last updated: 25 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bhatt & solanki [2023] fedcfamc2f 690
orders
the court orders that:
cash payment to wife
suburb c property   the husband shall assume all liability for and indemnify the wife against all payments in respect of the suburb c mortgage, and (b) the husband shall assume all liability for and indemnity the wife against all apportionable rates, capital gains tax, taxes, and outgoings of, or with respect to, the suburb c property of whatever nature and kind.   the husband shall assume all liability for and indemnity the wife against all apportionable rates, capital gains tax, taxes, and outgoings of, or with respect to, the suburb c property of whatever nature and kind.   the parties shall sign all documents, including any authorities for sale, necessary to enable the suburb c property to be listed for sale by way of private treaty with a licensed real estate agent nominated by the husband, (b) the parties shall retain a solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the husband to act on the sale of the suburb c property and both parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to allow and cause the issue of a contract for the sale of land for the suburb c property and any document required to affect the sale, and (c) the sale price shall be determined by the husband.   the parties shall retain a solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the husband to act on the sale of the suburb c property and both parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to allow and cause the issue of a contract for the sale of land for the suburb c property and any document required to affect the sale, and (c) the sale price shall be determined by the husband.   the sale price shall be determined by the husband.   in payment of real estate agent’s commission and all advertising expenses of and incidental to the sale, (b) in payment of all legal costs and disbursements of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the husband.   in payment of all legal costs and disbursements of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the husband.   in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the husband.   in payment of the balance to the husband.
the suburb e property   the wife shall assume all liability for and indemnify the husband against all payments in respect of the suburb e mortgage , and (b) the wife shall assume all liability for and indemnity the husband against all apportionable rates, capital gains tax, taxes, and outgoings of or with respect to the suburb e property of whatever nature and kind.   the wife shall assume all liability for and indemnity the husband against all apportionable rates, capital gains tax, taxes, and outgoings of or with respect to the suburb e property of whatever nature and kind.   the parties shall sign all documents, including any authorities for sale, necessary to enable the suburb e property to be listed for sale in a manner nominated by the wife with a licensed real estate agent nominated by the wife, (b) the parties shall retain a solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the wife to act on the sale of the suburb e property and both parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to allow and cause the issue of a contract for the sale of land for the suburb e property and any document required to affect the sale, and (c) the sale price shall be determined by the wife.   the parties shall retain a solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the wife to act on the sale of the suburb e property and both parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to allow and cause the issue of a contract for the sale of land for the suburb e property and any document required to affect the sale, and (c) the sale price shall be determined by the wife.   the sale price shall be determined by the wife.   in payment of real estate agent’s commission and all advertising expenses of and incidental to the sale, (b) in payment of all legal costs and disbursements of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the wife.   in payment of all legal costs and disbursements of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the wife.   in payment of all amounts required to discharge the mortgage and all outstanding council and water rates, and any other amounts owing as against the property, and (d) in payment of the balance to the wife.   in payment of the balance to the wife.
the real property in country y   in payment of real estate agent’s commission and all advertising expenses of and incidental to the sale, (b) in payment of all legal costs and disbursement of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of 52.5 per cent of the balance to the wife, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of all legal costs and disbursement of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of 52.5 per cent of the balance to the wife, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of 52.5 per cent of the balance to the wife, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of the balance remaining to the husband.
vehicle 4 and vehicle 5  in payment of any advertising and selling costs, (b) in payment of all legal costs and disbursement of and incidental to the sale, (c) in payment of 52.5 per cent of the balance to the wife, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the husband.
bank accounts, liabilities and superannuation   equally divide between them any proceeds remaining in the account, and (b) close the account immediately afterwards.   close the account immediately afterwards.
section 106a
costs and finalisation
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
backgound
the competing proposals
the parties
i feel the facts are there and you are twisting words and putting it back to me to get something out of me, it’s inappropriate and unnecessary, my words are there.
i never said that. where did i say that?
and
are you upset that i am answering the question you asked of me?
the statutory regime   make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties, or either of them, at the time of the hearing and determine the legal and equitable interests of the parties in such property, (b) consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s 75(2) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.[1]   consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s 75(2) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.[1]   after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s 75(2) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.[1]   ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.[1]
disclosure issues and credit
the balance sheet
ownership
description
wife's value
husband's value
assets
1
j
b street, suburb c
$1,125,000
2
d street, suburb e
$560,000
3
w
1f and 2f street, town g, country y
$42,086
4
1h and 2h street, town g, country y
$61,570
5
cba smart access #...26
$65
6
cba goal saver #...81
$67
7
cba smart access #...95
$2,974
8
motor vehicle 1
$17,800
9
household contents
$1,500
$15,000
10
h
anz access advantage #...87
$543
11
nab personal account #...22
$45
12
w bank #...27
$262
13
motor vehicle 2
$3,200
14
vehicle 4 and vehicle 5
$2,000
15
motor vehicle 3
$2,700
16
household contents
$3,000
17
hobby gear
18
jewellery
nil
$25,000
total
$1,824,312
$1,862,812
addbacks
19
notional add back of wife’s withdrawals
$39,547
$66,318
superannuation
20
super fund 1
$20,580
21
super fund 2
$134,000
$154,580
liabilities
22
suburb c mortgage
$370,000
23
suburb e mortgage
$250,000
24
personal loan
nk
$11,000
25
nab credit card #...38
$4,266
$620,000.00
$635,266.00
net total property pool (including superannuation property)
$1,398,439
$1,448,444
balance sheet findingsassetsitem 9 – household contents in wife’s possession
item 18 – jewellery
notional add backs
we observe that “notional property”, which is sometimes “added back” to a list of assets to account for the unilateral disposal of assets, is unlikely to constitute “property of the parties to the marriage or either of them”, and thus is not amenable to alteration under s79. it is important to deal with such disposals carefully, recognising the assets no longer exist, but that the disposal of them forms part of the history of the marriage – and potentially an important part. as the question does not arise here, we need say nothing more on this topic, save to note that s 79(4) and in particular s75(2)(o) gives ample scope to ensure a just and equitable outcome when dealing with the unilateral disposal of property. strictly speaking, given that these monies sought to be added back by both parties no longer exist, they cannot be treated as property in which the parties have a legal or equitable interest. nevertheless, pursuant to s 75(2) (o) of the act, the court could take into account the dissipation of those funds.
... ...when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion — usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property.
item 19: notional add backs sought by the husband
the wife’s asserted charitable donations of approximately $6,000
the investment by the wife of approximately $10,000
the wife’s withdrawal of superannuation entitlements
legal fees
superannuation
liabilities
the husband's personal loan of $11,000.
the husbands credit card debt of $4,266
whether an order altering property interests should be made
the assessment of contributions  ] ...well established that an assessment of contributions is not a mathematical exercise, but rather involves the identification and assessment of all of the parties’ respective contributions, in a holistic way across the course of the relationship and in the post separation period to the point of assessment...
relevant s 79(4)(d) – (g) matters
just and equitable
associate: dated: 15 june 2023
dated: 15 june 2023
[1] hickey v hickey & attorney-general of the commonwealth (intervener) (2003) flc 93-143; [2003] famca 395 at [39].