last updated: 17 february 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
trayden & trayden [2021] fedcfamc2f 285
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
1. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children x born in 2008 and y born in 2010 (“the children”) save for in relation to the children’s health. 2. the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children’s healthcare, including their medical and therapeutic needs, provided that:
2.1 the mother notify the father of all health appointments scheduled for the children as soon as practicable, 2.2 the mother provide the father with contact details of the health providers engaged by her for the children, 2.3 the mother provide to the father a summary of any health appointments attended by the children including recommended treatments, within 7 days of attendance, 2.4 the mother authorise all health providers attended by the children to provide to the father information and reports regarding the children.
3. the father be restrained from attending any medical or therapeutic appointments attended by the mother and the children, unless invited by the mother to attend. 4. the father provide to the mother a summary of any health appointments he facilitates the children attending, including recommended treatments, within 7 days of attendance. 5. the children live with the mother. 6. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, the children spend time with the father during term periods, as follows:
6.1 in week one and every second week thereafter:
6.1.1 from after school tuesday until before school on wednesday, and 6.1.2 from after school on friday until 6.00pm, and
6.2 in week two and every second week thereafter:
6.2.1 from after school tuesday until before school on wednesday, and 6.2.2 from after school on friday until sunday at 5.00pm.
7. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, during school term holiday periods at the end of term 1, 2 and 3 (“the term holidays”), the children spend equal time with the parents as follows:
7.1 until the term holidays commencing in term 1, 2023:
7.1.1 from after school on the last day of term for a period of four nights with the father, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the fifth day, 7.1.2 with the mother from 5pm on the fifth day for a period of four nights, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the ninth day, 7.1.3 with the father from 5pm on the ninth day for a period of four nights, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the thirteenth day, 7.1.4 with the mother for the balance of the term holiday period.
7.2 from the term holidays commencing in term 1, 2023:
7.2.1 in odd numbered years, from after school on the last day of term for a period of eight nights with the father, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the last day of that period, and 7.2.2 for the balance of the school holiday period with the mother, 7.2.3 in even numbered years, from after school on the last day of term for a period of eight nights with the mother, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the last day of that period, and 7.2.4 for the balance of the school holiday period with the father, with the children returning to the mother at 5pm the day prior school resuming.
8. term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next term. 9. the christmas school holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of school in term 4 and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next year (term 1) (“the christmas school holidays”). 10. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, during the 2020-21 christmas school holidays, the children spend time with the parents as follows:
10.1 from after school on the last day of term for a period of three nights with the mother (11 to 14 december 2020), 10.2 from 5pm 14 december 2020 for a period of four nights with the father, 10.3 from 5pm 18 december 2020 for a period of three nights, with the mother, 10.4 from 5pm 21 december 2020 for a period of four nights to 3pm 25 december 2020 (christmas day) with the father, 10.5 from 3pm 25 december 2020 (christmas day) for a period of four nights with the mother, 10.6 from 5pm 29 december 2020 for a period of four nights with the father, 10.7 from 5pm 2 january 2021 for a period of seven nights with the mother, 10.8 from 5pm 9 january 2021 for a period of seven nights with the father, 10.9 from 5pm 16 january 2021 for a period four nights with the mother, 10.10 from 5pm 20 january 2021 for a period of four nights with the father, 10.11 from 5pm 24 january 2021 for a period of four nights with the mother, 10.12 from 5pm 28 january 2021 for a period of three nights with the father, with the children returning to the mother at 5pm on 31 january 2021, the last day of the christmas holiday period.
11. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, during the 2021-22 christmas school holidays, the children spend time with the parents as follows:
11.1 from after school on the last day of term for a period of three nights with the father (10 to 13 december 2021), 11.2 from 5pm 13 december 2021 for a period of four nights with the mother, 11.3 from 5pm 17 december 2021 for a period of four nights with the father, 11.4 from 5pm 21 december 2021 for a period of four nights to 3pm 25 december 2021 (christmas day) with the mother, 11.5 from 3pm 25 december 2021 for a period of four nights with the father, 11.6 from 5pm 29 december 2021 for a period of four nights with the mother, 11.7 from 2 january 2022 for a period of seven nights with the father, 11.8 from 9 january 2022 for a period of seven nights with the mother, 11.9 from 16 january 2022 for a period of four nights with the father, 11.10 from 20 january 2022 for a period of four nights with the mother, 11.11 from 24 january 2022 for a period of three nights with the father, 11.12 from 27 january 2022 for a period of three nights with the mother with the children remaining in the mother’s care for the commencement of term 1 2022.
12. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, from december 2022, during christmas school holidays, the children spend equal time with the parents as follows:
12.1 from after school on the last day of term for a period of four nights with each parent, commencing with the mother in even numbered years for the first four nights and commencing with the father in odd numbered years for the first four nights, 12.2 notwithstanding any other order, that in even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 9am christmas eve until 3pm christmas day, and spend time with the mother from 3pm christmas day for a period of two nights, 12.3 notwithstanding any other order, that in odd numbered years, the children spend time with the mother from 9am christmas eve until 3pm christmas day, and spend time with the father from 3pm christmas day for a period of two nights, 12.4 that in even numbered years, the children spend time with each parent on a week about arrangement, commencing with the father from 5pm 27 december for a period of seven nights with changeover to occur at 5pm on the relevant day and save that the children will return to the mother at 5pm on the last day of the christmas holiday period, 12.5 that in odd numbered years, the children spend time with each parent on a week about arrangement, commencing with the mother from 5pm 27 december for a period of seven nights with changeover to occur at 5pm on the relevant day and save that the children will return to the mother at 5pm on the last day of the christmas holiday period.
13. notwithstanding any other order, the children spend time with the parents on special occasions as follows:
13.1 with the mother on mother’s day from 9am to 7pm, 13.2 with the father on father’s day from 9am to 7pm, 13.3 on a child’s birthday, with the parent with whom they do not wake on that day, as agreed and failing agreement:
13.3.1 if the birthday is on a school day, from after school until 5:30pm, 13.3.2 if the birthday is on a saturday, from 2pm to 7pm, 13.3.3 if the birthday is on a sunday, from 1pm to 5pm.
13.4 on a parent’s birthday, with the parent celebrating a birthday as agreed and failing agreement from after school until 7pm if a school day or from 2pm to 7pm if on a non-school day. 13.5 over the period commencing 9am good friday until 5pm easter monday (“the easter weekend”):
13.5.1 in odd numbered years with the father from the commencement of the easter weekend until 7pm easter saturday and then with the mother from 7pm easter saturday until 5pm easter monday, 13.5.2 in even numbered years with the mother from the commencement of the easter weekend until 7pm easter saturday and then with the father from 7pm easter saturday until 5pm easter monday.
14. in the event the easter weekend falls during a school holiday period:
14.1 order 13 prevails despite the requirements of order 7, and 14.2 at 5pm easter monday, order 7 resumes, with the children being in the care of the parent required by order 7 (or order 6, if term time resumes at the end of the easter period), as though that order had continued uninterrupted.
15. unless otherwise agreed in writing, changeovers not occurring at the children’s school are to occur:
15.1 with the mother delivering the children to b street, suburb c (or such other place within the act at which the father lives) at the end of any period the children are in her care, 15.2 with the father delivering the children to d street, suburb e (or such other place within the act at which the mother lives) at the end of any period the children are in his care.
16. the children may telephone the parent with whom they are not living or spending time each day between 6:30pm and 7:30pm, unless otherwise agreed between the parties. 17. the children may communicate with the parent with whom they are not living or spending time at any reasonable time the children may request. 18. each parent advise the other as soon as practicable any significant injury or illness to a child. 19. except in the event of a medical emergency, the parties communicate by email for the purposes of discussing matters relating to the children, unless otherwise agreed. the parties communicate by the most appropriate means necessary in the event of medical emergency for the children. 20. each parent advise and keep the other advised of any change to their residential address and relevant contact details including mobile telephone number and email address. 21. these orders act as authority for any school or educational facility attended by the children to communicate with both parents regarding the children’s education and provide to both parents copies of reports and notices ordinarily sent to parents. property 22. the net equity of the parties in their property (owned individually and jointly and including superannuation, subject to orders 32 – 36) be divided as to 60% to the wife and 40% to the husband and the following orders be made to give effect to that outcome. 23. within 28 days of these orders (“the due date”), the husband pay to the wife $628,900 (“the payment”). 24. upon the payment, the husband be declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property known as b street, suburb e, act (“the b street, suburb e property”). 25. within 28 days of these orders, the wife do all things necessary to transfer to the husband 40% of the shares held in each holding within the share portfolio and upon the transfer of the shares:
25.1 the wife be solely entitled to the funds in the joint bank account with f bank, and 25.2 the parties do all things necessary to close that account.
26. the wife retain to the exclusion of the husband, her motor vehicle 2 vehicle, registration number ..., 27. the husband retain to the exclusion of the wife, the motor vehicle 3 motor vehicle registration number .... default provisions 28. in the event the husband does not make the payment to the wife on the due date, then interest in accordance with the family law rules shall apply and be payable by the husband to the wife upon so much of the payment as is then outstanding from time to time, from the due date until it is paid. 29. in the event that the husband does not comply with order 23 (and order 28) within a further 30 days of the due date (“the default date”), the husband will forthwith do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to effect a sale of the b street, suburb e property at the expense of the husband, and for the purposes of effecting a sale:
29.1 the b street, suburb e property will be listed for sale with such real estate agent as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days from the date of default date, the real estate agent will be as nominated by the then president of the real estate institute in new south wales or the australian capital territory, 29.2 the list price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days of the default date, the list price will be as nominated by the real estate agent, 29.3 the sale price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement any offer to buy the property that is at least 90% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price, 29.4 in the event that the b street, suburb e property has not been sold by or before a date four (4) months from the settlement date then the parties will make all such arrangements and do all such acts and sign all such documents to procure a sale by public auction of the b street, suburb e property upon the following terms:
29.4.1 the auctioneer will be selected by the wife, 29.4.2 the auction will take place as soon as practicable and no later than 6 weeks after the happening of the events provided in order 29.4, 29.4.3 the reserve price will, unless agreed upon by the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer, 29.4.4 the husband will be solely responsible for payment of auction expenses payable before the b street, suburb e property is auctioned, and
29.5 in the event that the b street, suburb e property is not so sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction then the wife will do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise and upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction.
30. upon completion of the sale of the b street, suburb e property, the husband do all things and sign such authorities as required to cause the proceeds of the sale to be paid as follows,
30.1 payment of any other encumbrance affecting the property including rates and taxes, 30.2 payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable on the sale, 30.3 payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, 30.4 the balance to be divided 60% to the wife and 40% to the husband.
31. in default of the husband doing all acts and things and executing all such documents as are necessary to give effect to the sale of the orders relating to the sale of the b street, suburb e property, a registrar of the family court of australia at canberra be appointed pursuant to s106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to execute all such documents in the husband’s name and to do all such acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the said orders. superannuation 32. in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (the act), whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90xe of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of mr trayden from his interest in g super fund, ms trayden is entitled to be paid (by the trustee of g super fund) the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $100,000 and there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement mr trayden would have had but for these orders. 33. the operative time for order 32 is 23 october 2020. 34. subject to order 36 below:
34.1 in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (the act), whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90xe of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of mr trayden from his interest in the h super fund superannuation scheme (“the h super fund”) ms trayden is entitled to be paid (by the trustee of the h super fund) the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $100,000 and there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement mr trayden would have had but for these orders.
35. the operative time for order 34.1 is 23 october 2020. 36. the wife do all things necessary to obtain a family law valuation (flv) of the husband’s interest in the h super fund as at 23 october 2020 and:
36.1 provide a copy of that valuation to the husband within 48 hours of receipt, and 36.2 within 7 days of receipt of the flv, advise the husband and the court in writing whether any change to the base amount identified in order 34.1 is required as a consequence of the flv (noting the consequence of the orders sought by the wife is that she will receive 60% of the parties’ superannuation interests and the base amount split from the h super fund will be calculated by reference to the value of the total of the parties’ superannuation interests).
notation the parties note that these orders and payments made as a result, will be affected by the superannuation legislation amendment (family law) act 2004 which came into effect on 18 may 2004 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 which together provide for a separate superannuation interest to be created for the non-member spouse and for consequential effects on payments. other property 37. unless provided in these orders, the parties otherwise retain their superannuation interests, personal bank accounts, furniture and personal belongings in their current possession, 38. the husband be solely responsible for any credit card debt and any other liabilities held in his name and indemnify the wife with respect to all monies owing to his mother. 39. the wife be solely responsible for any credit card debt and any other liabilities held in her name and indemnify the husband with respect to all monies owing to her parents. 40. the qantas and velocity frequent flyer points of the parties be distributed between them such that the wife receives 60% of the total points (and the husband do all things necessary to transfer the necessary points to the wife within 14 days of these order). 41. within 21 days of these orders:
41.1 the husband do all things necessary to remove himself from the parties’ private health insurance policy with medibank private (noting the mother will retain the children on her cover), 41.2 the husband do all things necessary to obtain for himself a separate medicare card/account (nothing the wife will retain the current medicare card/account for herself and the children),
42. the husband make available to the wife copies of all digital photographs and video recordings of the children in his possession and to facilitate this, the wife will provide a hard drive to the husband and within 14 days of that, he will copy the file/s and return the hard drive to her. 43. the husband pay to the wife the sum of $2,500 within 14 days of these orders, in satisfaction of reserved costs (subpoena objection process). 44. the wife’s costs regarding the application to re-open to adduce new and updating evidence of the b street, suburb e property be reserved. 45. absent any other application regarding costs within 14 days of the date of these orders, the issue of costs regarding the application to re-open will be dealt with on the basis of submissions already filed.
section 121 of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville:
introduction
1 this matter involves the parties seeking property orders following a 15 year marital relationship. the parties also seek parenting orders that are in the best interests of now 13 year old x, and now 11 year old y. the children, and x in particular, have a range of health issues. the litigation between the parties has been on foot since 2017.
2 by definition, all trials are taxing, and usually much else. clearly this is especially so for the parties. sometimes, parties see the wood for the trees (to speak colloquially), while others do not – for any number of reasons. this matter fell very strongly into the latter category, which led to the trial being a quite enervating, and often remarkably exasperating, experience doubtless for all, sometimes including the bench!
3 regularly and unsurprisingly, exasperation most commonly arises from the conclusion being quite readily apparent even quite early in a trial. however, it becomes clear that the parties (one or both) cannot, for any number of reasons, or will not, also for any number of reasons, see the reality of the evidence that is laid out (or being laid out) before them. regrettably, such was the case here.
4 difficulties can also arise where usually one party has a particular fixation upon one incident or feature of the past relationship, and despite any number of attempts to assist the party to focus upon other, more important features of the matter, they cannot or will not do so. regrettably, such was the case here. a singular example will suffice here, with many more to come later in these reasons.
5 the parties separated in august 2017. there was a physical altercation between them at the time. everyone agrees that this was the only incident of physical contest between them both during the relationship and after separation. both parties give differing accounts of the incident, most notably who was the aggressor or instigator. as was made plain throughout the whole of the trial, from the father’s perspective, he was the victim of the assault and the mother the instigator and aggressor, and that until his account of things was vindicated “the 2017 incident” would (or will) continue to fester and blight all aspects of the parenting issues, and all else. details of how fixated the father was on this incident and how it coloured his perspective on so many aspects of the trial and the parenting relationship are set out later in these reasons. it mattered not a jot how many times the court indicated that as significant as family violence is, a one-off incident three or more years ago was unlikely to be so crucial to making orders that are in the best interests of the children. ultimately, after yet another commentary on this incident in the course of the father’s cross examination, the court bemoaned:[1]
his honour: the bazillionth time! it’s like an audit of “he said/she said”. it’s like watching, respectfully, a bad slow-motion movie, and it’s very difficult not to be distracted in trying to focus upon how does this – or how does any of the evidence help me make orders that are in the best interests of the children? that’s what my focus has got to be. that’s what i’m trying to focus upon, so hence my comments this morning to everyone in court about this remarkable fixation upon an incident in august 2017. people have got to move on. we’re hopefully – at the end of this trial and whenever a judgment is, rule it off. let it go. sorry, mr howard. mr howard: you’ve used the words, “we have differing views about that incident,” and certainly that’s reflective of what his honour has said as well?‑‑‑yes. but that’s not, with respect, what you tell medical providers, is it? you don’t say, “we have differing views.” you say, “ms trayden is not telling the truth about these things”?‑‑‑yes. yes, absolutely, i’m saying that.
6 the so-called august 2017 incident came up multiple times in the course of the father’s cross examination. such matters are summarised below.
7 another unfortunate exchange, along lines similar to the above, was the following (emphasis added):[2]
mr howard: yes. and it was after this series of communications that dr p, firstly, cancelled the appointment and then later withdrew treatment, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. you also shared with dr o the details of your separation and that you considered that ms trayden was a liar about those – about the incident at separation?‑‑‑i was requested to give explanation of some of that. so is the answer to my question, yes, you did share that with dr o?‑‑‑yes. thank you. i suggest to you that in neither case, neither with dr p nor with dr o, was it relevant for them to know the personal circumstances of your separation from ms trayden. do you agree with that or you don’t agree with that?‑‑‑i think it was important for our children’s health potentially, until we worked out what was actually happening, so. his honour: why? why? in order to treat the children for whatever the malady, the situation, circumstances were, why would the circumstances of the separation be relevant to that?‑‑‑because there was some irrationality, and i know that’s my view only, and so what if that was to be in what was informed to practitioners on behalf of children? so i just wanted to play a part in giving some input, so. i know the input is important, but ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑but, yeah. and so being – i guess we’ve both put the same view from what i can tell, “i’m going, you’re not.” so not – not helpful, wouldn’t have done it that way if my – my time over, and haven’t done it since, but ‑ ‑ ‑
8 the expert in the parenting side of the proceeding was dr j. she did two detailed reports, which became exhibit a1 (dated 29th october 2018) and exhibit a2 (dated 20th december 2019).
9 two interim oral judgments were delivered in november and december 2018, respectively. the november reasons and consequent orders granted sole parental responsibility to the mother regarding matters pertaining to health care for the children.
10 in the mother’s case outline for the final hearing in october 2020, her experienced counsel stated (par.20), with wonderful if not eternal optimism regarding the parenting side of the proceeding: “in light of the recommendations of dr j, this matter should be relatively easy to resolve without the need for a hearing.” given the brief procedural history already set out, including the number of interim hearings, the two detailed reports, plus the intricate layers of the dispute that has involved so many others (some noted below), the prospects of a quick resolution to the parenting side of things was indeed optimistic. having sat through the trial, and laboured through detailed submissions (not to mention the multiple affidavits), and the high level of conflict between the parties, which included the father’s almost obsessive fixation upon a single and concerning physical contest between the parties (fortunately the only one) on the date of separation in 2017 (“the 2017 incident”) it was a plainly forlorn hope of any expeditious resolution. for the children’s sake, and for the parents’ sake too, it is extremely regrettable that they could not resolve their parenting contest.
11 as an example of the father’s fixation upon the single physical contest between the parties in 2017, in addition to him regularly raising it with experts, he effectively lodged a formal complaint to his evangelical church (“m christian church”) by which he sought to have the mother “condemned.” his “statement” to m christian church, dated 28th november 2017, became exhibit c. the father’s complaints against the mother included that she lied about this incident, had perjured herself regarding its details, and had not taken responsibility for being the instigator and perpetrator of it. at the same time, he acknowledged that she was a good and attentive mother to the children.
12 subject to what is said later in these reasons, because it was a single incident, and now the better part of 4 years ago, in my view, the 2017 incident was, at best, of marginal relevance to the principal matters for the court’s determination. of course, as is often the case, a party or witness who continues to press a particular matter in his or her evidence often tells the court more about themselves than what they are seeking the court to find regarding the other person.
13 subject to what is set out later in these reasons, the father continued to press for parenting orders that are not only unsupported by the expert evidence before the court but were consistently contrary to what the expert cogently and consistently recommended. the father’s persistence, in other circumstances, would doubtless be a virtue. in the ongoing parenting contest between the parties, it is anything but. it strongly bordered on confirming a reasonably strong impression of him as lacking in insight and or being over-confident in his own assessment of the children’s needs, x’s in particular.
14 in dr j’s first report, noted in my oral reasons of november 2018, she said that the children have a good and close relationship with, and attachment to, both parents. however, the primary attachment is with the mother (pars.1.2 & 1.5).
15 in the oral reasons of november 2018, i noted the following, again by reference to dr j’s first report:
at par.1.8.2 (p.35) of the report, dr j said: “the parents appear not to be able to work together to manage the health needs of the children. professional services for the children’s health needs appear to have become intertwined in the acrimonious parental relationship. this appears to be having a serious negative effect on the children’s health treatment, especially x’s treatment. it appears that the father’s interactions with health professionals have had the negative effect of health professionals withdrawing (or considering withdrawing) care to x. specialist paediatric care in the canberra region is difficult to source. wait lists can be long. interruption to positive professional relationships in children’s lives can have negative impacts on children’s health and wellbeing. it appears the parents, at this point in time, cannot work together to support the children to receive appropriate professional health care. whether the parents can work together in other areas of decision making (such as supporting the children in choices for their educational needs and social / extracurricular needs) is unknown.”
16 also in those reasons i said:
in the father’s submissions, emphasis was placed on dr j’s comments regarding the children wanting to see their father more. while he acknowledged that her recommendations, such as they were, did not propose any move to a shared care regime until perhaps 3-4 years’ time, he sought that there be some definite increase in time with arrangements now.
17 regrettably, so many of my concerns that were raised in the november 2018 reasons remained, in my clear view, unheeded at the final hearing in october 2020. that said, at the eleventh hour, so to speak, late in the hearing there was a modicum of a breakout of peace. the father indicated at the commencement of the second day of the trial that he had changed his position regarding parental responsibility, more particularly regarding the mother continuing to have sole parental responsibility in relation to the children’s health. regrettably, this peace was not long-lasting.
18 for the reasons that follow, in relation to parenting, the orders sought by the mother, supported in substance by the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”), are in the children’s best interests.
19 also for the reasons that follow, in relation to orders regarding property, with some slight “tweaking”, the wife’s orders, in my view, are just and equitable in all of the circumstances.
procedural matters
20 the father’s position regarding parental responsibility changed a number of times in the course of the litigation. curiously, if not alarmingly, in the final iteration of his written submissions (set out in full later in these reasons), the father’s position regarding parental responsibility changed from what was articulated during the trial. no leave of the court was sought, no authority was cited – for or against – this novel course. unsurprisingly, the father’s changed orders regarding parental responsibility was vehemently opposed by the mother.
21 principles of long-standing hold that, absent leave being sought and granted, a party is bound by the case that was run at trial. thus so here: the father must be bound by his position notified to the court at the final hearing. this must especially be the case here where no leave was sought for the changed position, nor was it even mentioned in submissions. in addition to the submissions by the mother on this point, which i accept, i simply note the high court’s latest comments in this regard. in hsiao v fazarri, the majority (kiefel cj, bell and keane jj) said, at [44] (emphasis added, internal references omitted):[3]
the main purpose of the family law rules (cth) is "to ensure that each case is resolved in a just and timely manner at a cost to the parties and the court that is reasonable in the circumstances of the case". parties to proceedings under the act are under an obligation to act in a manner that conduces to the promotion and achievement of that purpose. nonetheless, it is recognised that in proceedings under the act, the need for finality will often be less prominent than in other appellate proceedings. among other considerations, this takes into account the fact that proceedings under the act will often affect the interests of children and that in many cases the full court is able to act on further evidence without the need for a new trial. this is not to hold that in a case such as the present – property settlement proceedings following a notably short marriage that do not involve the interests of children – the need for finality does not present as a most material factor. here the respondent had no opportunity to deal with the further evidence and its reception would have necessitated a new trial. the full court's exercise of discretion was correct, the demands of justice would not have been served by receiving further evidence that would have necessitated a new trial in order to give the appellant an opportunity to present a case that she deliberately chose not to make at trial. that is so regardless of whether the further evidence might have produced a different result, albeit the full court's conclusion that it would not has not been shown to be erroneous.
22 although the high court’s comments relate most directly to the reception of new or further evidence, plainly, their honour’s comments also refer specifically to a party being relevantly bound by the case that was conducted at trial.
23 a second procedural issue arose this way.
24 in the course of the trial, there was brief discussion with counsel, notably for the father, regarding the length of written submissions to be filed. it was discussed that they would necessarily be brief, indeed “very brief.” ultimately, after noting that a usual length of perhaps 10 pages was a commonly agreed and or ordered page limit, the matter of submissions was left with the lawyers to finalise.[4]
25 on the 30th october 2020, the parties provided the court with a timeline for the filing of written submissions. the orders in relation to the timetable for each party to file their respective submissions have been amended a number of times as a result of the delay on behalf of the applicant, with a revised timetable for filing agreed between the parties and published from chambers on 19th january 2021.
26 the applicant father/husband ultimately filed written submissions of 50 pages in length on 4th february 2021. although the consent orders, which provided for the filing timetable, did not specify a specific page length to adhere to, in my view (and in the light of the discussion at trial) the filing of such a document undermined the objects of standard practice in all courts regarding case management as well as in fact enabling responding material of similar or equivalent length. in an email to the parties on 11th february 2021, the court directed the applicant father/husband to refile his written submissions and contain them to no more than 10 pages in relation to property matters, and 10 pages in relation to parenting matter. the court further directed the parties to provide the court with an amended timetable for the filing of the applicant’s and respondent’s submissions. an amended timetable was never provided to the court. nevertheless, the applicant’s submissions were re-filed on 11th march 2021 and the respondent’s submissions were filed on 2nd june 2021. the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”) had previously filed submissions on 25th november 2020.
27 a third procedural matter was resolved as follows.
28 an application in a case was filed by the respondent mother/wife on 9th march 2021. put summarily, she sought leave to reopen proceedings for the purpose of adducing current evidence of the value of the property at b street, suburb e act and orders relating to the filing of the applicant and respondent’s submissions in the substantive proceedings. she also sought an order for costs relating to the previous submissions process and this application. this application was listed before a senior registrar of this court for interim hearing and orders made in chambers on 12th march 2021 for the filing of response material. the interim hearing did not proceed as the parties reached a consent position regarding the application in a case. those orders were made by the senior registrar on 28th april 2021. the consent orders of 28th april 2021 essentially provided for the parties to obtain an updated valuation of the b street, suburb e property, the provision of submissions by the respondent wife, and separate submissions regarding costs in relation to the application in a case to seek the updated valuation.
29 the parties confirmed that the court could accept into evidence and adopt the new valuation figure for the b street, suburb e property (as set out in the most recent submissions).
applicant’s orders sought
30 the applicant’s final orders sought were filed on 11th march 2021. the applicant subsequently filed an amended minute of orders sought in relation to property only. this was filed on 14th june 2021. the final orders sought by the applicant reflect the father’s position as later amended but different from what he sought at trial, and therefore without court sanction. as such, they are more expansive than what was sought and confirmed at trial:
proposed minute of orders sought by the father/applicant parenting – minute of order 1. subject to order 2 and 3, the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children x trayden born in 2008 and y born in 2010 (“the children”). 2. until 31 december 2021, the mother have sole parental responsibility for the health of the children as follows:
a) the mother notify the father of all health appointments scheduled for the children as soon as practicable. b) the mother provide the father with contact details of the health providers engaged by her for the children. c) the mother provide to the father a summary of any health appointments attended by the children including recommended treatments, within 7 days of attendance. d) that the mother provide to the father copies of information and reports regarding the children’s health matters.
3. until 31 december 2021:
a) the father not attend in person any medical or therapeutic appointments with the children and the mother unless otherwise invited by the mother, but the father may otherwise attend medical or therapeutic appointments with the children via electronic means (including but not limited to video link or telephone). b) the father may attend upon any of the children’s medical or therapeutic providers to discuss the child’s treatment with the practitioners and the mother shall provide all such authorities to facilitate any attendances. c) the mother not make arrangements to schedule recurring medical or therapeutic providers appointments for the children during the time the children spend with the father, without first obtaining the consent of the father. d) the mother may make arrangements to schedule appointments for herself with the medical or therapeutic providers for the children or a child. e) that in the event the children require medical assistance while in the care of the mother, the mother is to provide to the father a summary of any medical appointments the children attend including recommended treatments within 48 hours of attendance.
4. the children live with the father and the mother as follows:
a) during school terms 1 and 2 of 2021, with the father in a fortnightly rotation as follows:
i) in week 1, from after school on tuesday to the commencement of school on wednesday and from after school on friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to 6:30pm, and ii) in week 2, from after school on tuesday to the commencement of school on wednesday and after school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on monday or the commencement of school on a tuesday if the monday is a non-school day.
b) during school terms 3 and 4 of 2021, with the father in a fortnightly rotation as follows:
i) in week 1, from after school on tuesday to the commencement of school on wednesday, and ii) in week 2, from after school monday to the commencement of school on wednesday and after school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on monday or the commencement of school on a tuesday if the monday is a non-school day.
5. that unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, commencing in term 1 in 2022 the children shall spend time with the parents on equal shared time basis during the children’s school terms as follows:
a) with the father in week 1, from after school monday to the commencement of school on wednesday, and b) with the father in week 2, from after school monday to the commencement of school on wednesday and after school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on monday or commencement of school on a tuesday if the monday is a non-school day. c) for all other times with the mother.
6. that during school holiday periods occurring at the end of term 1, 2 and 3 (“mid-year school holiday period”) commencing in 2021 and each other mid-year school holiday period thereafter, the children spend one half of each school holiday period with the mother and father:
a) that mid-year school holidays periods are deemed to commence at 9am on the 1st monday following the last day of school term until the commencement of school in the following term. b) the children spend time with the mother and father as follows: i) in odd numbered years, with the father for week 1 and the mother for week 2, ii) in even numbered years, with the mother for week 1 and the father for week 2.
7. that during each christmas school holiday period commencing 2021, the children spend equal time with the mother and father, as follows:
a) from after school on the last day of term for a period of four nights with each parent, commencing with the mother in even numbered years for the first four nights and commencing with the father in odd numbered years for the first four nights, b) notwithstanding any other order, that in even numbered years the children spend time with the father from 9am christmas eve until 3pm christmas day, and spend time with the mother from 3pm christmas day for a period of 2 nights, c) notwithstanding any other order, that in odd numbered years the children spend time with the mother from 9am christmas eve until 3pm christmas day, and spend time with the father from 3pm christmas day for a period of 2 nights, d) that in even numbered years, the children spend time with each parent on a week about arrangement, commencing with the father from 27 december for a period of seven nights, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the relevant day. e) that in odd numbered years, the children spend time with each parent on a week about arrangement, commencing with the mother from 27 december for a period of seven nights, with changeover to occur at 5pm on the relevant day.
8. that notwithstanding any other order, the children spend time with the mother and the father on special occasions as follow:
a) with the mother on mother’s day from 9am until commencement of school the following day. b) with the father on father’s day from 9am until commencement of school the following day. c) on a child’s birthday, with the parent with whom they are not living with, as agreed and failing agreement:
i) if the birthday is on a school day: from after school until 6pm. ii) if on a saturday from 2pm to 7pm. iii) if on a sunday from 1pm to 5pm.
d) on a parent’s birthday, as agreed and failing agreement from after school until 7pm if a school day or from 2pm to 7pm if on a non-school day. e) over the period commencing 9am good friday until 5pm easter monday (“the easter weekend”):
i) in odd numbered years with the father from 9am good friday until 7pm easter saturday and then with the mother from 7pm easter saturday until 5pm easter monday. ii) in even numbered years with the mother from 9am good friday until 7pm easter saturday and then with the father from 7pm easter saturday until 5pm easter monday.
9. that in the event the easter weekend falls during a school holiday period, order 8(e) prevails and replaces the time required by order 6 until 5pm easter monday and then order 6 resumes, with the children being in the care of the parent required by order 6, as though that order had continued uninterrupted. 10. that unless otherwise agreed in writing, changeovers not occurring at the children’s school are to occur at each parent’s residence as follows:
a) the parent with whom the children are living with shall deliver the children to the other parent at commencement of time spent, and b) the parent who the children have spent time shall deliver the children to the other parent at the conclusion of time spent.
11. that the children may telephone/videocall the parent with whom they are not living or spending time with each day between 6:30pm to 7:30pm, unless otherwise agreed between the parties. 12. that the children or a child may communicate with the parent with whom they are not living or spending time with at any reasonable time the children or a child may request. 13. that each parent advise the other as soon as practicable of any significant injury or illness to a child whilst in that parent’s care. 14. that except in the event of a medical emergency, the parties communicate by email or text message for the purposes of discussing matters relating to the children unless otherwise agreed. the parties communicate by the most appropriate means in the event of medical emergency for the children. 15. that these orders act as authority for any school or educational facility attended by the children to communicate with both parents regarding the children’s education and provide to both parents copies of reports and notices ordinarily sent to parents. 16. that the parties advise the other of any change of telephone number or residential address within 24 hours of such change occurring. amended property - minute of order sought the applicant husband seeks the following final orders: 1. that within fourteen (14) days from the date of this order, the respondent shall do all such things and sign all such documents to transfer to the applicant 50% of each shareholding that she holds in publicly listed entities, where the respondent holds an odd number of shares in the relevant entity she may retain such 1 extra share with the balance to divided per 50%. 2. that within forty-two (42) days from respondent’s compliance of order 1 (the “due date”), the applicant pay to the respondent, or as she directs the sum of $398,598 (“the principal sum”). 3. that upon the payment of the principal sum, the applicant be declared the sole, legal and beneficial owner of the right, title and interest in the property situate and known as b street, suburb e in the australian capital territory (“the b street, suburb e property”) and he shall indemnify and keep the respondent indemnified against all liability arising from the b street, suburb e property. 4. the applicant shall be at liberty to raise a mortgage over the b street, suburb e property for the purposes of paying the wife the principal sum. default provisions 5. in the event the applicant does not make the payment of the principal sum on the due date, then the interest in accordance with the family law rules shall apply and be payable by the applicant to the respondent upon so much of the payment as is then outstanding from time to time, from the due date until it is paid. 6. in the event that the applicant does not comply with order 2 within a further 30 days of the due date (“the default date”), the applicant will do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to effect a sale of the b street, suburb e property at the joint expense of the parties, and for the purposes of effecting a sale.
a) the b street, suburb e property will be listed for sale with such real estate agency as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days from the date of default date, the real estate agency will be as nominated by the then president of the real estate institute in the australian capital territory, b) the list price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days of the default date, the list price will be as nominated by then president of the real estate institute in the australian capital territory, c) the sale price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement any offer to buy the property that is at least 95% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price, and d) in the event that the b street, suburb e property has not been sold by or before a date four (4) months from the due date then the parties will make all such arrangements and do all such acts and sign all documents to procure a sale by public auction of the b street, suburb e property upon the following terms:
i) the auctioneer will be selected by the nominated agent, ii) the auction will take place as soon as practicable and no later than 6 weeks after the failure to sell within four (4) months by private treaty, iii) the reserve price will, unless agreed upon by the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer, and iv) the parties shall pay equally the auction expenses, payable before the b street, suburb e property is auctioned.
e) in the event that the b street, suburb e property is not so sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction then the parties will do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise and upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction.
7. that upon completion of the sale of the b street, suburb e property, the parties do all things and sign all such authorities as required to cause the proceeds of the sale to be paid as follows:
a) payment of any other encumbrance affecting the property including rates and taxes, b) payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable on the sale, c) payment of the conveyancing costs and outlays relating to the sale, d) payment to the respondent the principal sum or so much thereof that remains unpaid, plus interest calculated in accordance with family law rules. e) payment of the balance to the applicant.
8. that in default of the parties doing all acts and things and executing all such documents as necessary to give effect to the sale of the orders relating to the sale of the b street, suburb e property, a registrar of the federal circuit court of australia at canberra be appointed pursuant to s106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to execute all such documents in the defaulting party’s name and do all such acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the said orders. 9. that within fourteen (14) days from the date of this order, the parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as are necessary to close all joint bank accounts and divide the balance equally between them. 10. that the respondent retain to the exclusion of the applicant, her motor vehicle 2 motor vehicle, registration number .... 11. that the applicant retain to the exclusion of the respondent, his motor vehicle 3 motor vehicle registration number .... 12. that the applicant provide a set of digital photos and video recordings in his possession of the children created during the period from 26 march 2008, being from the birth of x, until the date of separation of the parties, being 24 august 2017. 13. that unless otherwise specified in these orders and except for enforcing the payment of the principal sum:
a) each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders including any jewellery, furniture, furnishings, shares and motor vehicles. b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank accounts to be the property of the party in whose name such bank account is held. c) each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefit to or owned by the other. the party in whose name any such policy of superannuation shall be deemed to be the owner and the beneficiary of such policy to the exclusion of the other. d) a party who is the owner of a policy of insurance shall be deemed to be the owner of the policy to the exclusion of the other. e) each party will be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to this order. f) the applicant and respondent be solely responsible for any credit card debt and any other liabilities held in their individual names and indemnify the other with respect to all monies owing.
14. that the respondent do all things necessary and sign all documents to assign the applicant all contractual obligations and responsibilities of the applicant and the respondent for the sponsorship of children through cc charity. 15. that the respondent pay to the applicant the sum of $2,500 within 14 days of these orders, in satisfaction of the reserved costs order dated 4 june 2018. 16. there be no order for costs in respect of the reserved costs order dated 19 april 2018. and it is noted: a. these orders have been amended taking into account the new valuation of the b street, suburb e property from $970,000 to $1,125,000. the attached aide memoire filed with this minute shows the calculations of the applicant’s property settlement proposals taking into account the increased value of the b street, suburb e property. b. the respondent has told the applicant that the motor vehicle 1 has been sold for $1,000, receipt documents have not yet been provided.
respondent’s orders sought
31 the respondent’s final orders sought were included in her case outline and were as follows:
minute of orders sought children 1. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children x trayden born in 2008 and y born in 2010 (“the children”) save for in relation to the children’s health. 2. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children’s healthcare, including their medical and therapeutic needs, provided that:
3. that the father be restrained from attending any medical or therapeutic appointments attended by the mother and the children, unless invited by the mother to attend. 4. that the father provide to the mother a summary of any health appointments he facilitates the children attending, including recommended treatments, within 7 days of attendance. 5. that the children live with the mother. 6. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, the children spend time with the father during term periods, as follows:
8. that term holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next term. 9. that the christmas school holiday period is deemed to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of school in term 4 and conclude at 5pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next year (term 1) (“the christmas school holidays”). 10. unless and subject to any other agreement between the parties in writing, during the 2020-21 christmas school holidays, the children spend time with the parents as follows:
13. that notwithstanding any other order, the children spend time with the parents on special occasions as follows:
14. that in the event the easter weekend falls during a school holiday period:
15. that unless otherwise agreed in writing, changeovers not occurring at the children’s school are to occur:
16. that the children may telephone the parent with whom they are not living or spending time each day between 6:30pm and 7:30pm, unless otherwise agreed between the parties. 17. that the children may communicate with the parent with whom they are not living or spending time at any reasonable time the children may request. 18. that each parent advise the other as soon as practicable any significant injury or illness to a child. 19. that except in the event of a medical emergency, the parties communicate by email for the purposes of discussing matters relating to the children, unless otherwise agreed. the parties communicate by the most appropriate means necessary in the event of medical emergency for the children. 20. that each parent advise and keep the other advised of any change to their residential address and relevant contact details including mobile telephone number and email address. 21. that these orders act as authority for any school or educational facility attended by the children to communicate with both parents regarding the children’s education and provide to both parents copies of reports and notices ordinarily sent to parents. property 22. that the net equity of the parties in their property (owned individually and jointly and including superannuation) be divided as to 60% to the mother and 40% to the father and the following orders be made to give effect to that outcome. 23. that within 28 days of these orders (“the due date”), the father pay to the mother $628,900 (“the payment”). 24. upon the payment, the father be declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property known as b street, suburb e, act (“the b street, suburb e property”). 25. that within 28 days of these orders, the mother do all things necessary to transfer to the father 40% of the shares held in each holding within the share portfolio and upon the transfer of the shares:
25.1 the mother be solely entitled to the funds in the joint bank account with f bank, and 25.2 the parties do all things necessary to close that account.
26. that the father be declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the motor vehicle 1 motor vehicle located at the mother’s home, registration ..., and within 14 days of these orders, he shall arrange for the collection and removal of the motor vehicle 1 from the mother’s home, 27. that the mother retain to the exclusion of the father, her motor vehicle 2, registration number ..., 28. that the father retain to the exclusion of the mother, the motor vehicle 3 registration number .... default provisions 29. in the event the father does not make the payment to the mother on the due date, then interest in accordance with the family law rules shall apply and be payable by the father to the mother upon so much of the payment as is then outstanding from time to time, from the due date until it is paid. 30. in the event that the father does not comply with order 23 (and order 29) within a further 30 days of the due date (“the default date”), the father will forthwith do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to effect a sale of the b street, suburb e property at the expense of the father, and for the purposes of effecting a sale:
30.1 the b street, suburb e property will be listed for sale with such real estate agent as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days from the date of default date, the real estate agent will be as nominated by the then president of the real estate institute in new south wales or the australian capital territory, 30.2 the list price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within 14 days of the default date, the list price will be as nominated by the real estate agent, 30.3 the sale price of the b street, suburb e property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement any offer to buy the property that is at least 90% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price, 30.4 in the event that the b street, suburb e property has not been sold by or before a date four (4) months from the settlement date then the parties will make all such arrangements and do all such acts and sign all such documents to procure a sale by public auction of the b street, suburb e property upon the following terms:
30.4.1 the auctioneer will be selected by the mother, 30.4.2 the auction will take place as soon as practicable and no later than 6 weeks after the happening of the events provided in order 30.4, 30.4.3 the reserve price will, unless agreed upon by the parties, be as proposed by the auctioneer, 30.4.4 the father will be solely responsible for payment of auction expenses payable before the b street, suburb e property is auctioned, and
30.5 in the event that the b street, suburb e property is not so sold by auction or by private negotiation within fourteen (14) days after the said auction then the mother will do all acts and sign all necessary documents to procure a second auction within a further five (5) weeks of that date otherwise and upon the same terms and conditions as applied to the first auction.
31. upon completion of the sale of the b street, suburb e property, the father do all things and sign such authorities as required to cause the proceeds of the sale to be paid as follows,
31.1 payment of any other encumbrance affecting the property including rates and taxes, 31.2 payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable on the sale, 31.3 payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, 31.4 the balance to be divided 60% to the mother and 40% to the father.
32. that in default of the father doing all acts and things and executing all such documents as are necessary to give effect to the sale of the orders relating to the sale of the b street, suburb e property, a registrar of the family court of australia at canberra be appointed pursuant to s106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to execute all such documents in the father’s name and to do all such acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the said orders. superannuation 33. that in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (the act), whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90xe of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of mr trayden from his interest in g super fund, ms trayden is entitled to be paid (by the trustee of g super fund) the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $100,000 and there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement mr trayden would have had but for these orders. 34. the operative time for order 33 is 23 october 2020. 35. subject to order 37 below:
35.1 that in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (the act), whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90xe of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of mr trayden from his interest in the h super fund, ms trayden is entitled to be paid (by the trustee of the h super fund) the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $100,000 and there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement mr trayden would have had but for these orders.
36. the operative time for order 35.1 is 23 october 2020. 37. the mother do all things necessary to obtain a family law valuation (flv) of the father’s interest in the h super fund as at 23 october 2020 and:
37.1 provide a copy of that valuation to the father within 48 hours of receipt, and 37.2 within 7 days of receipt of the flv, advise the father and the court in writing whether any change to the base amount identified in order 35.1 is required as a consequence of the flv (noting the consequence of the orders sought by the mother is that she will receive 60% of the parties’ superannuation interests and the base amount split from the h super fund will be calculated by reference to the value of the total of the parties’ superannuation interests).
notation the parties note that these orders and payments made as a result, will be affected by the superannuation legislation amendment (family law) act 2004 which came into effect on 18 may 2004 and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 which together provide for a separate superannuation interest to be created for the non-member spouse and for consequential effects on payments. other property 38. that unless provided in these orders, the parties otherwise retain their superannuation interests, personal bank accounts, furniture and personal belongings in their current possession, 39. that the father be solely responsible for any credit card debt and any other liabilities held in his name and indemnify the mother with respect to all monies owing to his mother. 40. that the mother be solely responsible for any credit card debt and any other liabilities held in her name and indemnify the father with respect to all monies owing to her parents. 41. that the qantas and velocity frequent flyer points of the parties be distributed between them such that the mother receives 60% of the total points (and the father do all things necessary to transfer the necessary points to the mother within 14 days of these order). 42. that within 21 days of these orders:
42.1 the father do all things necessary to remove himself from the parties’ private health insurance policy with medibank private (noting the mother will retain the children on her cover), 42.2 the father do all things necessary to obtain for himself a separate medicare card/account (nothing the mother will retain the current medicare card/account for herself and the children),
43. that the father make available to the mother copies of all digital photographs and video recordings of the children in his possession and to facilitate this, the mother will provide a hard drive to the father and within 14 days of that, he will copy the file/s and return the hard drive to her. 44. that the father pay to the mother the sum of $2,500 within 14 days of these orders, in satisfaction of reserved costs (subpoena objection process).
independent children’s lawyer orders sought
32 the icl’s orders sought were as follows:
the icl’s position 1. icl gave her view as to appropriate orders at the end of the trial. her final proposal as to the children spending time with the father is as follows: that between now and the end of the school year 2020, the current interim orders remain in place, certain agreed orders apply for the christmas/january school holiday period in 2020/2021, from the start of term 1 2021, the children spend time with the father for 5 nights each fortnight, that the children spend equal time between the parents in school holiday periods in a week-about arrangement commencing the term 1 2021 school holiday period. 2. the icl maintains her view that these care arrangements should be reviewed by way of a form of child inclusive and child informed review mechanism (such as mediation), such mechanism to include each of the child’s psychologists. reasons behind the icl’s position 3. the icl does not agree with the father’s proposal that the children’s time with him should automatically increase at certain intervals of time. the expert witness dr j advised that any progression of time with the father should be more focused on how the children are coping and their developmental needs as opposed to intervals of time. 4. it is submitted that the evidence of the expert witness suggested that at this point in time, it is not possible to determine when each child (especially y) will be ‘ready’ to spend increased time with the father. this supports the orders sought by the icl that time should only increased if guided by professionals as to the children’s readiness – as opposed to automatically increasing at certain intervals of time. it is noted that y especially has not coped particularly well since separation and it is submitted that his wellbeing and ‘readiness’ must be considered a priority. 5. it is also noted the evidence of the expert witness suggested that the children will cope with seven day blocks during school holiday periods. this has informed the icl’s position as to school holiday time. such a position also lessens the number of changeovers between parents and allows each parent to take the children away for holidays. 6. the icl submits that the court can take comfort from the evidence of the mother as to her ability to make appropriate concessions and child focused decisions for the children (even if they are against her own interests). one example of this was the mother’s oral evidence as to her ability to put her own plans aside during ‘her time’ with y to allow him to attend a football match with the father. 7. the icl submits that in the context of a ‘review’ of the arrangements in around early 2022, that if the psychologists advise that the children should spend more time with the father at that point, that she is likely to agree. 8. as to the timing of the ‘review’ of these arrangements, the icl submits that 12 months is an appropriate timeframe for such event to occur. there is no real ‘magic’ to this timing, however it is suggested that a one year period gives both parties and the children time to settle into the new arrangements.
evidence of the applicant father
33 at the outset of the hearing, and prior to the father entering the witness box, the court inquired whether, and if so why, there was still a focus upon the august 2017 incident between the parties on the date of separation. the response from the father’s counsel was to the effect that it remained important or significant because of the risk, from the father’s perspective, of the mother’s account of events potentially “poisoning the well” in her engagements with, for example, the children’s various health care practitioners. this portentous response, as it turned out, had an element of foreboding that became clear, and concerning, during the hearing precisely because of the father’s fixation upon this unfortunate, and singular (indeed one-off), event. this is in circumstances where, for example, in her second report (exhibit a2), dr j confirmed (par.6)
there have been allegations made that each of the partiers have, previously, physically assaulted the other, however, there are no current concerns that the children are at risk of family violence or abuse.
34 indeed, neither party has ever claimed that there was any family or other violence at any time during, or after the end of, the relationship, except for this single incident in august 2017.
35 summarised to a very significant degree, the father’s evidence was as follows.
36 the father confirmed that (a) separation between the parties occurred on 25th august 2017, and (b) he had been on leave from work since about july 2017. he said that while he could have returned to work, he doubted that he was in a relevantly fit state to do so at least at the level he anticipated his employer (company k) would have required.
37 with a little bit of clarification, and some other effort and assistance from more questions, the father seemed to acknowledge (without recalling the details) that he had discussed his capacity or ability to return to work “at any time” with mr l of m church, of which the father and the mother, at the time, were members. this conversation with mr l, with only slight correction, was confirmed by a note from m church, dated 29th october 2017, which was contained in the tender bundle (p.69). the father said that he could have gone back to work, at any time, if he was ready to do so.[5] in any event, he confirmed that he did not go back to work until april 2018, while the mother continued to work after separation.
38 following separation, the father confirmed that the mother and the children occupied the former marital residence in the suburb of b street, suburb e. at this time, the father lived with his mother. the children continued to spend regular time with the father but they lived primarily with their mother.
39 it was not contested that there were family violence proceedings in the magistrates court arising out of the august 2017 incident at separation. those proceedings were resolved by way of mutual undertakings. part of the resolution of those proceedings also involved the father returning to live in the b street, suburb e property and the mother and children finding accommodation elsewhere, for which (of course) the mother was required to pay rent from her own funds – on which more later. the b street, suburb e property was unencumbered. the father confirmed that he paid the rates on this property from joint funds for approximately six months. the father confirmed that between august 2017 until approximately “some time in 2019”, while he was paying about $13,000 for school fees and associated expenses, he was not paying any child support to the mother.[6]
40 the father confirmed that the mother had calculated (using a spreadsheet) that he had used an extra $53,000 more than had the mother from jointly held funds. he said that the differential, from his calculations, put the sum at only $7000.[7] the father further acknowledged that, notwithstanding that he was not mentally capable of returning to work, he sought to have primary care of the children.[8]
41 the next relevant matter was the father confirming that he sought to have “added back” to the property pool, the sum of $1,916 that was paid to the mother as a refund from the ndis. this was in circumstances where the father had been regularly withdrawing funds from the parties’ joint account. he said basically that he saw no problem with it. this was also in circumstances where the mother’s bank accounts are in the property pool anyway. the discussion waxed and waned over this princely sum, and similar for quite some time. as interesting, at times, this was, up to a point, it is otiose even to set out examples from it. the references here will suffice.[9]
42 i had previously cautioned the father that a property settlement by the court under s.79 of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) was not an accounting exercise. very often, it seemed to the court that the father was quite determined to ensure that it was an accounting exercise, in every respect, including the time he had with the children, and in relation to the property orders.
43 the father said that although he still does not work full-time (a) his health is getting better, but (b) he provided no medical evidence to support his health situation.[10] on his reduced hours, he earns approximately $120,000 per annum.
44 he confirmed that the mother had filed the first child support application in january 2019. however, her request for an assessment produced a “nil” assessment. he said that he trusted the child support agency (“csa”) in the calculation of the assessment. he confirmed that he had told the csa that he thought a “zero assessment” was appropriate at that time.[11]
45 the father accepted the following matters were relevant to the “zero assessment” at that time: (a) the period of time that he had taken leave without pay, which led to him having earnt “zero income’, and (b) certain tax deductions that he had claimed and been granted. very tightly summarised, those deductions arose this way. a settlement sum came to his father in the sum of $77,000. upon his father’s death, that sum went to his mother. for the purposes of making a donation, it was agreed between the mr trayden and his mother (who had insufficient income to be assisted by any donation and resulting tax deduction) that she would give the money to him to make a tax-deductible donation to a particular research body. this resulted in mr trayden getting the tax deduction for that donation. all of this was for the tax year 2016/2017. thus, the father’s income was reduced by the value of this donation for that tax year.
46 the father confirmed that the following year, he received a tax refund of about $29,000. that sum was itself donated to “the church.” this created a further tax deduction for the father.
47 it followed, and the father generally agreed, that because of his more limited income from his reduced hours worked, this meant that his child support obligations were correspondingly reduced.[12]
48 although the father said that he was paying the children’s school fees, in fact, half were paid by the mother.[13] the nature and level of a certain obtuse and pernickety series of responses is well captured by the following exchanges with the father, which were, unfortunately, typical of the often very difficult exercise to get a straight answer from him. in saying this, i do not suggest that the father was being untruthful or obstructionist. very little, however, was straight-forward in his answers as the following, as but one example, makes plain:[14]
and so – so effectively ms trayden is paying half the school fees because she’s getting less money from you by way of child support?‑‑‑i agree with that. all right. and the ongoing liability then is about $9000 per annum or $733 per month?‑‑‑correct. all right. so in your – in your affidavit you say just a very simple statement, that you continue to pay child support and there – there are no arrears. and i’m not suggest that – that that’s not true but it doesn’t tell the whole story, does it? because there was a period when you did not pay child support?‑‑‑so it ‑ ‑ ‑ i’ve just taken you to that bit?‑‑‑are you suggesting my statement was misleading? i’m not sure what – what – what the question is, sorry. no, i’m saying ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑is this just a misleading statement? i’m saying it doesn’t give the full story. i’ve just taken you through the history of child support payment and – and you’ve made – you weren’t able to make contributions before april 2018. you didn’t make any contributions to ms trayden to – to support the children between august 2017 and august 2019, albeit at that point it was backdated to january 2019. that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑correct. so for two years – both school fee separately – you weren’t provided any child support to ms trayden for her support of the children?‑‑‑with the backdated it’s not two years. but i agree with the ‑ ‑ ‑ the time period?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ agree with the chronology. the time period – the time period, yes. i – i have mentioned the – the view is that they ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑so, it’s not two years is the only point i make. no, the point i make is, until august 2019, she hadn’t received any money?‑‑‑i would agree with that. that’s right?‑‑‑i agree with that.
49 next followed an extended discussion with the father regarding a series of financial gifts to him by his parents, but which were always used to pay down debt on the parties’ mortgage(s). the father maintained that the payments were to him alone, they totalled approximately $280,000. the following exchanges outline the respective contentions, but with perhaps some inadvertent concessions by the father:[15]
and you are aware, aren’t you, that ms trayden says that they were gifts to the both of you, not just to you?‑‑‑i have read that she wrote that in a – i think – a previous affidavit. i can’t recall whether it’s in the latest one. well, take it from me that it is in the latest one?‑‑‑okay. but – but you knew also, it was in one of the earlier affidavits, at least?‑‑‑yes. yes?‑‑‑absolutely. and so, it’s – throughout these proceedings, it’s always been her position that the moneys that were received were a gift to the both of you?‑‑‑yes. you – yes. and the moneys that were received were used for joint purposes, we had that discussion with his honour earlier. that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. and the first three of the payments were used to part-pay the mortgage – the liability relating to the mortgage on the suburb n property that you owned?‑‑‑correct. and the most recent one was used as a payment of the mortgage on b street, suburb e?‑‑‑yes. right. now, the only evidence that you’ve brought forward in relation to who the money was gifted to is the paragraphs that i’ve just mentioned to his honour, isn’t it, paragraphs 196 to 200 of your trial affidavit?‑‑‑yes. right. and feel free to turn to that now, so, find your affidavit and just turn to that. and tell me when you’ve found that page?‑‑‑do you have a page number for me? page 45. do you see major gifts as a heading?‑‑‑correct, yes. right. it’s page – it’s paragraphs 196 to 200 that sets out where you – where you set out the moneys that were received?‑‑‑yes. and do you see that, in every sentence from 196 to 200, or all of the paragraphs, the phrase used is, “my parents gifted me the sum”?‑‑‑yes, yes. and that’s – so – so the use “gifted me” is the one that’s repeated throughout those paragraphs?‑‑‑yes. right. and that – that sentence in each case is effectively, the entirety of the evidence that you’ve put – brought forward to show the court that the moneys were, in fact, gifted to you. that is right, isn’t it?‑‑‑that – yes. there’s other evidence hasn’t been produced yet, correct. and at paragraph 201, there’s a reference to some moneys that ms trayden’s parents provided. suddenly, the phrase changes from “gifted me” to “gifted us”. do you see that?‑‑‑yes, i do. right. and so, do you say that there’s a distinction between the funds, because those moneys were intended to be gifted to the two of you?‑‑‑i – look, it reads that way. i have no issue with it reading to her, so ‑ ‑ ‑ right. your – your mother is still alive?‑‑‑correct. your mother could have been called to give evidence about these things, couldn’t she?‑‑‑well, there’s other evidence we can give to prove it was given to me so ‑ ‑ ‑ well, there’s no dispute that moneys were received, sir?‑‑‑yes. the question is about the intention?‑‑‑yes. you could have called your mother to give evidence, couldn’t you?‑‑‑yes. i didn’t – didn’t know it was required.
50 the more important features of these comments and responses, in my view, relate to the confirmation that the funds were used to benefit the parties and the family on each occasion. the simple assertion by the father, and with no other supporting evidence including from his mother, that the gifts were to him alone, was and remains very difficult to sustain in the light of the history and consistency of the use of the funds for the family. as the father said, a tad later in his evidence:[16] “[the funds] paid off property, yes.”
51 there was another, quite needless (bordering on the inane) discussion about an unregistered vehicle that had been left on the front lawn of the mother’s residence. the car was a motor vehicle 1. the mother had proposed some time ago that it be sold. it was originally registered in the father’s name. obviously, the car was continuing to depreciate in value the longer it sat, unused, on the front lawn. the following short exchange, after a longer series of questions and answers, rather sums up the moment(s):[17]
you proposed that ms trayden retain that car as part of the property settlement, don’t you?‑‑‑correct. right. and do you accept that it probably could have been sold for more than the value that you both put on it now in 2018?‑‑‑and – and i attempted to do that, yes. right. thank you. that’s all that i have on the car, your honour. his honour: but there’s no problem with the car being sold and the proceeds divided?‑‑‑no issue. i would question whether it’s actually operational. yes?‑‑‑but – from a logistics perspective, but otherwise no. no, your honour. i’m glad we’re not doing an accounting exercise...
52 of greater moment was the following discussion regarding the responsibility for the children’s medical appointments and care. it should be recalled that, at the time of the trial, the children had been living primarily with their mother since separation, and that following previously made orders by the court in november 2018, she had had sole parental responsibility for the children’s health needs. what the father sought from the court was a complete reversal of responsibility for such matters. what the lengthy and sometimes difficult discussions with the father during the hearing vividly showed was that not only would such a reversal in parental authority not be in the children’s best interests (in accordance with s.60ca of the act), but that such a radical change would likely be a very unsettling, and therefore inappropriate, change for the children. additionally, the evidence also clearly showed that such a change would be contrary to their best interests. what follows is the start of what became quite a long series of exchanges with the father:[18]
you would accept, wouldn’t you, that the children love their mother?‑‑‑yes. dr j describes the children having a primary care attachment to her. do you accept that description?‑‑‑that – i accept that’s dr j’s opinion. i ‑ ‑ ‑ i’m asking if you agree that that’s probably the case?‑‑‑no. on balance, no. you would at least agree, wouldn’t you, that they have a close and loving relationship with their mother?‑‑‑absolutely, yes. do you accept that ms trayden is a good parent?‑‑‑yes. all right. and she has, at least since november 2018, had sole responsibility for managing the children’s medical needs?‑‑‑yes. and – but even before that, including during the relationship, she was the main person responsible for managing the ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ medical needs, wasn’t she?‑‑‑yes. and you haven’t suggested in your material that there’s any – any of the children’s medical providers at any time during the relationship, post relationship, have suggested that ms trayden is not managing their medical needs appropriately?‑‑‑no. and there also isn’t any suggestion from any of the medical providers that decisions that ms trayden has made about their medical needs have been bad decisions?‑‑‑no. his honour: but you want to change all that, correct? you want to change all that and you be solely responsible for all their medical things, yes?‑‑‑correct. yes. mr howard: and ms trayden has always accepted the advice and treatment proposals that have been put forward by the specialists treating your children?‑‑‑yes. and i will come to the – what you say is a deficit in information provided to you about medical stuff, but otherwise, you – as we’ve just gone through, you don’t make any complaints about her management of the medical matters, do you?‑‑‑no. and it’s in that context, as his honour said, that you seek that you have sole parental responsibility about medical matters?‑‑‑yes. and you seek to exclude ms trayden from being involved in those decisions for the future?‑‑‑it comes down to the definition of being involved. absolutely i would want her involvement, and i would seek to do it in a different way than it has happened to date with me, where we’re both involved, and i think this is a good way to get both parents involved. at the moment, that’s not happening and it’s not happening well. you understand the concept of parental responsibility, do you? have you had that explained to you?‑‑‑yes. right. and so “parental responsibility”, under the act, is decision-making power for major long-term issues. do you understand that?‑‑‑yes. all right. and so by seeking sole parental responsibility, what you’re asking the court to do is make an order that says that you have the sole right to make decisions about major medical issues affecting the children. do you understand that?‑‑‑correct. yes, i do. okay. and so from that perspective, what you’re asking for is an order that would allow – would provide for ms trayden to be excluded from the decisions because you have the sole right to make them?‑‑‑i understand it would allow that.
53 the father confirmed that really his only concern with the mother relating to the health care of the children concerned what he said to the family consultant of him being “locked out” of obtaining information about the children’s health care. as was confirmed at the trial, and will be set out shortly, this was completely erroneous.
54 another, similar and somewhat confusing discussion regarding the same matters, was the following:[19]
see, the court made the order, didn’t they, for ms trayden to have sole parental responsibility for medical matters?‑‑‑yes. and you consider that that was an indignity to you, don’t you?‑‑‑no. no. okay?‑‑‑i don’t – it was untested. the decision was made. his honour has made it, and he’s welcome to do so, and i guess i’m challenging that. that’s what we’re here for. and the way to challenge it is to seek, effectively, the reverse situation, isn’t it, that you have the sole right to make those decisions. that’s the way you challenge it, isn’t it?‑‑‑i’m seeking to have more involvement, and that is a way to achieve that. well ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i would have loved, as i have throughout this, to have shared – which is – for three years, i’ve maintained would have been a better option. with respect, sir, that is not your position before the court. your position before the court is what we’ve just gone through?‑‑‑yes. that you have the sole right to make decisions and ms trayden has no right to make those decisions. that’s what you ask the court to do, isn’t it?‑‑‑that is what i’ve asked the court to do. so let’s not suggest – i don’t want you to be suggesting that what you want is shared parental responsibility for medical matters, because that’s not what you’re asking for, is it?‑‑‑that’s what i would like. so ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑it’s not what i’ve asked for. right?‑‑‑you’ve asked what i’ve asked for or what i would like to see happen. they’re two different things. his honour: yes, but, sorry, you understand that in the absence of reaching agreement, i’ve got to make a decision?‑‑‑yes. and as mr howard has said, what you’re asking for from a legal perspective is sole parental responsibility in relation to ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ matters relating to health?‑‑‑yes, your honour. and in that regard, then, again, given the earlier questions and the answers that you’ve given, where your – really, the only concern that you express is the difficulties – the lack of information sharing, to speak in general terms, yes?‑‑‑no, that’s not the only points that i’ve raised, nor what come through some of the subpoenaed material, which we will cover later. so i’m happy to detail further points, if his honour wishes. well, what else, just in summary? so there’s information sharing. what else?‑‑‑well, it’s the outcomes for the children. so we’ve covered the inputs and who has been doing that, but we haven’t actually looked at the outcomes in how the children are coping, and to me, that’s the whole point, really. how are the children coping? and i don’t believe they’re coping well under the current arrangement, medically, and, indeed, the psychologists, in documentation, suggesting similar things. so if children had strong outcomes right now, then i can see you wouldn’t want to change things, but they simply don’t. mr howard: just on what you’ve just said – so before, i asked you some questions about whether there was any complaint by any of the medical providers about the way in which ms trayden has made decisions for their medical needs, and you said there wasn’t?‑‑‑correct. i asked you whether or not you had any complaints other than information sharing, and you said no, there were not any other complaints. do you remember saying – giving that evidence just a moment ago?‑‑‑i understood the question to be have i put in my affidavit any other complaints. the answer – i don’t think i wrote it in that way in the affidavit, and we will hopefully be exploring that throughout the passage of this hearing. what i asked you was whether you made – i suggested to you that you don’t make any complaints about her management of medical matters?‑‑‑and that ‑ ‑ ‑ and the answer is no, isn’t it?‑‑‑the answer is – that’s right. and that’s the correct answer, isn’t it? you don’t make those complaints?‑‑‑that’s right. in relation to what you’ve just answered to his honour in answer to those questions, i also asked you whether or not ms trayden followed the advice of the medical treaters, and you agreed that she does?‑‑‑i do, yes. correct. i also asked you whether there was any complaint by any of the medical providers that ms trayden had managed their medical needs not appropriately – inappropriately, and you said that there wasn’t any complaints?‑‑‑i agree. so, it’s the case, isn’t it, that whatever’s happening for the children now is in accordance with the recommendations of the various people treating them. that’s right, isn’t it? you need to answer?‑‑‑correct. and as a result of ms trayden accepting their advice?‑‑‑correct.
55 among other things, the father’s contention that the children were not coping is completely contrary to the two reports from dr j, as noted later in these reasons. the father also slightly “back-tracked” on his contention that he had been “completely locked out” of medical information regarding the children. indeed, he confirmed, in accordance with the mother’s evidence, that since the november 2018 orders, the mother had provided the father with 160 plus emails regarding the medical and health treatment for the children.[20]
56 as noted in the extract above, and later in his evidence, the father’s concern was that, in his view, he had not had relevant “inputs” to the health care of the children. curiously, he confirmed that while he had the “authority” to contact health care providers to obtain further information regarding the children and their care, he had never taken up this opportunity under the november 2018 orders.[21]
57 then followed, and not for the first time, the unusual interplay between, for example, the contested, really only in degree and particulars, issue of the father’s interactions with health providers which led, in some instances, to a health care provider refusing to treat or look after the children because of what was regarded as the father’s unhelpful if not disruptive interventions. these “interventions”, regularly if not invariably, related to his need to tell the doctor or other health provider of the events surrounding the separation of the parties in august 2017. the names and specialties of various health providers are set out, primarily but not only, in the mother’s trial affidavit.
58 the health issues canvassed with one or more of them, and the parents, concerned, for example, whether and if so when, to tell x of her diagnosis of asd. the father disagreed with x being told of her diagnosis at the time – an earlier time – proposed by the psychiatrist, dr o. this ultimately required, as the father acknowledged, the mother to seek the assistance of the court because of the opposition of the father regarding the provision of medical information to x that had been recommended by her psychiatrist.[22]
59 the following briefer responses fairly sum up the dilemma regarding the children’s health care:[23]
see, what i’m suggesting to you is that when both of you were responsible for making decisions about x – just looking for x at the moment, x’s medical needs – the two of you were incapable of reaching an agreement that would assist x. you wanted a particular way. ms trayden wanted a different way. in the end, only his honour could make the decision, because the two of you couldn’t do it, that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑the hearing was ‑ ‑ ‑ it’s as simple as that, isn’t it, sir? you wanted it a particular way. ms trayden didn’t agree with that. as a result ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. i – yes, i agree with that.
60 in relation to the responses of some medical practitioners to the father’s engagement with them, there was the following, and in my view quite troubling, exchange:[24]
now, there was a dr p treating x at one point?‑‑‑correct. and he’s a paediatrician, he or she?‑‑‑she. dr p, yes. she’s a paediatrician. and you’re aware, aren’t you, that as a result of contact from you, dr p, firstly, cancelled an appointment with x?‑‑‑she – she cancelled an appointment with x just to ‑ ‑ ‑ and then, secondly – and so this all arose after you had contacted her office?‑‑‑correct. and shortly thereafter dr p decided that she could no longer treat x?‑‑‑dr p hasn’t informed me of that, nor anyone else from her offices. well, you read it in ms trayden’s affidavit, haven’t you?‑‑‑i – i’ve seen that ms trayden has asserted that. yes?‑‑‑i’m saying dr p has not informed me of that. nonetheless, dr p has not had any further involvement in x’s treatment?‑‑‑not to my knowledge. and certainly consistently with what ms trayden says, she has not been involved?‑‑‑i agree with that.
61 ultimately, the father confirmed that it would have been “nice if the doctors and physicians, practitioners let me know themselves”, meaning, if only they had let the father know directly of their concerns in dealing with him when they were trying to care for the children. regrettably, this was another instance where the father seemed quite incapable of putting the children’s needs above his own need to be involved, or as he regularly put it, to have “input” to the information being provided regarding the children.
62 there was a brief reference to a piano, owned by the mother prior to the relationship, for which the father wanted its value included in the property pool. but he had not provided, or otherwise sought, such a valuation be undertaken.[25]
63 again, the father’s cross examination was diverted to the events of separation in august 2017. again, the father was reminded of the general comments by the court at the commencement of the hearing regarding the likely diminishing relevance of a single event three years earlier. regrettably, the narrative below is a tad long, albeit somewhat disjointed:[26]
and so you heard what his honour had to say about how his honour was struggling to see how this could be of significant ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i heard that, yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ relevance. do you accept that? do you accept that it isn’t a matter that should be of significance, or do you think it is significant?‑‑‑i’m not a federal circuit court judge. i take his honour’s view on it. i’m not asking you for the legal position. i’m asking you whether you think it should be considered to be significant?‑‑‑well, i have come in here with that in an affidavit. so if it’s the question has his honour’s view today changed my mind from what i’ve written, i think it hasn’t in that ‑ ‑ ‑ okay, just stop there?‑‑‑yes, i don’t think it has. just stop there. i will just stop you there. i’m going to take ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑okay. ‑ ‑ ‑ you then through the things that i discussed with his honour this morning. as you said at some point during the day, there is a difference of opinion as to who was the aggressor, who was the instigator of that incident. that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑correct. and neither of you say that the type of behaviour that you accused the other of is a pattern of behaviour of that person. so you don’t say that’s a pattern of ms trayden’s behaviour. she doesn’t say that’s a pattern of your behaviour?‑‑‑the physical component, no. yes. well, that’s what i’m talking about?‑‑‑if you’re talking purely ‑ ‑ ‑ and?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ physical, no. and neither of you say that that type of physical – the physical conformation that you had has occurred either previously or since?‑‑‑no. both of you are seeking orders that would result in the children spending substantial time with the other parent. that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑both are seeking orders for that? yes. yes. in fact, more less mirror orders, aren’t they? so not quite mirror, but almost mirror orders. and neither of you are saying to his honour, are you, that there is a risk of a repeat of the violent behaviour on that night?‑‑‑i haven’t said that, so ‑ ‑ ‑ yes, well ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. and you’re not aware that ms trayden says it either?‑‑‑not that i’m aware of, no. no. and so with all of that background, what i have just taken you through, will you accept that then the incident in august 2017 is of very minor moment in determining the best interests of your children?‑‑‑i think it’s a significant issue for y in particular. but who was the aggressor or the instigator of the incident? who’s the one at fault in that incident? that’s not a matter that should bother y, is it? it’s just the fact that there was a violent altercation between his parents. that’s likely to be distressing, whoever was at fault, isn’t it?‑‑‑there’s a nuance to the injuries though, that also make it somewhat important. his honour: how or why?‑‑‑because if i didn’t – well, we – i think ms trayden ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no, no. sorry. sorry?‑‑‑if i can explain. i ‑ ‑ ‑ no. no, look ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑was it rhetorical, was it, your honour? i really don’t want to get down into ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑okay. ‑ ‑ ‑ the nuts and bolts ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑all right. ‑ ‑ ‑ because i have got to focus upon the kids. and one of both of you just seem to have this fixation. yes, it was a terrible incident. there’s no question. okay. and it’s not a question, from my perspective, that compared to others, it was modest in terms of its gravity, but obviously for you two it was significant. and how many times have i said today, which is rhetorical question, “guys, you have got to rule it off and move on, because while either of you keep handing onto the – hanging onto it, i don’t know how either or both of you are going to move on”. but, yes, it’s a consideration that i hope and assume that you have been taken through the list of considerations that i’ve got to have regard to in section 60cc(3) of the family law act, and family violence, etcetera, is a consideration that i’ve got to take into account. the protection of children is a very significant consideration that i’ve got to take into account. but as you’ve acknowledged, this was – these are my words – a one-off incident, correct?‑‑‑correct. ... so you’ve now heard his honour on more than one occasion today talk about how it’s difficult to see how this incident could be considered to be significant to the decision about what’s in the best interests of the children, so that’s what his honour has just told you, isn’t it? you agree with that?‑‑‑yes. all right. but you still see that it’s significant, don’t you – a significant thing that needs to be decided?‑‑‑in three years, i haven’t had the opportunity to explain why, so it’s difficult. could you answer my question, please, sir ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑well, i ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ not the question you wanted me to ask. could you answer the question i asked?‑‑‑i think it may be significant. we need to explore it, and we haven’t done so. well, no, you still want, don’t you – you want his honour to vindicate you, to find that, in fact, you were the one who was not at fault, that ms trayden was at fault. that’s what you want his honour to do, isn’t it?‑‑‑no. no, i don’t. it’s not about that at all, actually. right. his honour: well, what’s it about? come on?‑‑‑well, if ‑ ‑ ‑ let’s keep digging?‑‑‑well, there’s – the pink elephant in the room is if i didn’t injure ms trayden, how did she become injured? and i think it’s irresponsible for a parent not to raise that to authorities to say, “i didn’t do this.” so how can i not be concerned about how it did happen, where children were at that time, and so on? that’s all i want looked at. because i believe that is ‑ ‑ ‑ with the result of what?‑‑‑i believe that is – i believe that’s important for children to be able to – to know that and to factor into the parenting arrangement. that’s all i would ask. how will they know?‑‑‑no, no, not – they wouldn’t know. i’m saying for a parenting arrangement to have that factored in as one component. i’m not saying it’s the complete component. it’s not everything. it doesn’t have all the weight. i’m just saying i can’t believe it would have zero per cent weight.
64 although stated earlier in these reasons, the father’s fixation upon the event of august 2017, and his vindication regarding it, was worrying, and much else besides.
65 the incident of august 2017 was considered further in the light of the father’s correspondence with members of his then church, the m church. he spoke to one of its members, mr l, on 29th october 2017. there is a record of that conversation in the tender bundle (p.69). the record stated: “mr trayden [the father] said that he was upset that ms trayden [the mother] had not been admonished given that he was convicted by the police.” there was a continued discussion with the father regarding his expectations of the church at that time, the role of certain members of the church supporting the mother which did not please the father, and the role of the leaders of the church. the father confirmed that he provided the church with details of the events of separation.[27] the father further confirmed that he had written to the church to complain that it should not have supported the mother and that it should have “condemned her.”[28]
66 i need not outline in detail the events subsequent to the separation of the parties in august 2017, except to record that the police took out an apprehended violence order to protect the mother. a short time later, the father took out a similar order. i put to him that the second order was surely superfluous given the ongoing impact of the first order. he explained, or justified the second order this way (emphasis added):[29]
... removed from the home, and not having possessions and so on, and then obviously dictated parenting arrangements and so on. so for me, i just didn’t want something to happen again that would even make that worse, because that just wasn’t a good period of time. so i thought, well – and again, i won’t go into the narrative of the time, but i just didn’t want that to be done again to me and have to go through that again. and so, i thought let’s – you know, i’m the one who has been assaulted. let’s get the family violence order and we will see what happens. i didn’t know when any of them would resolve or what would actually happen either. it could well be one resolves and that one’s left. i couldn’t tell what was going to take place.
67 the father confirmed that he had undertaken an assessment in 2014 with a psychologist that led to him receiving an assessment that he had asd (autism spectrum disorder). he wanted the mother to have a similar assessment. obviously in his view, he was trying to be helpful, but the father provided the person who was doing the assessment for the mother with two separate documents, one of 16 pages, the other of 15 pages, in which he set out his concerns about the mother’s behaviour.[30] these assessments took place prior to the separation of the parties. the father claimed that his motives in providing such documentation “were pure”, he said he was trying to help, understand and support. he also confirmed that he told the assessor that he was struggling with “ongoing traumatic relationship syndrome.” some of the symptoms of this syndrome were stress related, he said, and arose from the stressful relationship with the mother.
68 in answer to some questions from the icl, the father confirmed that the communication between the parents is extremely difficult, and sometimes, because of the difficulty, (using the icl’s words regarding the father’s view), the mother just shuts down and will not talk to him.[31]
69 regarding his conduct towards medical practitioners, there was the following brief exchange:[32]
do you take any responsibility for those health professionals not wishing to engage with you?‑‑‑clearly i have written in a way in some communications that could have been written in a different manner to get my point across. they have clearly not liked what they’ve read, and perhaps the tone. so the answer is, yes.
70 the father confirmed that the last time he and the mother spoke “face to face” was the evening of the separation in august 2017. there was, however, something of a “light bulb moment” in relation to a comment he made to dr j. the exchange with the icl was not the usual tenebrous kind:[33]
... you also then say on the same paragraph [29]:
ms trayden allegedly continues to denigrate him to the children.
what examples do you have of ms trayden denigrating you as the children’s father to them?‑‑‑look, i don’t have examples for that and i have – i would like – that question of dr j – because i – i haven’t said that in any documentation. i – i know it’s here, but i have not said that. i – i don’t believe that. i – i think what i was saying at the time was i think ms trayden still seems caught up in what took place and that is having – would have a negative impact and seems to be on y. she has not said anything, to my knowledge, to denigrate me to them and if – if i said that there, then – then that was absolutely wrong.
71 the following lengthy response by the father to the icl’s further question was significant, and in my view (regrettably not for the first time), lacking in insight (emphasis added):[34]
ms hiles: one last question – and i understand now, after that, what your position is with respect to parental responsibility. you are also seeking, are you not, orders that the children live primarily in your house and spend time – regular lots of time with their mum?‑‑‑mmm. and that’s in effect a reverse of what’s currently happening?‑‑‑it’s not mirrored, but ‑ ‑ ‑ but it’s close?‑‑‑yes. primarily in one house, and lots of time in the other house, let’s say?‑‑‑yes. broadly speaking. could you please tell his honour why should that change?‑‑‑yes, yes. so i think it’s a more emotionally stable environment with me, and that would support the children more so, especially y, and there’s information coming through about why he feels the need for cuddles and so on all the time. i think more time with me is going to be more beneficial. where that lands – we had to put down what that is. i don’t want to be prescriptive about it. i think it should be more. where that lands, and on the balance of evidence, we just had to put that down. i’m more than open to still have, you know, looking at it, discussing about it, if there’s a possibility. so i wanted to have roughly similar time with both parents. i think the orders i’ve requested have that, even though if we look at overnights it’s not. but again – and like your honour said, i have to speak to my legal team again, but the reality is i’m not – i don’t mind exactly where it is. i think it should be more. i think that will be helpful for the children, and if that’s over time or now – i don’t see why we wouldn’t move to it by the start of next year, but you know. i’m open to that being looked at, but i see that that could be a positive, and i would rather do that because at the moment it looks like they’re heading down the path of potentially medication. let’s get them into – i believe – a more stable environment. i appreciate that i might not have persuaded people of that, but i think if we do that first and give that a run, hopefully we will make a big, big difference.
72 the father’s evidence was troubling in many respects. i do not share his somewhat sanguine view about the stability of the environment he would provide to the children, and certainly not more stable than the mother’s long-time firm, durable and supportive environment she has continued to provide for them.
73 more generally, in my view, i did not find the father was not candid or not truthful in his evidence. rather, i found him very consistently to be a significantly guarded witness who was very protective, by nature and otherwise, of his own position because he was so convinced of the truth and accuracy of his own account and views. he was regularly very self-focussed, which often led him being unable to see that there was any other view, especially regarding the best interests of the children. and his fixation on specific matters, coupled with his undaunted self-belief, effectively drowned out any and all other views, including those of the mother. it is unsurprising, as the mother’s evidence below makes plain, how utterly relentless and exhausting it is to deal with the father because of his certainty of belief, among other things. he was, and doubtless remains, relentless in prosecuting his views. moreover, he strongly viewed both the parenting and financial aspects of this matter through the lens of almost unrivalled certainty and self-belief. it was, as i viewed his evidence, almost an accounting exercise, and audit of what was (in his firm view) just and equitable, be it in relation to the time with the children, or the determination of financial matters. on this latter aspect, subject to what is said later in these reasons, i found the father/husband to be remarkably pernickety in matters that concerned the mother (e.g. the inclusion of a quite modest refund to the mother from the ndis), yet astonishingly imprecise when it came to matters for which the court should have reasonably expected him to have detailed evidence, but did not, such as evidence from his mother regarding the so-called “gifts” that were unquestionably used for the benefit of the family.
74 accepting that he had (and possibly still has) some health issues that impacted his ability to work full-time, i regard the father’s evidence in relation to child support as more an issue of his remarkable lack of insight, and unfortunately being apparently almost insouciant about the lack of financial provision for them. this was in circumstances where, in large measure, the mother was carrying the bulk of the labour in the care of the children while supporting herself and them, and the father was basically looking after himself and not working.
75 i have no doubt of his best intentions, and love, for the children. however, his evidence clearly and regularly showed a lack of insight into their best interests. unwittingly, he often seemed to equate his “insights” and “inputs” into the children as necessarily correct and always in their best interests. few, if any, other views relevantly held any sway with him. without expressly saying so, he seemed to think that part of his responsibility was to ensure that health professionals, and invariably the mother, required his guidance and “input” to ensure the optimal outcome as he saw it.
evidence of the respondent mother
76 at the outset of the second day of the trial, counsel for the mother noted that the father had changed his position regarding parental responsibility, and accepted that the mother should retain sole parental responsibility regarding the children’s health matters, subject to him being able to attend medical appointments and the like. other spend time with arrangements were also flagged. these matters were set out in a revised minute of orders that had been circulated that morning to the mother’s lawyers and to the icl.[35]
77 the other matter that might be conveniently noted here was that, as an observation only, the court commented that if the spend time with arrangements moved to a five nights per fortnight with the father, the need for the current, regular “check in” time between the father and the children (as doubtless disruptive as that was to everyone’s scheduling) would thereby be unnecessary.[36]
78 the mother readily acknowledged the father’s love for the children, his engagement with y in particular over their shared love of afl, and some other examples. she said however that it was the first time she had ever heard the father say that he had a “positive view of her as a person”, and further that, based on all the material she had read, this was not the impression she had.[37] the mother confirmed that, in her view, the father has the best intentions for the children as his “motivation” but then said, somewhat ruefully and with quite some regret, and certainly in my view, with very significant understatement: “i think there are challenges in the execution of that sometimes.”[38]
79 regarding the father’s latest position regarding parental responsibility, which as noted earlier changed again after the evidence closed and notified only during the quite late-filed submissions, the mother continued to express that there were clear tensions, now down to a “medium level”, between the parents and their engagements.[39] and to record again, the father’s further changed position placed the mother (and everyone else) at a significant procedural and evidentiary disadvantage.
80 fairly, the mother noted that in relation to communication, it would be preferable and advisable for communication between the parents to focus only on the children and not on the parents themselves. it was necessary, in her view, for the parents to “suck it up and get on with life”, noting that no parent is perfect but it was essential for the parents to be able to focus on what was best for the children. for my part, this was one of many examples where the mother’s clear direction and focus upon the children’s best interests, while regularly managing the distressing and very often obstructionist pre-occupations of the father, shone very clearly. given all the responsibilities she has carried for some time, and still does, she was a very impressive and caring witness. she readily gave credit where it was due, and invariably took a conciliatory course wherever possible, regularly in the face of significant difficulties posed by the father and his awkward and resistant approach to many things.
81 much of the mother’s further cross examination focussed on many matters of logistics and detail, which i have to say, assisted me very little regarding the main issues i was, and am, required to address. i do not say this to be especially critical of counsel for the father, who seemed to be labouring under a range of difficulties not of his making.
82 the mother confirmed that there are many changeovers for the children. likewise, there are many appointments to which she takes the children. again, with notable understatement, she commented on this latter aspect: “... i am mindful of all the running around i have to do ... to take the children to appointments which – i can’t always have control over when i can schedule them.”[40]
83 the mother was then asked about whether she had any difficulty in consulting with the father when making medical and related appointments for the children. this was partly in the context of appointments that may occur when the children are scheduled to be in the father’s care, and also in the context of the father seeking that he be able to attend appointments. matters of logistics, and more, were canvassed as follows:[41]
from a practical sense, it’s actually quite difficult, because i note that in the proposed orders, i have to consult with mr trayden first before making an appointment in his time. whereas, when you’re on the phone to a provider, they – you don’t really get a choice. like, you can say, “i am available this and this time”, and they will say, “well, this or this appointment.” if it’s in his time, i can’t say yes, because i haven’t asked him if he is willing to do that. so, how do i do that, from a practical sense. are you open to emailing him, and saying, “look, this is the – this is the timeframe that – of this particular therapeutic treater, or medical provider has. if you – can you do it”?‑‑‑i guess i am concerned about ‑ ‑ ‑ yes?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ it, because it’s untested – his ability to manage those relationships in a productive way. and i appreciate you saying that, but if, for example – if he’s just to drop off your child, or your children, or the children you – both of your child – children, to a sort of – say, a medical treater, or a therapeutic treater, and it’s delivering them, letting them go in themselves ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ and coming out, which is – seems to be a lot of ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ what they do ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ is there any problem with that?‑‑‑well, yes. he can do that.
84 i accept the mother’s clear and simple evidence in this regard. as with almost all else, she was abundantly clear (but in no martyr-like bemoaning of her lot) what worked and what was necessary in the day to day care, especially health care, of the children. the father’s proposal that he be consulted before any medical appointment for the children was made was astonishingly unrealistic. i understand his interest and good intentions. but it showed at least remarkable naiveté, if not (again) self-focus rather than an appreciation that almost invariably, health care providers cannot and do not wait for the convenience of a consultation with another parent. for my part but as an observation only, i would not even permit the father to attend any consultations with the children’s health care providers electronically. he can obtain such information as he might require from those professionals later.
85 the mother confirmed that she and the father gave different accounts of the events of separation to dr o. she said that she gave each party’s version of events, at a “high level”, which i took to be a general reference to something of an overview.[42]
86 next followed a discussion regarding the father’s proposal that there be something akin to an agreed progression and increase in the father’s time with the children. to this, the mother said:[43]
... you have seen the proposal by the father, to progress time from – from five nights to six nights to seven nights. right?‑‑‑yes. you have seen that?‑‑‑yes. and, in terms of – or any of the proposal – none of them are weak about a solution. you understand that. and there’s – in terms of the move – the move that the husband well, proposes in relation to terms 3 and 4 of – in 2021, to six nights per fortnight, which i think you have reviewed, is – do you have an objection to a progression of time, if both kids are – both your children are coping with the five night arrangement?‑‑‑well, i think that’s where it has to be reviewed – how the kids are coping ‑ ‑ ‑ yes?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ before a further step can be made. so, it’s not a fundamental objection. it’s just, you want ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑it’s not a fundamental objection. it’s based on the kids. yes?‑‑‑if – if they’re coping well, you know, i have no objection to that. but ‑ ‑ ‑ right?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ as things stand right today, that is not somewhere that would be appropriate at the moment, and i can’t say that it will be appropriate at that time.
87 i agree with the mother’s comments completely. any progression in time, as with any orders for the children, must be what is best for them. there cannot, and should not, be automatic increases in the father’s time with them. to propose this in the circumstances of this case, in my view, again showed significant lack of insight and a strong focus on the father’s own interests. this can be explained or understood in part because of what seemed often to be an equation between the children’s best interests and his own. if not almost identical, they were, in effect and in reality, at least symbiotic.
88 regarding the issue of the financial “gifts” from the father’s parents during the marriage, noting too that the mother’s parents made a very modest gift also, the mother’s evidence was:[44]
and i’m going to suggest to you that these were gifts that, you know, were given directly to mr trayden and – in his name, because they were a gift from his folks, weren’t they?‑‑‑we actually had a discussion specifically about that, the first gift that was – come in. so, mr trayden said to me his parents would like to give us money. this was early in the marriage, and he wanted to see how i felt about that. and i was uncomfortable because i thought, if they give us a large sum of money, did that mean they had a say in, you know, the – the house – what happened at the house, or what happened in our relationship. and he said, “no. no. no. there’s no strings attached. that’s not how my parents operate. that’s not what it’s like.” yes?‑‑‑so, i thought, okay. there’s no strings attached. okay. that would be the – i assume the 2003 ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑that was the first gift, yes. that 2003 $31,400 advance?‑‑‑yes. as to the balance of them, did you have conversations with mr trayden about them at all, any of those tranches that came in?‑‑‑well, the history was laid, so it was the same kind of scenario in situation ‑ ‑ ‑ so, you ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑“my parents want to give us some more money.” “okay.”
89 in relation to some brief questions from the icl, the following may be noted.
90 in relation to the mother’s dealings with the father, she said:[45]
... you say that – and this is perhaps my paraphrasing, so tell me if this is incorrect, but – that you feel fatigued and distressed dealing with mr trayden?‑‑‑yes. things that i think should just be simple matters, to be resolved easily, often are not resolved easily. could you give his honour an example of that?‑‑‑so, the covid home-schooling, i emailed mr trayden and said, “are you interested in, you know, participating in the home-schooling, and sharing it.” he said, “yes.” i proposed a way that we could do that within the current set of orders, and then the back and forth that occurred around that was mr trayden trying to change the situation to a 50 50 shared care, which i didn’t actually believe was – well, it wasn’t really in the current orders, and i didn’t think it was helpful, and it was – it was like, let us talk about this issue, and then it’s – it’s this issue over here. and it’s, like, you know – and then, it descended into involvement with solicitors and stuff, and it – and it’s hard work when solicitors become involved.
91 the following somewhat lengthy exchange, which covers a couple of different items regarding parenting, is, in my view, quite instructive, if that be necessary. again, it shows the mother’s measured responses, and much else besides – very positively:[46]
his honour: can i ask: has it gotten easier, or is it basically the same since you separated?‑‑‑that sort of stuff is similar. so, it has been consistently ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑it has been consistent. ‑ ‑ ‑ sort of like that ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ about specific issues?‑‑‑yes. so – so, like, another example was the children – x doing art. the way it occurred to me was i received, from one of the mothers at school, a brochure for a free art class. is x interested. and it was in mr trayden’s time, so i forwarded it to mr trayden, and said, “received this. you know, i think x is interested. are you.” you know, and, so he took her. she was interested. after that period of time, i received notification there was an ongoing art class at a cost, and so i sent the information to mr trayden. “it appears there is a cost. there is an ongoing art class. she really wants to do it.” and i received, “you didn’t tell me that there was going to be an ongoing art class. this was supposed to be a one off. you should have told me at the start.” i didn’t know at the start. all i knew – the first part was that it was a free art class. i didn’t know it was going to extend into an ongoing thing, but x enjoyed it, and it was an option for her to do it. but, again, i was criticised, like, i should have told him. i didn’t know. and it’s – it’s that kind of pattern that it – it can be simple issues about going to an art class. it’s like, okay. well, i didn’t know this is what has occurred. i think she will enjoy it. so ‑ ‑ ‑ but as soon as you got the information, you passed it on?‑‑‑absolutely. ms hiles: how long ago was that incident?‑‑‑well, that was the start of the year, because i think she started art at the start of this year. okay. i understand that there was – and i am not sure if it was – sorry ..... this year or last year about a change to a weekend to facilitate y attending a football game, or – i don’t know if it was watching on tv. something like that ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ with his dad. and if i understand correctly – sorry, i withdraw that. how do you say that was arranged?‑‑‑so, mr trayden – it – the grand final for the afl fell on y’s time with me, and mr trayden emailed me and said y would love to watch it with him. it can either be y goes to his house and watch it, or the possibility of going to sydney. i think – i am pretty sure that it was – the team that they go for was in the grand finale, and the possibility to go to sydney to watch it live, and he would love that. what are my thoughts. and i said – so, i thought about it. okay, i had actually made significant plans that weekend to take the children to the fireworks in suburb q, but i spoke to y. i said, “what would you like to do.” he wanted to go to the afl. i said, “okay. you can go to the afl.” so, i agreed for y to spend that whole saturday up until 9 o’clock that night, so he could go with mr trayden to the afl in sydney and watch the game with him. and i – i just said, “well, maybe on one of your weekends, i could just have some time with y, one on one, so i can have some one on one time.” and mr trayden – and i suggested the – the next school holidays, which were in a couple of weeks, because i thought that would be easiest to manage. and the response i got was, “well, you can have y.” and he – he identified a date in the christmas school holidays, which was four and a-half months away. and i thought, “how.” well, i don’t think that that was – is helpful. i mean, if those school holidays didn’t work, that’s okay, but why do i have to wait four and a-half months. so, i just said, “okay. i will look at – this weekend, can he do this weekend.” and so i got him that weekend for five hours, and we – we went and had ice-cream, and – after the soccer final and stuff, so that’s how it worked. in the event that something like that event that you just described happened again, or the art example, in, say, six months’ time, when none of us are involved anymore, and, so that – you don’t have the ..... that backstop of, okay, if we can’t sort it out ourselves, we’re going to, you know, get our lawyers to write letters and whatnot, how do you propose that kind of thing would be resolved when lawyers aren’t here anymore?‑‑‑i think – i think it’s about what’s best for the kids. so, in that example, it was a good experience for y to go and watch the footy with his dad, and so i agreed to it, and i will still agree to things in the future if it’s good for the kids. if there’s, you know, concerns around, you know, how that’s negotiated – i mean, i will – i will do my best to be, you know – to try and negotiate it, and i’m not going to stop the kids from having an experience that’s positive for them. i would – i will support that, and i will just have to try my best through communication and negotiation, and that’s where i have sort of tried to adopt strategies where we’re just focusing on the issue. we’re not accusing each other of anything, we’re not inflammatory, but at the end of the day, there will be orders in place. and if things can’t be agreed, we have – we will have orders that will specify what time the kids have with each parent.
92 in my view, the mother’s evidence here, which i accept, confirms that (a) she keeps the father informed of matters regarding the children, (b) she seeks to get him to take relevant responsibility for certain things regarding the children (not always with the speed or insight that she might have wished), and (c) she so regularly takes a conciliatory approach and tries to negotiate things with the father. i found the mother to be very fair in her account of things in relation to the father. so often, as the evidence showed, it regularly amounted to doing things “his way or the highway.” on the mother’s evidence, some of these aspects, or dimensions of them, have been noted by the children, notably x. thus:[47]
well, there’s some concern about how you may schedule those in the father’s time, or you may need to seek consent. that really limits (a), your ability to make appointments, and (b), your ability to have some downtime with the kids in the afternoons. is that – do i have that right, in terms of your weekly schedule?‑‑‑yes. and that’s actually something x has commented on. she actually has said to me, “we do all our – have all our downtime with dad, and we’re always busy with you.” but if – i mean, if i need to schedule work – appointments during work times, i do that, and then – then i do my own work in night – at night, or when the – when the kids are with mr trayden, to make up my hours. so, i have that flexibility to do that during my work time, as well as after school. it’s not preferable because i don’t want to be taking the children out of school, but, also, when there’s longstanding appointments, i – what i tend to do is – is try and book them in advance, because they book out. so, i can kind of get the – the pick, so to speak, to get the after school appointments, to try and fit it in around other activities. so, it is a bit of a juggle and a negotiation with service providers, but so far, i have managed it so they kind of fit into the routine. but, in the event, say, for example, dr o, you – x is on her cancellation list, for example, and, so something comes up. dr o’s office rings you and says, “hey. we have actually got an appointment tomorrow available. otherwise, you are going to have to wait three months”?‑‑‑yes. in the event that you needed to get the father’s consent because that day happened to be on the father’s time ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ how do you think you would go about managing that?‑‑‑so, in the past, what i have done is i have accepted the appointment, and this occurred when there was a cancellation, and x went. the appointment was an hour, crossed over the time when there was a changeover. okay?‑‑‑so, basically, when they offer you something like that, you have to accept it on the sport, because if you don’t accept it on the spot, they ring the next person on the list. ... his honour: i know. we get that?‑‑‑so, i accept it on the spot, and then i communicate to mr trayden, “this appointment has come up. i have accepted it.” and, i mean, at the end of the day, if he can’t do it, or – or if it doesn’t – if it’s in his time and he can’t do it, well, i have to cancel it and accept the next one. but i have to accept it on the spot because these providers are busy.
family report
93 the first family report of dr j, dated 24th october 2018, became exhibit a1. although slightly dated and complemented by the later, december 2019 report, there remain important matters that were canvassed, which i note below.
94 perhaps most importantly are the comments recorded by dr j from ms r, who is x’s psychologist. pars.49 – 57 of dr j’s first report regarding her discussion with ms r were in the following terms:
49. ms r introduced herself as x’s psychologist. she said she has been providing psychological services to x since approximately 2014. when x started her psychology sessions, she was highly anxious with poor social communication skills. as the sessions have progressed, x’s anxiety has significantly decreased, she has become more able to speak confidently and understand social relationships. 50. according to ms r, in her psychology sessions, x has spoken of her perceptions of the parental separation. x has commented that she overheard the fight between her parents that led to the police being called. x reported to ms r that she believes her father pushed her mother, her mother said “i’m going to call the police” and her father said “you go ahead”. since that time, x has formed the belief that “daddy might be trying to get mummy into trouble and blame her for things”. x has spoken to ms r about feeling confused about which parent to believe about things, for example, her mother told her to have honey and lemon when she was feeling unwell, then her father said “its ridiculous” which was confusing to x. x has told ms r that she loves both of her parents and she does not want to be separated from either parent for more than three days. 51. ms r explained that she does not see y for psychology sessions, he is seen by another psychologist at the same practice. it is ms r’s understanding, through talking with y’ psychologist and observing y at the clinic, that y is highly anxious and he clings to his mother at times of high anxiety. 52. ms r has had psychology sessions with ms trayden. initially the sessions focused on parenting support to coach ms trayden in parenting strategies to assist with x’s therapy. as the parental relationship deteriorated, ms trayden became increasingly distressed during sessions and ms r provided some personal support to ms trayden. ms r observed that ms trayden appeared to be very non-assertive in the marital relationship, however as she decided that she no longer wanted to be in the relationship and she started “speaking up” the family functioning “went pear shaped”. ms r recognised that there could be a conflict of interest if she continued to provide personal psychology services to both ms trayden and x, so she recommended that ms trayden see a different psychologist. ms r is unaware of whether ms trayden has done so yet, however she is no longer providing ongoing personal therapeutic support to ms trayden. 53. ms r, for the majority of x’s psychology services, liaised with ms trayden in respect to administrative and support matters for x. at approximately the time that the parental relationship markedly deteriorated, mr trayden booked an appointment for himself with ms r, he booked it under ms trayden’s name and ms r was not aware that the appointment was for mr trayden until he arrived to see her. in total, mr trayden attended two to three appointments with ms r for parenting support for x. 54. it appeared that ms r found the professional relationship with mr trayden stressful. she reported that she had to continually direct him to focus on parenting strategies for x as he wished to speak at length about the marital relationship, however ms r did not feel she was the appropriate psychologist to assist mr trayden with these issues. mr trayden interacted with ms r in a “lovely” manner in person, however ms r later received a letter from mr trayden’s solicitors that were incongruent with their in-person conversations and ms r felt the letter was threatening in tone. mr trayden, when wanting an appointment sooner than was available, allegedly spoke to the receptionist staff in a threatening manner, the reception staff allegedly felt bullied and upset by mr trayden’s behaviour. 55. in the context of mr trayden’s behaviour, ms r reportedly spoke to ms trayden about the possibility of having to cease providing services to x. ms r reported that she believes that other health providers who have seen x have felt that there is a high likelihood of mr trayden falsely accusing service providers of engaging in wrong-doing. when she considers this, in addition to her experience with mr trayden, she is concerned that if she continues to provide services to the trayden family, she may have false complaints made against her, which could threaten the viability of her psychology practice in the future. 56. recently, x participated in group therapy ‘secret agent society’ at ms r’s psychology practice. when ms r suggested the group to x, she was enthusiastic about the idea and spoke to her parents about it. mr trayden brought x to her appointments for the group therapy. 57. it is ms r’s opinion that both parents have positive relationships that help x in her development. ms trayden has a positive attachment relationship with the children, she reads them well and is able to give them what they need emotionally. mr trayden is an active father who engages the children in activities that challenge them, this helps x to grow in confidence and self-esteem. however, ms r does not believe that mr trayden and ms trayden are likely to be able to successfully co-parent the children due to the extremely high level of acronymity [sic: acrimony] between them.
95 in the section dealing with mr trayden’s “mental health evaluation”, dr j said, at pars.67 – 74:
67. mr trayden reported that his physical health problems were primarily caused by sleep problems (that have now been improved by using a cpap machine) and the stress of the marital relationship (that is now improved by the parental separation). he reported that his overall health is much improved since the parental separation. it is the opinion of the consultant that mr trayden’s physical health problems may be closely linked to his stress levels and emotional state, this is consistent with his scores in the psychological testing in respect to elevated somatic complaints and low activity levels. this appears to be a longstanding pattern for mr trayden, his psychological testing results showed similar patterns in his 2014 assessment. considering that mr trayden’s recent test results showed that he was not presenting himself in an open fashion, rather, he was attempting to portray himself as extremely emotionally well-adjusted, it is possible that mr trayden is over emphasising his health improvements since the parental separation. the long standing nature of mr trayden’s health problems, combined with his elevated scores in the domains of somatic complaints, interpersonal passivity and introversion/low positive emotionality, indicates that mr trayden may have fixed personality traits that negatively impact on his physical wellbeing and interpersonal functioning. it appears likely that mr trayden has a tendency to become overwhelmed by stress and the accompanying effects on his physical wellbeing. it appears that he responds to this by passively withdrawing from responsibility and expecting others to adjust to his reduced ability to function. it is likely that he refrains from directly and openly communicating his negative feelings, rather, he reacts in a passive-aggressive pattern that is confusing to others and not conducive to constructive negotiation and problem solving. 68. whether or not mr trayden suffers from an autism spectrum disorder is outside the scope of this assessment. the consultant considers that it is possible that he may suffer from such a disorder, however it is also possible that the reported similarities between his patterns of behaviour and autism spectrum disorder could have alternate explanations. 69. it is possible that mr trayden is suffering from depression. this is consistent with his scores on the psychological testing. however, his presentation of himself as emotionally well-adjusted and his tendency to minimise emotional problems makes a definitive diagnosis outside the scope of this assessment. 70. mr trayden may have narcissistic personality traits that present themselves in a tendency to misinterpret others’ behaviour and subconsciously avert his attention away from the role that he plays in increasing interpersonal conflict and distress. when psychologist ms s’s report is considered in the context of the subsequent events relayed by psychologists ms t and ms r, it appears that mr trayden, in an extreme way, misinterpreted ms trayden’s increasing distress in the context of the deterioration of the marital relationship as being signs that she is suffering from a mental disorder. mr trayden appears to have a tendency to deal with interpersonal conflict by locating the problem in the other person rather than by recognising and dealing with his own contribution to the problem. it appears that mr trayden does not have insight into this aspect of his own personality and functioning. 71. mr trayden appears vulnerable to developing a skewed perception of reality in intimate relationships. it appears he truly believed that ms trayden’s behaviours were indicative of autism spectrum disorder. this is despite having first hand knowledge of the symptoms of the disorder through his daughter’s experience. he appears to have been unable to understand ms trayden’s behaviour in any other way, for example, as a stress reaction in the context of their marital discord. this is of concern, it is likely that this is a pervasive pattern in mr trayden’s behaviour in close relationships. it is likely (although not a certainty) that such a pattern would manifest in a future intimate relationship for mr trayden. 72. the pattern discussed above is not apparent in mr trayden’s relationship with his children. at this point in time, he appears able to accurately perceive his children’s physical and emotional needs and meet them in a way that helps the children to feel safe and secure with him. there is the chance that mr trayden’s pattern of developing a skewed and blaming perception of relationship problems may manifest in his relationship with his children in their adolescent years. it is necessary for children, in their adolescent years, to be able to disagree with and challenge their parents. this is an important part of adolescent development as they build their autonomy and independent sense of self. the children, at this stage of their development, will need their parents to be able to understand their point of view and compromise (even when the children disagree with and criticise their parents). as the children mature into adolescence, they are more likely to challenge their parents and behave in ways that contradict their parents’ value systems. mr trayden may be vulnerable to blaming others (such as ms trayden) or misattributing the children’s behaviour to something being ‘wrong with them’ (such as x suffering from a disability) and therefore unwittingly contribute to a deterioration in the parental relationship and alienate the children when they are in need of his understanding and support to learn to appropriately manage conflict and family disagreements in assertive, respectful and confident ways. this risks the relationship between children and their father becoming stressful and emotionally distressing in the children’s adolescent years. however, there is also the possibility that mr trayden’s positive relationship with the children will continue. their positive history may be protective and help the children and their father successfully negotiate the adolescent years. 73. the complex interaction of emotional issues, physical health issues and personality issues that constitutes mr trayden’s situation is one that is likely to be stable over time. at times of reduced stress, it is likely that mr trayden’s physical and mental wellbeing will improve. however, at times of increased stress, it is likely that the problems will re-emerge (although they may present in different forms over time as circumstances change). as mr trayden appears to be lacking in insight and he is defensive about admitting his flaws, he is unlikely to be able to easily engage in a treatment program with a mental health professional. 74. despite the concerns related to mr trayden’s physical and mental health, it is apparent that he has a history of engaging positively in caring for the children. when x talked to him about her wish to engage in a therapy group, he helped her to attend by supporting her and taking her to the appointments. he coached y’s football team, a positive experience for both of the children. he engaged the children in outdoor activities such as cycling, which helped both of the children with their sense of self-confidence and wellbeing. mr trayden has demonstrated that he has the capacity to contribute in important ways to the children’s wellbeing, despite some physical and mental health concerns. however, it is likely that he would not be able to entirely manage the demands of the children’s care needs in a primary carer role.
96 regarding the mother’s mental health evaluation, dr j noted, at pars.82 – 85:
82. ms trayden appears to be suffering from high levels of distress, anxiety and issues of self-doubt and low self-esteem. it is highly likely that these mental health issues are related to the stress of the breakdown of the marital relationship and the subsequent circumstances of the parental separation. in the opinion of the consultant, ms trayden is suffering from adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. her current elevated somatic complaints are likely to be related to her emotional distress. it is recommended that a second mental health clinician confirm the diagnosis before it is considered definitive. 83. it is likely that ms trayden’s physical and mental health will improve significantly if the parental conflict reduces and the matters before the court are resolved. this will enable her to re-establish new routines with a sense of confidence that there will be the hope of family stability in the future. 84. ms trayden has some personality traits that may be longer-standing issues. it appears that she has a tendency to respond to relationship conflict in a way that passively internalises problems, leading to self-doubt, excessive negative ruminations and low self-esteem. it is likely that she has difficulty expressing her negative feelings (such as anger) to others in an open and direct manner. it is likely that her negative feelings build up, instead of being resolved by open dialogue and constructive problem solving. she appears to respond to stress by withdrawing from social relationships, as she is somewhat shy and introverted in nature. given that she appears to have good insight into her own personality, she is non-defensive and open to seeking professional help, a long term trusting therapeutic relationship with a mental health professional is likely to be of significant value to ms trayden. if she is motivated to do so, it is likely that she can make positive changes that will enable her to better manage relationship conflict in the future. 85. despite her high levels of distress, ms trayden is committed to her children’s wellbeing and appears to be prioritising their care needs. it is likely that ms trayden hopes that the children’s care is not compromised by her mental health difficulties. however, children are sensitive and they are affected by their parents’ emotional state. it is likely that ms trayden’s distress is contributing to increased anxiety for x and y. it is important for x and y’ wellbeing that ms trayden reaches out for help, to both mental health professionals and her social network. this may be difficult, given ms trayden’s shy and introverted nature, but it is likely to greatly assist her to recover her emotional wellbeing and thereby assist x and y in their emotional wellbeing also.
97 regarding her discussions with x, dr j reported (pars.90 – 94):
90. x said that although she is getting used to her family situation, she does not really like it. she misses her other parent and has cried sometimes. 91. in relation to changeover, x described the arrangements for changeover at the suburb e shops. she thought it would be easier if changeover was at a parents’ home, however she was concerned about her parents seeing each other, she reported “it might be fine if they got a glimpse of the other one, but it might not be fine. its not like they talk to each other, they have to email each other”. although x is aware that her parents no longer wish to communicate or be in proximity to each other, she believes that both parents are making efforts in their relationship, she explained “they’ve tried to be kind to each other. mum was kind doing the hard work moving out of the house. mum did the timetable (of the parental care arrangements), my dad was kind and let mum have that although he didn’t agree”. she also spoke of purposefully eavesdropping on her parents in order to better understand their situation and their feelings towards each other. she requested that the consultant not include details of this in the report as she does not want her parents to know about it. 92. in respect to the time she spends with each parent, x spent considerable time thoughtfully considering possible options in her discussion with the consultant. on the one hand, she expressed that she “wants to make it as even as i can”. she explained that it is difficult for her because when she is with one parent she misses the other parent. for x, four days in a row without seeing the other parent was considered too long. on the other hand, she expressed that her routines are important and she does not want to disrupt them. she spoke of monday night being the night to go to nanny and poppy (her maternal grandparents), tuesday being the day for a play date with a friend and tuesday and friday being the days for art therapy (either with her friend or on her own). she prefers to start the school week with her mother. overall, she expressed that the current schedule means that she has to go too long without seeing her father and it does not feel equal enough. x’s thoughts were that it might be good if she and y spend every wednesday and thursday night with their father. she also liked it when her father was coaching y’ soccer team, because it meant she would see him even on the weekend when she was with her mother. x thought it would be good to see her other parent each weekend, so long as it was for “a reasonable amount of time, more than five minutes”. 93. in respect to time with her parents, x spoke of the different role each parent plays in her life. she thinks that her dad is sporty and her mum is crafty and “both is good for me”. 94. when asked what her three wishes would be for her family, x identified that she wanted time with each parent to be fair, an inside pet in each house “cats would be my favourite” and “for mum and dad to agree more easily and not fight so much, at least they could be nice to each other for now”.
98 regarding her interview with y, dr j said (pars.95 – 101):
95. y is an eight year old male. prior to the interview, he was in the waiting room, engaged in a game of cards with his father. he willingly attended the interview with the consultant without signs of distress. during the interview, he appeared to be reserved. he willingly talked to the consultant, but he rarely spontaneously expanded the conversation onto topics that he wanted to talk about. 96. y was unsure of why he was meeting with the consultant. his guess was that maybe it was to see how much time he and x want to spend with each parent. 97. y spoke about finding the parental separation difficult. he explained that when he is with one parent, he misses the other parent. he misses them both. 98. in respect to arrangements in each household, y thinks the arrangements are good. he does not really like watering the plants and feeding the cats at his mother’s household. there is nothing in particular that he does not like at his father’s household. 99. in respect to his care arrangements, y explained that he spends more time with his mum and he wants to see his dad a bit more. he does not like that his mum has to drive all the way back to b street, suburb e to the shops for changeover. y said that he thinks it would be good if his weekday time with his father shifted from wednesday night to tuesday night, that way, he would not have to go for such a long time without seeing his dad. 100. y thinks his parents fight and they do not care about each other now. 101. when asked what his three wishes would be for his family, y said that he wishes his parents would go back together, that his dad would not have to go on a plane somewhere else to work like he used to, and that he and x would agree on things so they would not have to fight. y talked further about his relationship with x, explaining that often they both want the “first turn” on the i-pad and they often want the toothpaste first when they are getting ready for school. these are issues that cause some fighting and disagreement between them.
99 dr j’s responses to the agreed terms of reference and recommendations, were as follows (they commence on p.35 of the report) (emphasis added):
1.1 the nature of the relationship between the children and each of their parents, the children have a positive relationship with each of their parents. 1.2 the emotional attachment of each of the children with each of their parents and each other, the children have a positive emotional attachment to each of their parents. it appears that they have a primary care attachment to their mother. this is evidenced by the children’s care history and the children (especially y) repeatedly seeking out their mother for comfort. the emotional attachment between the children and their father, while it appears not to be a primary care attachment relationship, is nevertheless a strong and important emotional attachment for the children. because the children have strong emotional attachments to both parents, they miss each parent and experience frequent distress at being separated (as they cannot spend time with both of their parents at the same time). the children have a positive emotional attachment to each other. they have a close sibling bond. x’s understanding of y’ physical and emotional needs is somewhat limited by her condition of autism spectrum disorder. this can result in some behaviour on x’s part that appears self-centred and lacking in empathy for y. this creates some friction in their relationship, perceived more by y than by x. both parents appear to have a good understanding of this dynamic and they both sensitively guide the children to be considerate and caring of each other. 1.3 any identified effect on the children of previous residential care arrangements and the likely effect (if any) of the continuation of existing residential care arrangements, the change to the parental care arrangements following the parental separation (where the children are unable to spend time with both of their parents together) has had the effect of increasing distress and anxiety for x and y. over time, it is likely that the children will adjust to the care arrangements and they will feel happier and less distressed. however, the children are likely to feel that they have not been listened to if the current care arrangements continue without change. the children feel that the current arrangements mean that they have to go too long without seeing their other parent, especially their father. 1.4 the likely effect (if any) of any change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect on them of any separation from either of their parents, or from any other child or person with whom they have been living, in the future, if the children have less time separated from each parent, especially their father, this is likely to help the children feel happier and more content. if the care arrangements were changed so that the children were to be separated for longer amounts of time from either parent, this is likely to have a negative effect on the children’s emotional wellbeing. the exception to this is ‘special occasion’ holidays, it is expected that the children can manage longer holiday periods away from each parent if this is infrequent and for a special occasion. as the children mature and develop, they may be able to manage longer time separated from each parent. it is normal for children to prefer less handovers as they mature as they miss each parent less acutely when separated and the disruption of handover becomes more burdensome as they mature. however, given that y appears to be suffering from anxiety and x is diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder, these children may be reluctant to want to change their routines in the future. 1.5 the capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs including each of the parents’ attitudes to and understanding of the children’s relationship with other significant people, each parent appears able to provide for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs, however the children look more towards their mother for these needs to be met than their father, as she is their primary carer. it appears that both parents understand that the children’s relationship with the other parent is important, however mr trayden does not appear to understand that the children have a primary care relationship with their mother that makes them proportionally more dependent on her for their emotional needs. 1.6 the likely effect (if any) on the emotional and psychological needs of the children if either of the proposals made by the mother and the father respectively were implemented, the children are not likely to emotionally adjust well to living primarily with their father. their history is that their mother is their primary carer and they are dependent on significant time with her for their emotional and psychological wellbeing. the children are not yet developmentally mature enough to spend holiday time away from each parent for up to a week at a time. they are likely to experience distress and miss the separated parent. the exception to this is ‘special occasion’ holiday time that is not routine, but extends longer than usual because of a special holiday occasion. at the interview, the mother proposed that the children’s care arrangements continue according to the current pattern, but that the children spend some additional time with their father to ensure they are no longer separated from him for such a long period of time. this proposal is likely to have a positive effect on the children’s emotional and psychological wellbeing. 1.7 the capacity of both parents to provide for the children’s physical or emotional needs both without support from other persons and with support that can reasonably be expected from other persons including other family members, it appears that both parents have the capacity to provide for the children’s physical and emotional needs in the current care pattern, with the current supports from other persons that are available. there have been concerns raised that the father’s physical and mental health issues may restrict his ability to provide for the children’s needs, however, there is no indication to the consultant that the children’s needs are not being met by the current arrangements. 1.8 any aspect of the psychological health of the mother or father or personality characteristics which in the opinion of the expert may have an effect on: 1.8.1 that parent’s ability to provide for the wellbeing of the children and what that effect may be, and see the section of the report related to the evaluation of parental mental health. 1.8.2 that parent’s ability to work together with the other parent for the benefit of the children. both parents appear to be able to work together to manage the day-to-day care of the children. the parents appear not to be able to work together to manage the health needs of the children. professional services for the children’s health needs appear to have become intertwined in the acrimonious parental relationship. this appears to be having a serious negative effect on the children’s health treatment, especially x’s treatment. it appears that the father’s interactions with health professionals have had the negative effect of health professionals withdrawing (or considering withdrawing) care to x. specialist paediatric care in the canberra region is difficult to source. wait lists can be long. interruption to positive professional relationships in children’s lives can have negative impacts on children’s health and wellbeing. it appears the parents, at this point in time, cannot work together to support the children to receive appropriate professional health care. whether the parents can work together in other areas of decision making (such as supporting the children in choices for their educational needs and social / extracurricular needs) is unknown. as time goes on, if the children’s care settles into a stable and non-contested pattern, parental decision making in respect to the children’s care may improve. however, there is also the possibility that it may not improve and the children’s wellbeing could be seriously compromised in the future by parental conflict in respect to their care. 1.9 the likely effect of separation of each child from each of the mother, the father and each other, extended separation from either parent results in increased sadness and anxiety for the children. they are likely to cope with (and probably benefit from) short amounts of separation from each other (such as participating in separate social and extra-curricular activities). 1.10 the extent to which the practical needs of x arising from the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder are being effectively met: 1.10.1 under the current care arrangement, 1.10.2 likely to be met under each parent’s proposal. historically, it appears that the mother has taken the primary role in sourcing and managing the considerable professional assistance required by x arising from the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. the mother appears to have done an admirable job of organising this for x, it requires a great deal of perseverance and dedication to put together an effective treatment team for a child with an autism spectrum disorder. it appears that x has benefitted enormously from the professional care she has received and her mother’s careful consideration of which professional recommendations to implement and which to reconsider or reject. in the past, it appears that the parents have worked together well in agreeing that the mother should take the lead and the father should support her judgement in these matters. mr trayden shows a sophisticated understanding of x’s practical and emotional moment-to-moment needs that arise from her diagnosis of autism, he helps her very well with needs such as support to socially include her brother and support to help her cope with the distress of leaving an activity unfinished. ms trayden also shows a sophisticated understanding of x’s practical and emotional moment-to-moment needs. since the parental separation, it appears that mr trayden has shown some poor judgement in his choices in respect to his interactions with x’s health professionals. this appears to have had the effect of negatively disrupting x’s health care. under the current care arrangement (of equal parental responsibility for health care decisions and an acrimonious parental relationship) x’s needs are at risk of not being met. depriving a parent of parental responsibility deprives the children of their parents’ valuable input. yet lack of intervention in this situation can deprive x of effective care. overall, at this point in time, mediation is not recommended for mr and ms trayden. they are unlikely to reach productive agreement and it is likely to exacerbate (rather than ease) conflict. however, in this area (management of x’s health care in the short to medium term) the parents may be able to use some focused mediation to make a time limited agreement (for example, for the next two years). the parents are encouraged to consider an arrangement, over the short to medium term, that reflects (to the extent possible) the arrangement that existed prior to parental separation. if mediation is considered, it is recommended that it be focused so that it does not contribute to delaying a resolution to the dilemma of x’s health needs. if the current situation of disrupted health care continues or worsens, x’s development could be affected. currently, her development mirrors typical child development more than it deviates from typical development. this is a hard-won result, the positive effect of both parents working together to support her care. if mr trayden cannot adjust his behaviour to better support x’s health needs, it is not guaranteed that x’s development will continue on such a positive trajectory. if the parental conflict continues or worsens, it may be necessary for the children’s future wellbeing for aspects of their care to be differentially assigned to a single parent for final decision making. x has indicated that she is content with the historical situation, where their mother arranges their health needs and their father arranges their extra-curricular / sporting activity needs. if this arrangement were to continue, it is likely to be experienced as a sensible and positive distribution of decision making by the children, without undue disruption to their routines. due to her autism diagnosis, x is more reliant on stable routine than most children. she is more sensitive to disruption of her routine. for x, disruption to routine causes confusion and distress, it makes the world seem less predictable and therefore less safe to her. the parental separation has caused fundamental disruption to x’s routines. overall, she is coping remarkably well, this is likely to be a function of both parents protecting her from unnecessary chaos and uncertainty and approaching the changes in a sensitive way. future changes should be minimised. if changes are made, they should be positive changes (from x’s perspective) as much as possible. both parents are urged to be aware that x is at an age where she is interested in knowing what is happening at a parental level. she is actively making efforts to access information. it is necessary, for both children’s wellbeing, that the parents are more vigilant in ensuring that adult discussions are not relayed to children and that the children are not in a position where they may overhear adult conversations. it is common that children misinterpret overheard adult conversations, to the detriment of their emotional wellbeing. they are left alone in their distress and confusion, as they do not know how to confess to their parents that they have overheard sensitive conversations. both parents are urged to better protect x and y from this risk. the extent to which any concerns for y relating to his adjustment to the separation of the parties and/or any issues he may be experiencing regarding the needs of his sister are identifiable and, if so, the extent to which those concerns are effectively addressed: 1.11.1 under the current care arrangement, 1.11.2 likely to be addressed under each parent’s proposal. y is experiencing distress and anxiety in relation to his parents’ separation. he loves both of his parents and he misses them when he is separated from them. currently, y is separated from his parents for too long. the long separation from his father is particularly problematic. to the extent that changes to the current care arrangements under either parents’ proposal differs from the spirit of y’ expressed wishes, they are likely to increase his distress. he is likely to benefit a great deal from changes to his care arrangements that allow for “check-in” with the other parent. examples of check-in time may include being picked up from school by one parent and transported home to the other parent, or having both parents come to watch his extra-curricular activities (such as sport). check-in time is likely to equally benefit x, it is unlikely that the children would need separate check-in time. the assessment identified that y has a good relationship with his sister, but he is also troubled by their sibling conflict. y, as expected for an eight year old child, does not truly understand the nature of his sister’s social communication difficulties. it is hoped that x’s social communication will continue to improve, with the help of appropriate professional and family support, as this will have a positive effect on the sibling relationship and y’ wellbeing. the consultant has only a limited understanding of the progress of y’ professional psychology support. it is the consultant’s understanding that y is reserved in his relationship with his psychologist (as he was with the consultant). progress for y is likely to require patience and ongoing support. any views or wishes expressed by any child in relation to issues of residence or contact and any factors which the expert considers are relevant to the weight that ought to be given to those views or wishes, including: see the report section relevant to each child. 1.12.1 the children’s respective age and maturity, the children are relatively young. nevertheless, they know their own feelings and they know what would help them feel better. the children’s wishes should not be considered in a ‘black and white’ fashion, with an over-emphasis on the children’s exact stated preferences. this is because the children are too young to be able to consider all the ramifications / consequences of their stated wishes / preferred changes. rather, it is recommended that the spirit of the children’s wishes be given considerable weight. 1.12.2 the degree of appreciation by the child of the factors involved in the issue before the court and their longer term implication, the children do not have a full appreciation of the factors involved in the issues before the court. they have been protected from this by their parents. 1.12.3 the strength and duration of the child’s views and wishes, and the extent, if any, to which those views and wishes have been influenced by external factors and if so, what those external factors are, both of the children were able to clearly articulate their wishes. it appears that both children have felt this way for some time. it appears that the children feel strongly about not being separated from either parent (but particularly their father) for too long. the consultant has no reason to believe the children have been unduly influenced by external factors. 1.12.4 the likely impact on the children of an order contrary to their wishes. in essence, the children’s opinion is consistent with the consultant’s opinion in respect to future care arrangements that are in their best interests. orders substantially contrary to their wishes are likely to increase the children’s distress. a point of difference is that the children are focused on their wishes in the here-and-now (as expected for children of their age), whereas the consultant has also considered the children’s needs as they mature. it is expected that as the children mature, they will become less emotionally dependent on their mother (as their primary caregiver) and they will prefer longer blocks of time with each parent with less handovers. typically, if children are not stressed by conflict and tension in their parents’ relationship, they greatly appreciate a degree of flexibility in care arrangements as they mature. flexibility, where their parents prioritise the children’s happiness over their own desire to spend time with the children, enables children to enjoy the freedom of being able to make social arrangements for parties, sleepovers etcetera (without the anxiety that they will be making their parents unhappy by changing established care arrangements). if mr and ms trayden are able to form a future relationship where the children are not stressed by parental conflict and they (as parents) can put their children’s needs above their own, x and y are likely to benefit from a move to equal shared care in a week about pattern in approximately three to four years time.
updated family report
100 as earlier noted, dr j’s updated report is dated 12th december 2019, and became exhibit a2. from that report i note the following. i should note at the outset that, notwithstanding the father’s constant and persistent reference to the 2017 incident between the parties at the time of separation, which was also regularly, and unfortunately, referenced in his submissions, even in dr j’s second report in december 2019, in dealing with “risk factors”, at pars 6 and 7, she recorded:
6. there have been allegations made that each of the parties have, previously, physically assaulted the other, however, there are no current concerns that the children are at risk of family violence or abuse. 7. there are no significant concerns that the children’s safety and wellbeing are at risk.
101 in such circumstances, and despite raising it with the father at some length during the trial, the continued reference by him to this single incident was astonishing and alarming, and showed a singular lack of insight on many levels. his self-focus and the need for self-vindication, for my part, was highly concerning.
102 in this second report, dr j noted the following as the issues in dispute (pars.10 – 12):[48]
10. whether the children’s wellbeing will be better supported by living with their mother or their father. 11. how much time the children should spend with the parent they do not live with. 12. how the parents can best make decisions in respect to the children’s care.
103 dr j went on to make the following observations in relation to ms trayden (paras. 14 – 17)
14. ms trayden reported that, in her opinion, the current orders are not suited to the children’s needs. in particular, she believes:
- the ‘check in time’ for the children and their father is too extensive in time and it disrupts the children’s normal routines, for example, it is disruptive for the children to drive from their mother’s home, to their father’s home and back to school on friday morning for check-in. she does not believe it is workable for ‘çheck in time’ to transfer from friday morning to a weekday evening as it would be disruptive to the children’s routines and their need for time to attend their extra-curricular activities and health professional appointments. - the nightly telephone calls are disruptive to the family routines for both the children and the parents. the calls each night are excessive and unnecessary. - the change in time with their father from tuesday to wednesday each week is confusing and destabilising for the children. the children would benefit from a simpler routine. - during school holidays, more than four days separated from either parent is too long for the children.
16.ms trayden reported that the parental relationship is challenging and not functional. she has not communicated her proposed changes to the children’s care to mr trayden. she has found that they cannot communicate constructively or reach agreement. it becomes stressful and distressing to communicate so she has ceased communication as far as is possible. ms trayden gave the example of mr trayden requesting a change in y’ time, so that he and y could go to sydney and watch their afl team play. according to mr trayden, she was aware that y would enjoy it, so she agreed to a swap of time. when she tried to negotiate the extra time for herself and y, mr trayden allegedly would not consider any day that suited ms trayden, rather, he nominated a day more than four months in the future. ms trayden found this behaviour to be “weird” and not helpful in developing a co-parenting relationship. in her opinion, there is no indication that the parental relationship will be able to improve in the future. 17. ms trayden alleged that mr trayden is “doing weird things” that are making her unsettled and uncomfortable. she reported that when she took the children to their father’s home to spend time, mr trayden was filming her. the children allegedly noticed their father filming their mother and asked her why he was doing it. she was unable to answer the children’s questions, as she did not know why mr trayden would do such a thing. the children suggested that they should ask their father why he is doing it, ms trayden told the children not to ask their father about it, in order to protect them from issues of adult conflict. ms trayden instructed her solicitor to correspond with mr trayden and request that he stop filming her and that he “hands over the images” to her. although the solicitor correspondence was “months ago” she alleged that she has had no response from mr trayden in respect to this matter. ms trayden reported that this behaviour is not appropriate, it is “not ok”. she reported that previously, she would accept mr trayden’s behaviour and his decisions and she would “not rock the boat”, however, she is now challenging such behaviour and feels strongly that “i’m allowed to speak up, i’m not ok with this”. ms trayden reported that she has been supported by her psychologist to trust her own judgement, advocate for herself and “speak up” or decline to engage in things when it is not effective for her to do so.
104 regarding mr trayden... (paras. 30 – 38)
30. mr trayden reported somewhat contradictory opinions in respect to the parental relationship. one the one hand, he reported that it was not functioning effectively to support the children. he alleged that ms trayden made false accusations in respect to her report that he physically assaulted her. it is his opinion that as long as she continues to hold this false view, they cannot co-parent well. he reported that he is “willing to work alongside ms trayden”, however, he believes that ms trayden cannot co-parent with him. it is his belief that if ms trayden continues to be unable to co-parent with him, the children need more time with their father than with their mother. on the other hand, he reported some positive aspects to the co-parenting relationship, saying “a business type relationship, we can do as well as anyone. by email, text, we can work out who picks the kids up this afternoon. better communication, its better for the children, i’m open to that. i invited ms trayden to see x after her school camp. i invited her to watch y play soccer, it is a positive time for y. last friday we both went to school assembly. clearly, it’s not good if someone says they don’t want to speak to you, but i’m doing what i can. it’s gone as well as it could have”. 32. mr trayden believes that it is not in the children’s best interests that they spend the majority of their time in such a family environment as that provided by ms trayden, he reported “i don’t think y and x are coping well with the environment of living with their mother. leaving the children in the environment where the parent emotionally is not well. y is sensitive and in tune with it and it is impacting his flat mood in a negative way. that is why i think there should be, at minimum, equal time for the children with both parents. significant periods of time with both parents is helpful for the children’s health”. 38. the consultant discussed with mr trayden the concerns ms trayden shared in respect to being filmed by mr trayden without her consent. mr trayden discussed this is a ‘matter-of-fact’ manner. he explained that ms trayden had, on occasion, delivered the children to his home at a time later than the agreed upon time. he was concerned that this late drop-off may develop into a pattern. he decided to take photographs of ms trayden dropping the children off, with the time recorded as part of the photograph, as he felt the recordings may be useful in the future if he should need to raise it as an issue. since the late drop-offs did not become a pattern of concern, he did not persist in taking the photographs. he expressed surprise that ms trayden knew about it, he commented “i didn’t know she would see”. there was no indication that mr trayden considered his behaviour to be inappropriate or problematic in any way.
105 regarding the children’s psychologist, ms u... (para. 40 )
40. ms u has observed y to be struggling with emotional problems. he has demonstrated behaviours consistent with separation anxiety, he has been overfocused on being close to his mother. his behaviour has been consistent with that of a child younger than his years, he has been reluctant to separate from his mother for psychology sessions, he has talked in a “baby voice” to communicate his need for his mother to stay with him and he has regressed from being agreeable to sleep in his own bed to being intently focused on sleeping in his mother’s bed.
106 regarding x trayden, dr j made the following observations: (paras. 43, 49 and 55-57 )
43. x is an 11 year old female. the consultant greeted her in the waiting room, where x was in the company of her mother and brother. the consultant invited her to accompany her to the interview room. x’s expression was solemn, she said that she felt shy and she made no move to accompany the consultant. the consultant chatted briefly to x about her feelings and reassured her that she managed the interview well on the previous occasion and she would be able to manage it well on this occasion also. her mother also encouraged x to attend the interview. x agreeably accompanied the consultant to the interview room. throughout the interview, x spoke readily and freely to the consultant. her expression remained solemn. her ability to discern which topics were of relevance to the interview was below that expected for her age. she was frequently tangential in her conversation. when the consultant gently encouraged her to refocus her conversation, she was agreeable and responsive to the consultant’s guidance. she brought her soft toy (polar bear) to the interview and appeared to derive comfort from having her bear with her. she showed no signs of distress during the interview process. 49. in respect to time with her family, x said “when we’re with dad for the weekend, we’re back to mum five pm sunday and she takes us to school monday”. in relation to possible changes to her care arrangements she said “i guess we could go to school with dad on monday, i’ve just gotten used to what we do. i’d be happy with whatever as long as it’s even, round about. it’s reasonably even now. although, mum has odd weeks, dad has even weeks, dad misses out on a weekend every term. i think every second term mum could have us odd weeks, that it not a huge difference. i’m a perfectionist and have a strong sense of justice. i like things to be right and fair. they love us and want to spend time with us. it is fair for them. how it is now is reasonably fair and even, which is what i want”. 55. x spoke of her parents’ relationship. she said “they are sometimes playing the other. dad blames mum, like when he came back to the house the plants had died. mum said she left it in very good shape”. x appeared somewhat perturbed about this topic. she went on to say “y tells what the other parent says. he shouldn’t. i want to create peace. i don’t know what to do. i know they’re upset with each other. doesn’t make me feel comfortable. even if i hear something, i don’t share it. just don’t tell them. i don’t know if he (y) realizes it creates fights. i think dad didn’t realise the work that mum did. she did do some gardening and weeding and cared for the trees. it’s a ‘ginormous’yard. y shouldn’t mention it when dad blamed mum for it. i could tell she felt hurt. i was angry at y for hurting mum. but i didn’t tell him. i didn’t want to hurt him. it was a misunderstanding. once, when we were driving back from town v, y told mum that nan got pulled over by the police. mum was shocked. i said ‘y, don’t make it sound worse than it is. it was just a breath test’. i just want to create peace. if they could feel a bit better about the other and not so angry anymore. i don’t like to see them upset”. 56. as the interview was drawing to a close, x summarised her thoughts by saying “i’m pretty sure i could get used to a new changeover timetable as long as it’s even and the gaps between seeing them aren’t too long. there’s nothing else, really”. 57. overall, x appears to have adapted well to her parental care arrangements. it appears that she would manage well if the current care arrangements were to stay in place. likewise, she would manage well if there were some minor adjustments made to her care arrangements. x has a positive relationship with both parents. she feels loved and cared for by both parents and she enjoys spending time with them. developmentally, she is moving from childhood to adolescence. her preoccupations and concerns are moving towards more focus on peer social interactions, as expected for her age. she is wanting more time with her peers to develop these relationships. she will need her parents to appreciate the importance of this and to help her to spend more independent time with peers, in a safe and supported way. she is starting to challenge her parents’ ideas and to think more independently, as expected for her age. this is likely to create challenges for the family, as x’s thought processes sometimes digress from those expected of a child of her age. due to her autism spectrum disorder (asd), she sometimes perceives the world and relationship dynamics differently from others. it is expected that she will increasingly question each of her parents, seeking help to understand complex relationship dynamics that cause her confusion and anxiety. x is likely to find it stressful and difficult when her parents contradict each other. due to her asd, contradictions cause her anxiety and she puts a great deal of energy into trying to resolve them. it is inevitable that her parents will sometimes contradict each other in their advice to her. this is inevitable in any family. when parents have a positive, respectful and trusting relationship, they are able to discuss such events together and modify their behaviour to smooth the way for their child. x’s parents are unlikely to be able to do this, they do not have the positive relationship that is required. therefore, it will be important to x’s wellbeing that her parents are mindful of the anxiety and stress their contradictions are likely to cause x. it will help x if they put her needs first. this is likely to mean helping x find a way to feel positively about each of her parents’ explanations and behaviours, even when the parent disagrees with the other parent’s approach to an issue. x appears to be confused and distressed by the poor relationship between her parents. she is highly attuned to her parents’ emotional state. parental conflict causes her distress and she is taking responsibility to try to prevent it and create peace in the family. this responsibility is stressful to x. she cannot understand it in a mature way, due to her young age, so she oversimplifies the situation. this is having the effect of x blaming y for upsetting her parents. she is trying to shape y’ behaviour to better avoid parental conflict in the future. there is a risk this will harm their sibling bond and cause distress to y. x needs her parents to be more attuned to the confusion and distress it causes her when they make negative comments about the other parent, or when they show signs of being distressed by the other parent’s behaviour. she needs her parents to better manage themselves so that she is not exposed to the effects of the parental conflict. this will benefit both children.
107 regarding her interviews with y trayden, dr j made the following comments: (paras. 62 and 66 )
62. in respect to his family care arrangements, y’ opinion is that it is going “pretty well”. he expanded on this to explain that swapping houses, moving between the houses and the times he spends with his parents is “going pretty well”. 66. in respect to future arrangements and how y would like things to be, he initially said he would like “to keep it mostly the same”. he said he would like to go to his dad’s a bit more because now, he spends more time with mum than with dad. as y thought more about the possibility of changing arrangements, he changed his mind about keeping things mostly the same. he decided that he would like to change things so that he spends each night with a different parent during the school term week and he alternates weekends between his parents’ homes. he explained it as “i would make it one person drops me off at school and the other parent picks me up from school. then the next day they drop us off, the other parent picks us up. all week. then weekends, one with mum and one with dad”.
108 dr j made the following observations in relation to the parent’s interactions: (paras. 72 and 73)
72. the parents were observed to be avoidant of each other. it appeared that where possible, the parents took their own initiative to not be present in each other’s company, for example, being out of the room when the other parent was known to be approaching. where it was not possible to avoid being in proximity, the parents ignored each other. at changeover, for example, the children were with their mother. mr trayden walked past and exited the building with no goodbyes or interaction except for a brief wave goodbye to the children. 73. the parents appeared to be anxious and suspicious in relation to the other parent’s motives. both parents questioned the consultant to allay their concerns about the other parent. the father commented that at the previous assessment, the mother had brought some of her own games for the children. he had therefore brought some of his own games on this occasion as he was concerned that the materials provided may not be age appropriate and may result in less favourable family interactions. the consultant requested that the family do not bring additional materials and agreed to make the same request of both parents. later in the schedule of the day’s appointments, the consultant changed the schedule to spend a brief extra individual time with the father in between the child observation sessions. this was in order to follow up and clarify a point from the father’s individual interview earlier in the day. the mother queried the consultant and asked for an explanation for the change of schedule, asking if such as change was “normal”.
109 dr j’s evaluation and terms of reference were set out in her second report as follows: (paras. 92 and 93 )
92. in considering the reading material, interviews and observations as a whole, the consultant has concerns for y’ emotional well-being. it appears as though y may be suffering from symptoms of depression. it is highly likely that his sadness and apparent reduced ability to enjoy the positive aspects of life are related to his difficulty adjusting to his parents’ separation. y showed subdued emotional expression across contexts, in the presence of the consultant and both of his parents. he showed a preoccupation with being comforted by his parents and remaining in proximity to them. it is difficult to fully understand the context of y’ emotional difficulties as he appears not to yet have the maturity to understand and express his emotional experiences. his mother has organised ongoing psychology sessions for y in an attempt to help him in this regard. whilst this is an appropriate and responsible course of action in the circumstances, at this stage of y’ development, he appears unable to make full use of the psychology support. he may be able to benefit more from psychology support in the future, as his emotional maturity develops. y is most likely to benefit from both of his parents engaging with him in enjoyable social activities. he is also likely to benefit from enjoyable social activities with extended family and his peers. y is focused on increasing his access to physical comfort from each of his parents. whilst it is not recommended that either parent cease providing y with access to physical comfort, there is no indication that either parent is neglectful or not available enough to meet y’ needs in this respect. it is unlikely that increasing y’ access to physical comfort will resolve this issue. rather, it is more likely to help y if his parents are able to show him that they can join together to support him to enjoy his independent activities. 93. there are indications (from the individual interviews) that x sleeps in the same bed as her father, whilst in her mother’s care, she sleeps in her own bed. it appears that y sleeps in the same bed as his mother, whilst in his father’s care, he sleeps in his own bed (although this is not his preference). the children are approaching an age where they are likely to benefit from support to sleep more independently in their own beds. this is not an urgent issue. however, as the children approach puberty it will be in their best interests to be confident to sleep in their own beds. it is common for adolescent children to enjoy joining their parents in bed, and this is not generally harmful for the children, however once they have reached the age of onset of puberty, it is most appropriate for children’s time in the bed with their parents to be for short periods. examples of appropriate short periods include reading together before going to sleep, occasionally joining their parents in bed after a bad dream or co-sleeping sometimes for a short period in the morning before starting the morning routine. terms of reference a. any changes since preparation of the report dated 24 october 2018 in the nature of the relationship between the children and each of their parents, and any changes in the comprehension of each parent of the children’s relationship with the other parent or any other significant person, in these respects, the family situation and relationships have remained essentially stable. b. the current arrangement for x and y is as per the orders dated 21 december 2018 and 16 november 2018. please provide your view as to whether this arrangement is in the best interests of the children or whether the arrangement should change. the arrangements are essentially in the best interests of the children. if changes are considered in the short term, it is recommended that the changes are minor with as little disruption to the children’s routine as possible. c. should your recommendation be for time to increase with the father, please advise by how much and over what time frame, noting in your previous report your recommendation was for time to move to a week about arrangement in 3 to 4 years time. a significant change to family circumstances since the previous recommendation is the mother taking sole parental responsibility for the children’s health and medical needs. there are some flow-on implications which are discussed at terms of reference point (g) and (d). d. if changes to the children’s current care arrangements are recommended, please comment on the likely effect (if any) on the children, taking into account:- the effect of any recommendations that may be against the children’s wishes, (ii) the capacity of either parent or both of them, to work together to implement such an arrangement, and (iii) the effect on either child if a variation of time with or periods of separation from either parent is proposed,
the recommendations are mostly in agreement with the children’s wishes (for their care arrangements to remain as stable as possible for the next few years). an exception is that y wishes for more regular time with each parent (alternating between each parents’ care every day during the school week). this arrangement is likely to be too disruptive to him and would not suit x’s needs. arrangements to suit y’ wishes exactly are unlikely to be practical. he is likely to adapt to arrangements that do not exactly accommodate his wishes. the capacity of the parents to work together to implement arrangements is poor. the parents and children will benefit from stable arrangements that minimise the times the parents have to re-negotiate arrangements between them. x is reaching an age where she is likely to be able to manage longer separations from each parent in the near future. however, y is not yet showing signs of being able to tolerate increased separation from his parents. longer periods of separation from either parent in the short to medium term future is likely to increase y’ distress. e. any views of or wishes expressed by any child and any factors the expert considers relevant to the weight that ought to be given to these views or wishes, see the child section of the report for details of the children’s wishes. considerable weight should be given to the children’s wishes, except y’ wish that he change between each parents’ care every day during the school week, which is unlikely to work to meet his and x’s needs. f. the effect on either or both children of ongoing litigation, the children do not truly understand that their parents are engaged in litigation in respect to their care arrangements. the parents have protected them from these details. this has been useful to the children, understanding the litigation process would not be likely to benefit them. the ongoing litigation has had indirect negative effects on the children. the process of litigation has stressed and preoccupied their parents and shaped the parental relationship in negative ways. it is likely to benefit the parents (and therefore the children) if long term and stable orders can be established that decrease the need for ongoing litigation. g. the current interim orders state that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, except in relation to the children’s health. the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children’s health care. could you please provide you (sic) view on whether this remains in the best interests of the children. it is in the best interests of the children that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children’s health. in considering all of the assessment information, including the reading material, it appears that the mother is more able to be child centred in her assessment of the children’s needs. it appears that the mother is more able to make health decisions in the children’s best interests. it appears likely that the children’s health needs will be better met by the mother having sole parental responsibility. if parental responsibility is shared, there is the risk that the children could be deprived of care they would benefit from and subjected to care that they would not benefit from. however, there are negative flow-on implications as a result of this situation. the father does not have the opportunity to fully benefit from professional support to meet the children’s needs. careful consideration of week about shared care is needed, as there is the likelihood that the father will become more estranged from the children’s health care as time goes on (if the current situation continues). if decisions about shared care were made based on the children’s relationship with their parents and the parents’ relationship with each other, week about joint care in two to three years time would be recommended for the children. the children feel strongly that they want equal time with each parent. in two to three years time, they are likely to be mature enough to cope with longer separations from each parent. less disruption due to frequent changeovers will be likely to benefit both the children and the parents. ideally, it would benefit the children if their father were able to gradually become more involved with their health care and build positive relationships with his children’s health professionals over time. it would benefit the children if their father were able to hear their professional’s recommendations, discuss the details of the recommendations and implement these recommendations in the children’s daily life. however, to date, it appears the father has not been capable of engaging with the children’s health professionals in positive ways. whether this can improve in the future is unknown. it is possible that a trial towards more involvement from the father could be worthwhile. a possible way forward may be for the independent children’s lawyer to provide a letter for the children’s health care providers (present and future) outlining the circumstance of the mother’s sole parental responsibility for the children’s health and the potential benefits of the father’s positive engagement. potentially, it could be beneficial for health care providers to be informed that they are encouraged to include the father in aspects of the children’s care, to the extent that the inclusion is judged by the health care professional as constructive and positive for the children. however, the potential benefits of such an approach should be weighed against the potential risks of the father continuing to engage with the children’s health professionals in counter-productive ways and the stress this causes the mother and the potential disruption it could cause to the children’s health care. if the children change to a week about equal shared care pattern in the future, and their mother continues to have sole parental responsibility for their health needs, provision for her to attend to their needs during the week that they spend with their father will be necessary. h. any other matter you wish to comment upon and any recommendation you wish to make.
oral evidence of family report writer
110 dr j’s oral evidence, relatively brief as it was, may be summarised as follows. this is also in circumstances where much of her cross examination was by way of occasional comment on, or brief clarification of, certain parts of her reports. as well, and in no way stated critically, a number of matters were of little moment, such as x’s comments (at par.19 of dr j’s second report) regarding x’s expression of concern about trees apparently dying at the former martial residence. what was of greater moment was that in the same paragraph, x said to her mother, as recorded by dr j: “it’s a game, isn’t it, daddy blaming you?”
111 a little way into the oral evidence, there was this exchange on a matter already noted in these reasons:[49]
... perhaps in relation to paragraph 8.4, and i don’t know if you have that in front of you, the husband’s minute, it – i think he says term 1, 2022. but so far as you’re concerned, is there any magic in the timing there?‑‑‑i haven’t really thought that through. i don’t think there’s any magic in the timing. 2022 sounds about right. thank you?‑‑‑i would just say, though, that – that in this respect, one of the things i have concerns about is that i notice the father has requested that the mother does not book children’s appointments with health professionals during the time that the children are with him. and my concern is that if the children go to week about shared care, that the mother will take the majority of responsibility for the children’s health appointments, which is really quite a lot – quite time-consuming. and my worry is that then the children will have just – free time, relaxed, enjoyable time, on the weeks that they’re with their mother as compared with their father. i do hold that concern.
112 regarding any increase in the spend time with orders, the following exchange should be noted:[50]
... and you considered that, if you – it’s at page 29, but it’s under terms of reference d – that you considered that the arrangements that were in place, which at that point was a four-ten arrangement – there were some check-ins, but ultimately, it was four nights a fortnight – was appropriate, because you thought that the arrangements should stay as stable as possible, at least for the next few years. that’s a fair comment, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. yes. all right. and when you were talking about any possible progression, what you were saying – qualifying before is you thought that it was very important that the parties’ coparenting relationship needed to improve in order for that to be a beneficial thing for the children? so for progressions in time, you – you considered that the parenting relationship between the parties needed to improve to make it beneficial to the children? that is, the progression?‑‑‑yes. yes. and between the first – the first report and the second report, you didn’t really see any improvement in their coparenting relationship, did you?‑‑‑that’s correct.
113 dr j confirmed that, in her view, y was not at a point where he could tolerate longer gaps between the time he spends with each parent.[51] in more detail, the following exchanges are instructive and, in my view, speak for themselves:[52]
and without y being able to advance in his ability to tolerate that gap, progressing the time is unlikely to be in his best interests, is it?‑‑‑well, i think it would be recommended that there is a review. so if y is not progressing, then i think it would be very useful to have a review with an experienced clinical psychologist to reassess the situation. well, i mentioned to you before that the mother’s position was to have child-inclusive mediation. is that what you mean, or do you mean something different?‑‑‑i do mean something different. i – i see that the child-inclusive mediation could be very useful. if – if, over time, y is not happier, more settled, more independent, i would be quite concerned about his mental state, and i would think that a review from a clinical psychologist would be important. it would be important, though, wouldn’t it, before – so his honour has – his honour is being asked to make orders now for progression of time, and the mother is saying, “this is the position: we go to the five-nine in january or february, but we wait and see what happens before agreeing on anything further.” if there were to be that further assessment of y before a child-inclusive mediation, that’s likely to tick all of the boxes, isn’t it? see how y is developing, see whether that then would – whether he’s able to tolerate the extra time away from each parent, and take into account his views as well?‑‑‑yes. thank you. you had – did you have some concerns about mr trayden’s attitude to the mother?‑‑‑i’m just taking some time to consider your question. i ‑ ‑ ‑ perhaps i will withdraw it and ask a different one. clear – it was clear during your interviews with mr trayden, wasn’t it, that for him – and the interviews last year, i mean in december 2019 – for him, the incidents at separation were still of some significance to him?‑‑‑yes. and he went to the extent, and it’s in paragraph 30 of your second report – he went to the extent of telling you that from his perspective, until the mother effectively admitted that she had lied about what happened at separation – this is my words, not yours – but until – until she had admitted that she lied about the incident at separation, he didn’t believe that they would be able to coparent well?‑‑‑yes. and that’s – that’s a concerning attitude, i suggest, for a person who seeks to have equal time?‑‑‑yes, it is concerning, and i will also raise that he either videotaped or photographed the mother dropping the children off as a way of collecting information about potential problems, like a late drop-off. and i was also concerned that that behaviour was indicative of some interactional styles that are – that are disrespectful. and he didn’t seem to appreciate that that could be problematic. now, it wasn’t the same sort of focus by the mother, was it, on the incident at separation? there wasn’t such a focus?‑‑‑i would say it was a different focus. the incident around separation i do think continued to impact the mother, but – but she was not preoccupied with it in terms of moving forward with the children’s care arrangements and the parental relationship in the future.
114 in response to questions from the icl, dr j confirmed that x’s current view was that the spend time with arrangements were “fair”. however, the expert confirmed that it did not have to be an equal time arrangement for matters to be “fair.” this ultimately led to her comments, thus:[53]
so in your view, would it be better to say, “okay, everyone agrees that from term 1 next year, so early february next year, there’s an arrangement that everyone agrees to which is five nights with dad, nine nights with mum”, but then in terms of any future progression past that time, it would be better informed by – i think you said a psychologist, and then some child-inclusive mediation or something similar to that?‑‑‑yes, i do think so, yes.
115 regarding “check-ins”, a rather vexed issue, and related issues, there was the following longer discussion (emphasis added):[54]
... i understand at the moment that – and i’m sure my friends will correct me if i’m wrong – that the children are having phone calls every night with the parent who they are not currently physically with. do you see this as a necessity at this point in time?‑‑‑no. not a necessity. last time i spoke to the children, they were both enjoying it and getting a lot out of value from it, so i thought at that point in time it was worth continuing with. i don’t think it’s a necessity, and i also think – again, as the children mature, they’re likely to need less phone calls. all right. and would that be something that could be put in some kind of orders as, instead of nightly phone calls, that if the child – particularly as they get older – requests to make that telephone or skype contact with the other parent, they should be able to do so, but otherwise, it doesn’t need to be, i guess, enforced upon the households?‑‑‑under many circumstances, i would think that would be very sensible. i – i do have some concerns for x and y. but because they’re highly tuned in to their parents’ emotional state, especially x, they might self-centre – self-censor asking, even when they might want to ask, because they don’t want to upset the parent. so – so i do think some sort of scaffolding, some – some support, like a routine of calling, is worthy of consideration. okay. with respect to, i guess, on a similar vein, the concept of the “check-ins” as i think we’re all calling them, which is, you know, regular – i think it’s one-hour sessions at the moment, one or two-hour sessions with the other parent, and i think it’s almost always or always the father – do you consider those to be necessary at this point, or are they more disruptive than beneficial?‑‑‑it’s hard for me to know, because i haven’t seen the children or spoken to them recently. but the check-ins, as they were happening for the children – they were more extensive than i had originally envisaged, but the children were really enjoying them. but again, like, as they mature, i think those check-ins will become very disruptive. so i don’t think they’re really sustainable in the long term, but i think they have served an important purpose in the kind of short to medium term.
116 i have no reason to doubt or question any of dr j’s evidence.
written submissions filed on behalf of the applicant
117 as detailed earlier, on 4th february 2021 the applicant originally filed submissions that were 50 pages in length. the applicant’s amended written submissions were filed on 11th march 2021. regrettably, they were single spaced, thereby making “digestion” of them rather more difficult than they should have been. moreover, as per the court’s long-standing past, and more recent, rules, all documents filed should be “with line spacing of 1.5 lines”.[55] the submissions were as follows (emphasis in original, footnotes omitted):
applicant father’s amended written submissions – parenting the father’s minute of order in detailed in a separate document filed with these submissions. 1. the father’s minute of order in its entirety is separate to this document. 2. parenting orders are sought for the children x trayden born in 2008 and y trayden born in 2010 (“the children”) 3. x has been diagnosed as being on the autism spectrum. x attends the w school and commenced year 7 this year. y also attends the w school and commenced year 5 this year. the husband pays circa $16,892 per year (2021) in school fees in addition to his child support assessment. parenting regime that is agreed parental responsibility 4. it is understood that the mother and father agree on the following regarding the parenting of the children,
a) equal shared parental responsibility save in relation to the children’s health (where the father’s instructions have now altered), b) that as to parental responsibility for health, the parties are agreed that the mother retain sole parental responsibility on agreed terms as detailed in the father’s minute of order (although the father’s present position is that this division of responsibilities expire on 31 december 2021, as outlined below):
live with/spend time with 5. time spent by the father with the children during the first and second school terms occurring in 2021 as defined in the father’s minute of order (4.a) although, thereafter, the father seeks a graduated increase to equal time. miscellaneous 6. there appears to be agreement on time spent on each parent’s birthday, easter, the children’s communication with each parent, advice of any significant injury or illness, the form of communication between the parties, the provision of authorities to receive information and the notification of any change of residential address and telephone number. parenting issues that require determination parental responsibility for health 7. the mother seeks an order (and the icl) that she be conferred sole parental responsibility for the children’s health until they respectively attain their majority, whereas the father seeks that the mother be conferred same until 31 december 2021. thereafter, the father contends that the party’s equal shared parental responsibility for health prevail. the pathway to equal share time during school terms 8. the father proposes that the shared time arrangement commence in term 1, 2022 and proceed in a graduated manner from 5 nights a fortnight commencing term 1, 2021, to 6 nights a fortnight commencing term 3 2021, and to 7 nights a fortnight commencing term 1, 2022. 9. it is understood that the mother proposes the agreed arrangement for terms 1 and 2 continue indefinitely, with a child inclusive “review” in 2 years (january 2023), 10. the icl proposes a 5-night regime with a child inclusive “review” in early 2022, with the consideration of “more time with the father at that point” (see the icl’s submissions at paragraph 15), school holiday time during the autumn, winter and spring (following terms 1, 2 & 3)(short school holidays) 11. the father’s position is identified in his minute of orders. 12. the mother proposes as to the short school holidays:
a) that until term 1 in 2023:
i) from after school on the last day of term for a period of 4 nights with the father and with changeover at 5 pm on the 5th day, ii) with the mother from 5 pm on the 5th day for a period of 4 nights with the changeover at 5 pm on the 9th day, iii) with the father from 5 pm on the 9th day for a period of 4 nights with the changeover on 5pm on the 13th day, iv) with the mother for the balance of the term holiday period,
b) that from term 1, 2023:
i) 8 days with the father alternating the first and second 8 days period of the holidays in even and odd numbered years with changeover at 5 pm on the 5th day,
c) that the school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the school on the last day of term and conclude at 5 pm on the day prior to the resumption of school in the next term.
12 the icl proposes that the children spend equal time with the parents, week about, in school holiday periods in an equal time arrangement commencing at the conclusion of term 1, 2021. summer school holidays 13. the father’s position is identified in his minute of orders. 14. the mother proposes that the children spend time with each parent during the summer school holidays as follows:
a) during the 2021-22 christmas school holidays as follows:
i) from after school for a period of 3 nights with the father, ii) for a period of 4 nights with the mother, iii) for a period of 4 nights with the mother (5 pm 21 december 2021 to 3 pm 25 december 2021), iv) for a period of 4 nights with the father (3 pm from 25 december 2021), v) for a period of 4 nights with the mother, vi) for a period of 7 nights with the father (2 january 2022), vii) for a period of 7 nights with the mother, viii) for a period of 4 nights with the father, ix) for a period of 4 nights with the mother, x) for a period of 3 nights with the father, xi) for a period of 3 nights with the mother until the commence of term 1 2022,
b) commencing the 2022-23 christmas school holidays as follows:
i) from the last day of for a period of 4 nights with each parent with the mother in even numbered years and commencing with the father in odd numbered years, ii) even numbered years: with father from 9 am christmas eve until 3 pm christmas day, (2) with the mother from 3pm christmas day for a period of 2 nights,
iii) odd numbered years, reverse the even numbered years for the christmas period iv) in even numbered years in a week about arrangements with the father from 5 pm 27 december for a period of 7 nights with changeover at 5 om in the relevant day with the children returned to the mother at 5 pm on the last day of the christmas holiday period, v) in even numbered years in a week about arrangements with the mother from 5 pm 27 december for a period of 7 nights with changeover at 5 om in the relevant day with the children returned to the mother at 5 pm on the last day of the christmas holiday period,
c) the icl proposes a week about arrangement for the summer school holidays.
fathers day and mothers day 15. the father relies on his minute of orders 16. the mother proposes from 9 am until 7 pm 17. the icl takes no position. children’s birthday 18. the father relies on his minute of orders 19. the mother proposes as follows:
a) on a school day from after school until 5.30 pm for the parent children not living with/spending time with, b) on a non-school day if a saturday 2 pm to 7 pm and if a sunday from 1 pm to 5 pm.
20. the icl takes no position. family reports 21. for the purposes of these proceedings, there have been two reports by dr. j. 22. dr. j’s first family report is dated 24 october 2018 (“the first family report”). 23. dr j’s second family report is dated 12 december 2019 (“the second family report”). 24. the matter came before the court on 29 and 30 october 2020. dr j did not interview either the parents nor the children following the preparation of the second family report. dr j, however, had the opportunity to read the parties’ respective trial affidavits before she was cross-examined during the trial. 25. in the first report dr j, inter alia, opined as follows:
a) the children have a positive emotional attachment to each of their parents (fr1:35:1.2), b) the children have a primary attachment to the mother (fr1:35:1.2), the father submits that the children presently have an attachment to each parent which is neither primary not secondary but equally as important and valuable to x and y, c) the children have a strong and important emotional attachment to the father (fr1:35:1.2), this is agreed and is submitted to continue to this date of trial, d) the children have a strong emotional attachment to both parents, and miss each parent and experience frequent distress at being separated from each parent (fr1:35:1.2), e) the change in parental care arrangements following the parental separation (where the children are unable to spend time with each parent together) has had the effect of increasing distress and anxiety for x and y (fr1:35:1.3), f) over time, it is likely that the children will adjust to the care arrangements and they will feel happier and less distressed (fr1:35:1.3). however, the children are likely to feel that they have not been listened to if the current care arrangements continue without change (fr1:35:1.3), g) in the future, if the children have less time separate from the other parent, especially the father, this is likely to help the children feel happier and more content (fr1:36:1.4), h) each parent appears to be able to provide for the children’s emotional intellectual needs, however the children look towards their mother for these needs to be met than their father, as she is their primary carer (fr1:36:1.5). the father contends that there is no objective evidence to establish that the children have a “primary carer” or perceive either of the parents as being “primary” or “subsidiary”, i) the children are not yet developmentally mature enough to spend holiday time away for each parent for up to a week at a time (fr1:37.1.6). it is submitted that this situation has changed since 2018. the children should have the opportunity to enjoy travel with their parents which is not truncated. this is a part of their childhood which they really ought to have a full opportunity to experience, given that it will all too soon be usurped by the realities of adolescence and adulthood. j) as time goes on, if the children’s care settles into a stable non-contested pattern, parental decision making in respect of the children may improve. however, there is also the possibility that it may not improve and the children’s wellbeing could be seriously compromised in the future by parent conflict in respect to there are (fr1:38:1.8). it is submitted that the court will conclude that there has been no conflict which has seriously impaired the children’s care. both parties concede raising the circumstances of the separation with dr o and the doctor’s notes substantiate this. it is submitted that dr o and ms. r were both recipients of the narrative of either or both of the parents. whether through omission or intent, the mother’s case certainly implied that the father was singularly responsible for drawing health professionals into the crux of the parental dispute. but, as conceded in cross-examination, the mother had also taken the time to give a history of the separation to health professionals. the husband, who has maintained his innocence about the alleged family violence (to which he was not challenged) also gave his history. k) extended separation from either parent results in increased sadness and anxiety for the children (fr1:38:1.9), l) the children are likely to cope with (and benefit from) short amounts of separation from each other (such as participating in separate social and extra-curricular activities per fr1:38.1.9), m) the father shows a sophisticated understanding of x’s practical and emotional moment-to-moment needs that arise from her diagnosis of autism, he helps her very well with needs such as support socially include her brother and support to help her cope with the distress of leaving an activity unfinished (fr1:39:1.10), n) since the parental separation, it appears that mr. trayden has shown some poor judgement in his choice in respect of his interaction with x’s health professionals (fr1:39.1.10). this appears to have had the effect of negatively disrupting x’s health care (fr1:39.1.10). the father submits that prior to separation that there is no evidence of problems so far as it relates to his engagement with x’s health care providers o) depriving a parent of parental responsibility deprives the children of their parents’ valuable input. p) both the children were able to clearly articulate their wishes. it appears that both children have felt this was for some time. it appears the children feel strongly about not being separated from either parent (but particularly their father) for too long (fr1:42:1.12.3). the family consultant found no reason to believe that the children had been influenced in that view by “external factors” (fr1:42:1.12.3). q) orders substantially contrary to the children’s wishes is likely to increase the children’s distress (fr1:42:1.12.4), r) a point of difference between the consultant was that the children were said to be focused on their wishes in the “here- and-now” (fr1:42:1.12.4), whereas the consultant considered the children’s needs as they matured. in that regard the consultant said as follows:
i) it is expected that as the children mature, they will become less emotionally dependent on their mother as their primary care giver (fr1:42:1.12.4). this is agreed, ii) the children will prefer longer blocks of time with each parent and less handovers (fr1:42:1.12.4). this is agreed, iii) if the children are not stressed by conflict and tension in their parents’ relationship, they greatly appreciate a degree of flexibility in care arrangements as they mature (fr1:42.1.12.4).
s) x and y are likely to benefit from a move to equal shared care in a week about pattern in 3 to 4 years' time (fr1:43:1.12.4). being october 2021/22.
26. in the second report dr j, inter alia, opined as follows:
a) since the first family report, “the family situation and relationships have remained essentially stable” (fr2:28:93a), b) dr p interviewed x and the following is noted:
a. in relation to possible changes to her care arrangements she said “i guess we could go to school with dad on monday”. x was looking for things to be “right and fair” (fr2:16:49), b. “in respect of school holiday time x makes reference to one week breaks being a “bit long. but i want to spend time. and when you have fun on holidays you don’t miss them a lot. it’s alright” (ft2:16:50), c. in respect to the tuesday or wednesday time, x said. “dad has us tuesday arvo. now i do art. painting with people at school. i find it a lot of fun. it’s pretty good. if dad has me tuesday, he always drops me off to art. on wednesday mum or dad would have me the whole time. it’s even pretty good. (fr2:16:52), d. x’s interview was concluded with her saying: “i’m pretty sure i could get used to a new changeover timetable as long as it’s even and the gaps between seeing them aren’t too long. there’s nothing else really” (fr2:17:56).
c) dr j interviewed y and the following is noted:
a. y appeared to be happy at school and has many friends (fr2:19:60-61), b. in respect of his family care arrangements, y expressed “that it was going pretty well” (fr2:19:62). he expanded by explaining that swapping house, moving between houses and the time he spends with his parents is “going pretty well”. c. in respect to future arrangements, y said he “would like to keep it mostly the same” but go to his dad’s a bit more because now, he spends more time with mum than dad (fr2:20:66). d. y decided that he would like to change things so that he spends each night with a different parent during the school term week and he alternates his weekends between his parents (fr2:20:66). whilst impractical it evidences the attachment he has with both parents. e. as to holidays, y stated that he likes “four days and four days”. he explained that there are also times when he is with one parent a week at a time on holidays. he explained that he has mixed feelings about this, he liked being on holidays but he would like to see his other parent more. he cannot do that whilst on holidays. f. as to communication, y was noted as liking telephoning his parents every day and provided a cheerful description of why (fr2:20:68) g. dr j concludes that it “does not appear that y has adjusted well to his parents’ separation” (fr2:23:70). despite interim orders which the family consultant described as being “sensitive to his needs” y “appears to be struggling emotionally with his family situation”. dr j continues:
i. y is an emotionally sensitive child who has not developed maturity to be able to readily identify and express his emotional experience, ii. he appears not to be coping with being separated from either of his parents, iii. this is extremely sad for y as he is always separated from one of them,
d) it is noted that the father was the coach of the y’ soccer team. as such, during season, he saw y on training on wednesday and each saturday for their games. the parties agreed for this to occur and for the husband to pickup and deliver y for the purposes of this practice (w8:36-37). e) dr j provides the following “evaluation” (fr2:27:92) in the second report:
a. that the current parenting arrangements “are essentially in the best interests of the children”, and if changes were made to the currenting parenting structure in the short term, it is recommended that “changes are minor with as little disruption to the children's routine as possible”(fr2:28:93b), b. that it “ is in the best interests of the children that the mother has sole parental responsibility of the children’s health....it appears that the mother is more able to make health decisions in the children’s best interests” (fr2:28:93g), c. however, dr j also discusses the balance the court must consider with respect to the negative flow on effects this will cause with respect to the father’s relationship with the children, which include the potential risk that the father “does not have the opportunity to fully benefit from professional support to meet the children’s needs” and that there is a “likelihood that the father will become more estranged from the children’s health care as time goes on” (fr2:28:93g). d. that “ideally, it would benefit the children if their father were able to gradually become more involved with their health care and build positive relationships with his children’s health care professionals over time” (fr2:28:93g). e. with respect to living arrangements, dr j’s recommendations are “mostly in agreement with the children’s wishes” with the exception of y wishing to have a day-about arrangement with each parent. (fr2:28:93d). f. in this regard, x has a “positive relationship with both parents” and has “adapted well to her parental care arrangements” and that she would “manage well of there were some minor adjustments made to her care arrangements.” (fr2:17:57) further, she expressed a desire for equal time with both parents, stating that she “could get used to a new change over timetable as long as it’s even and the gaps between seeing them aren’t too long” (fr2:17:56). g. similarly, y expressed a similar wish to spend more even time with both parents, telling dr j that “he would like to go to his dad’s a bit more now because now, he spends more time with mum than with dad” (fr2:20:66). h. furthermore, dr j recommends that “the parents and children will benefit from stable arrangements that minimise the times the parents have to re-negotiate arrangements between them” (fr2:28:93d). i. dr j opines that “the ongoing litigation has had indirect negative effects on the children. the process of litigation has stressed and preoccupied their parents and shaped the parental relationship in negative ways. it is likely to benefit the parents (and therefore the children) if long term and stable orders can be established that decrease the need for ongoing litigation” (fr2:28:f).
section 65daa does not apply 1. as the court made evident at the commencement of the hearing in these proceedings, the court’s posture was that the circumstances of the alleged event of family violence at separation (which was vehemently and comprehensively denied by the father and referred to in the affidavit evidence of both parties) would not inform its decision as to the future parenting of the children. neither party asks the court to draw the conclusion that either party poses a risk of family violence to either the parents or the child. 2. in this case, it is agreed that the equal shared parental responsibility shall apply, but not for all aspects. at least until 31 december 2021, the wife will have sole parental responsibility for health (the husband proposes that this order lapse on that date). accordingly, it is submitted that section 65daa is not triggered in this matter. primary considerations – section 60cc(2) 3. as is evident from the family reports and the evidence of the parties:
a. the children have a deep attachment and connection to each parent such that there is a genuine sense of absence felt by the children when the other parent is not present, b. the parents comprehend the intellectual and emotional needs of the children, save that the father argues:
i. the mother acted in a fashion contrary to the emotional needs of the children in unilaterally implementing and then seeking parenting orders which were not suitable to the children (as is evident from the first family report) and left them in a position where they were having an unrequited desire to spend more time with their father,
c. each of the father and mother parent the children to a high standard, d. the difference in the parents’ personalities, interests, hobbies and parenting approaches of the parties afford individual benefit to each of the children.
4. the children have a meaningful relationship with both of their parents and, it is submitted, the more the children are able to spend time with and engage with their parents the better. 5. merely because the children have a “meaningful relationship” with both parents presently does not mean that the maintenance of the status quo is necessary. it is a matter of a “prospective approach” (per sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439) to maintain that meaningful relationship and give it room to grow in a fashion consistent with the maturation of the children and taking into account all of the section 60cc matters and their best interests as whole. 6. as for family violence, the court is not urged to make a finding that either of the parties poses a present or future risk of family violence towards the children or any other person who may be a member of their respective households. having said that, the husband expressed concern about the circumstances that gave rise to an allegation of family violence on the date of separation. both parties gave evidence about this issue. the court took the view that the determination of this issue would not assist it in making prospective parenting orders. however, it is not unreasonable for the father to have been concerned about allegations of family violence that he – on a first hand basis –knew to be untrue or for negative impact on children being handed over in a public place for over fifteen months subsequent. it was not unreasonable for the father to question the motivations of the mother in those circumstances. the father was not foolish for defending himself against these allegations, but for his reliance on expert evidence the mother may not have taken the position that the family violence allegations were no longer pertinent. section 60cc(3) - additional considerations section 60cc(3)(a) 7. the family consultant in the second family report concludes that “considerable weight should be given to the children’s wishes, except y’ wish that he change between each parents’ care every day, which unlikely to work to meet his and x’s needs” (fr2:29:93e). 8. both children expressed a desire to spend more time with the father in both the first and second report. 9. in relation to possible changes to x’s care arrangements she said “i guess we could go to school with dad on monday”. x was looking for things to be “right and fair” (fr2:16:49), 10. y decided that he would like to change things so that he spends each night with a different parent during the school term week and he alternates his weekends between his parents (fr2:20:66). 11. each of the parents, such as it is, are proposing orders that are different to the interim orders. the morning “check ins” whilst reflected upon with some fondness by x, were frequently delayed by lateness on the part of the mother. it is the father’s case that this had an adverse effect upon x. for the purposes of cataloguing this lateness, the father did record the mother on one occasion (see w24:138(i)). albeit with the intention of being surreptitious, he was unfortunately noticed. as was evident from the cross-examination, he would not do so again and was regretful that he was noticed. the court is asked to conclude that the father is not likely to do same again. 12. whilst it is agreed that the proposal by y is untenable, it is submitted that the children are seeking to spend as much time with each parent as possible and have each of their parents in their lives as much as is possible. the notion of “fairness” expressed by x is an understandable position taken by many children who find their parents in litigation, but as the family consultant observed these are children who have not been brought into, nor educated about, the court process. it is submitted that y and x’s best interests are served by orders that provide them equal time with each of their parents. section 60cc(3)(b) 13. both parents share a close bond with the children. they have both served as a close part of the children’s live throughout the relationship and post separation. the family expert finds the same in both reports. the close relationship is reciprocated by both children who have expressed a desire to spend time with the parents in a substantial way. 14. y is clearly missing the day-to-day interactions with his father. it is submitted that his proposal for alternate days with each parent during the school week is evident of same. section 60cc(3)(c) 15. both parents have been available to the children and their respective needs both throughout the relationship and post separation. 16. the father commenced attending x’s art therapy in term 4 of 2017 and he has continued to do so every second friday. (w9:46) 17. the children have been living primarily with the mother since separation, this is not from lack of want from the father. moreover, it is not from want of the children to spend more time with him. 18. whilst the mother has been making the sole decisions in relation to the health of the children, this is not from lack of want by the father. 19. the point of contention as to the ongoing parental responsibility of the children is the father’s capacity to manage the health care of the children. as addressed, the father disagrees with this assertion, and as discussed, he hopes to gradually increase his role with regards to the children’s health care, until espr is reached. section 60cc(3)(ca) 20. throughout the marriage, both parents made sure they were an integral part of the children’s lives. the mother took time off work, and the father reduced his working hours to ensure he was able to support the children and spend meaningful time with them. 21. the children have additional needs. these are being met through their health care treatments and both parents' availability and patience. currently, the children have nightly telephone communication with both parents to help mitigate their separation anxiety. 22. the second family report details both parents' ability to maintain the children and demonstrates their parental capacity and ability to perceive the children’s needs and communicate with them effectively, through the joint sessions the expert spent with the parties and children. 23. the father shared the responsibility for the education of the children during the covid-19 period when the children were not attending school. the father committed himself to that role. the mother, was working from home during that period whereas the husband was undertaking no work whilst the children where in his care. thus it was the father who was able to more meaningfully commit to the children’s homework and assignments. the father is very well placed to continue to assist the children with the homework and assignments, particularly as their work becomes more complex. a move towards equal shared time gives rise to his continuous involvement and for him to bring these strengths to bear for the benefit of the children going forward. for these children, as is evident from the family reports, the more time with both parents is meaningfully important to them. section 60cc(3)(d) 24. it is submitted that the children wish to spend more time with the father and, with particularity, that y wishes to equal time with the father. this is articulated through the second family report. 25. as aforementioned, dr j concluded that it “does not appear that y has adjusted well to his parents’ separation” (fr2:23:70). despite interim orders which the family consultant described as being “sensitive to his needs” y “appears to be struggling emotionally with his family situation”. dr j continues:
a. y is an emotionally sensitive child who has not developed maturity to be able to readily identify and express his emotional experience, b. he appears not to be coping with being separated from either of his parents, c. this is extremely sad for y as he is always separated from one of them.
26. the above conclusion by dr j is demonstrative of the need for a change in the parenting regime. the gradual process of increased time as sought by the father will serve as a rampart to y. it will reduce the separation from the father and gradually tilt the axis of his time towards the equal exposure to both of his parents that he apparently needs. 27. it is therefore submitted that the wife’s proposed parenting arrangements result in undue separation from the father and do not ameliorate the needs of either y or x. section 60cc(3)(e) 28. the father is seeking a gradual increase as to his overnight time. this would not affect the current drop off or collection of the children. 29. similarly, the father’s proposal for a continuation of nightly telephone/electronic communication is in line with the current arrangements and causes no great disruption to the children or either parent. section 60cc(3)(f) 30. the wife in cross-examination gave evidence of y’ interest in outdoor activities and alike. an interest that the father and y share and undertake during the time that they share. it is submitted that y clearly wishes to spend more time with the father (per the second report). this appears not to be a mere innocuous wish but a need on his part, a deeply felt emotional need. the father’s proposal will provide y with the opportunity to satisfy this need and to engage in outdoor activities and physical pursuits with his father particularly when his emotional advancement has stalled. 31. this is also a life experience for x, who will have the opportunity to bond with her father and y in the pursuit of different activities than she might pursue with her mother. 32. the father is in good health and there is no evidence to suggest that he is physically or mentally unwell. nor is there evidence that there is a prospective likelihood of the father becoming unwell. 33. the mother’s mental health is less clear as is its affect on her household, in particular y. the mother informs dr j that she is of the view that her “anxiety is under control” (fr2:9:22). however, her anxiety was assessed in the “moderate range” by ms z, clinical psychologist, in the latter’s letter to dr aa dated 26 february 2019. as is elsewhere averted to herein, y’s maturity and emotional advancement has stalled somewhat during the interim regime. the mother “sought psychological assistance for y and advice for herself in respect to how to support him” (fr2:9:20). the mother remarked that y “was previously a happy child, now he appears to be carrying an emotional burden” (fr2:9:20). the father reported y to be in good health and observed the many activities that he enjoys whilst in his father’s care (fr2:10:26). the father did remark upon “emotional sensitivity” associated with sibling rivalry. on the other hand the father remarked that y’ “health is deteriorating” and that he was drained and upset when calling from his mother’s home. the father expressed a belief that y may be traumatised by the events surrounding the parental separation in 2017 (fr2:10:26). 34. as aforementioned dr j “does not appear that y has adjusted well to his parents’ separation” (fr2:23:70). as aforementioned, y expressed that he would like to change the current arrangement. it is submitted y appears not to be thriving and, indeed, somewhat dwelling in the mother’s home. 35. the temporary period of sole pr on medical matters with engagement with the father, will allow the parties an opportunity to “ease in” to an espr arrangement and give the children time to be reacquainted with the experience of the father being involved in the decisions regarding their health and to see him being involved with the relevant health professionals. 36. it should further be noted that the father has a strong and abiding interest in the education of the children. he is, as the mother agrees (w142) on the board of the school. there is no complaint about the father not attending school events, sports or parent-teacher interviews and alike. it is apparent that the father is more engaged in that regard than the mother and there is no evidence to suggest that things are going other than smoothly in this regard. section 60cc(3)(g) 37. the children, in particular x, are not far off from entering their adolescence. it is therefore submitted that their wishes are important as they will set the tone and parameters for their future relationship with their parents. it is not in their interests to overlook the spirit of their wishes and the evidence that they profoundly want and desire both of their parents in their lives as much as can be accommodated. 38. it is in the best interests of the children to take into account their maturity and their needs and to avoid the risk of increasing separation anxieties and any features of depression already being exhibited from the children. section 60cc(3)(i) 39. this is dealt with above. section 60cc(3)(j) 40. this is no longer a factor in this matter. neither party are currently purporting a risk of family violence or risk to the children. section 66cc(3)(l) 41. it is submitted that the orders sought by the father the children allow for the dispute to be settled with finality. 42. such finality carries additional importance in this matter, given the vulnerabilities of the children, duration and negative effect these proceedings have had on this family. it is clear that both children are struggling with the breakdown of the party's marriage and the ongoing separation occasioned by the orders. 43. contrastingly, if such orders were made in which this matter is required to be revisited in the future, there is a risk that there would be a regression to disputation between the parents. 44. the husband’s proposal will obviate further litigation and provide x and y with the knowledge that, bit-by-bit, they will move towards an arrangement that will maximise time with both of their parents. it provides stability for them. this will serve to defuse the anxiety of all parties, including the parents. the worst case for these children is not a regime of graduation towards equal time, but for their parents to be back into court or in further dispute. parental responsibility for health 45. as aforementioned, the father contends that the mother should retain sole parental responsibility for health until 31 december 2021. by that time x will be almost 14 years old and y will be 12 years old. 46. the parties will have engaged with the sole parental responsibility regime as to health for 3 years. these acute emotions of litigation will have dilated, as they so often do. the father will have been reintroduced into the relationships with the health care providers. 47. as aforementioned the court would not find that the allegations of family violence would rebut the presumption in section 61da(1) 48. it is noted that in 2022 the children would be spending equal time with the father pursuant to his proposed orders, accordingly it would be an appropriate time to align parental responsibility to this timing. 49. there has been complaint made about the father doing or saying things to detract health care providers from the provision of service. there is no evidence from any health care provider on affidavit that proves this. moreover, the evidence appears to mostly come from the mother’s understanding. the complaints are, at any rate, not widespread. it is conceded that there was a difficulty where both parties were liaising with dr o and talking about the separation event. the father as cross-examined about his consultations where he discussed these matters. the father thought it important that the doctor know what was going on with their daughter. but the mother, as she conceded in cross-examination, also discussed these issues with health care professionals. it was not a good decision by either of them, but it is a very severe outcome to lock the father out of joint parental decision making on account of that and to lock him out where the parties appear to be moving towards a more positive pathway of parental communication. 50. there was an issue about informing x of her asd diagnosis. the impression given by the mother was that the father did not agree to this. but, as was revealed in cross-examination, was not objecting to this per se. indeed, for the father it was a matter of timing (email of september 12, 2018). this event was well over 2 years ago when the parties were both grappling with interim parenting disputes. 51. it is notable that the parties have agreed to share parental responsibility in other areas of decision making. it is not as if they are incapable of reaching consensus. the cross-examination of the mother underlined the improvement in the parties’ co-operation notwithstanding that their communication had occurred by electronic means. and disputation in the subpoenaed material pertain to 2018. the communication that continues, are for the most part straight forward and child focussed. the mother was cross-examined on this matter and the selective communications put forward to the court by her (which constitute a sliver of the parties’ multitude of benign communication) is not indicative of the parties regularly benign missives. 52. dr j was cross-examined regarding the nature of the parties’ post-separation communication and, whilst regarding electronic communication as not ideal, she did not regard this of and by itself as necessarily contra-indicating equal shared parental responsibility. 53. the temporary period of sole parental responsibility (as argued by the father) will necessitate regular communication between the parties at any rate. this period of what is primarily unilateral communication from the mother to the father, albeit with the explicit opening of channels between the father and health care providers, will commence the gradual reintegration process of both parents into the management of the children’s health 54. the mother raised matters at paragraph 138 of her affidavit regarding things the children having allegedly said to her, mostly earlier during the separation period. it is submitted that the court cannot conclude that the father had been intentionally or unintentionally seeking to undermine the mother by saying things to the children. it is notable that the affection between the children and the mother has not attenuated since separation nor are the children’s troubled, unlike in many families, with the parties trying to inculcate partisanship. 55. it is notable that the parties, despite their affidavits which were less than charitable, were far more conciliatory in cross-examination. each of them were able to identify characteristics of the other which complimented the others parenting and benefited the children. 56. the full court in vr v rr [2002] famca 320, (2002) flc 93-099, which was recently applied by his honour justice harper in warnett & amerson [2019] famca 499, considered parental responsibility and determined that any interference or diminution of parental responsibility for a parent should only be made if it clearly advances the welfare of the child. 57. it is the father’s desire to be fully engaged with the children’s health needs, especially given their special requirements. it is further submitted that neither the current arrangement nor the temporary future agreed arrangements, serve the children’s best interests in the long term. as the children mature, they may not necessarily turn to the mother to express their needs from a health perspective. indeed, where the father is so integral to their life experience, he may well become an equally or more important pillar to the children in this regard. it is submitted that locking the mother in as the sole decision maker for the rest of the children’s minority does not clearly advance their interests. 58. the welfare of the children is not clearly advanced by long-term orders that proscribe the joint decision making of the parents as to the health issues. whilst the father conceded that the mother had not be malfeasant whilst wielding her interim sole parental responsibility, that is not the measure for its continuance. it is submitted that it is too detrimental a measure to remove the father from shared parental responsibility on the basis of what occurred in the aftermath of highly disputed separation and then immediate court proceedings. 59. the children will benefit from both parties, who know them intimately, from being involved in their decision making for health. the husband’s proposal to gradually reintroduce his role and then revert to espr is both sensible and proportionate to the circumstances. graduating to equal shared time/school holidays 60. it is submitted that the father’s proposed living arrangements are in line with the spirit of the children’s wishes. 61. it is submitted that the father’s recommendations in which live-with arrangements are incrementally increased towards shared time is one which not only meets the best interests and wishes of the children, but also fixes a parenting plan which provides finality as to the future parenting arrangements without the need to reconvene or to position themselves. 62. the second family report further concludes that x is reaching an age where she is able to manage longer separations from each parent. however, y was not yet showing signs of being able to tolerate increased separation from his parents. it is submitted that school holiday periods, as suggested by the icl in her minute: need not be treated in the same manner as school term time. 63. the orders sought by the father would not see the children spending materially increased blocks of time away from either parent during school term. his proposals would see maximums of four nights at a time during school term, which neither party appears to suggest could not be tolerated by the children. 64. per the second family report, x expressed her wishes as to future parenting arrangements, stating “i’m pretty sure i could get used to a new changeover timetable as long as it’s even and the gaps between seeing them aren’t too long” (paragraph 56 of the second family report). similarly, dr j stated that x would manage well “if there were some minor adjustments made to her care arrangements” (paragraph 57 of the second family report). 65. likewise, in the second family report, y expressed his wishes as to future parenting arrangements, stating he “would like to go to his dad’s a bit more because now, he spends more time with mum than with dad” (paragraph 57 of the second family report) 66. as to equal time, it is fair to say that this is not a matter where any party rules out such an outcome. the icl contemplates a “review mechanism” as to the parenting arrangements in early 2022 (12 months hence), with such process to include the children’s psychologists. the mother contemplates a “review mechanism” in 2 years. it is not assured that the mother will be minded to view this “mechanism” with a positive frame of mind. the mother effectively remains the gate keeper. in that regard, the mother has continued to insist upon the continuance of an interim regime that the children have made apparent they wished to change for some time, per the family reports. moreover, the mother behaved in a somewhat difficult fashion when the check-ins were ordered (see the husband’s affidavit at paragraph 13). as a result of error in the form of the orders, the wife permitted only 2 check-ins rather than the spirit of the intent. the father’s evidence was not rebutted on this matter. rather than leave the matter of further time effectively in the hands of the mother (as the review regime effectively does), it is submitted that the course of action in the best interests of the children is the gradual step up proposed by the father. 67. while a review mechanism has been raised in opposition to the father’s proposals for equal time, it is submitted that this is not in the best interests of the children. such outcome may accentuate disputation and require the parties’ and children to revisit unpleasantries in the future. 68. there is no material challenge as to the father’s parental capacity or his potential to care for the children. throughout their upbringing, the father has been an active and involved part of the children’s lives. the father maintains he has put their needs as the prime consideration and has centred his decisions and lifestyle choices around this. such is apparent by his decision to reduce his hours of work during the relationship to ensure his presence in the children’s lives. 69. the wife noted that “prior to separation, mr trayden and i took turns caring for the children for week blocks during school holidays” (w17:97). the husband gave evidence that he would assist with the children’s bedtime routine when he returned home from work (h41:180). there was no material challenge to the husband being an active and involved father prior to separation, who was familiar with and engaged with the children’s treating practitioners since the diagnosis of x (although the wife argued discord in the post-separation period). 70. the father’s proposal is one that will restore the children to a routine in which they feel and understand to be considerable and meaningful time with both parents. 71. to further assist the children in time spent away from either parent, and with consideration of the children’s needs and best interests, the father is seeking a continuation of the nightly telephone communication between the children and the parent they are not living with. the mother has expressed opposition to this in the second family report [14], however, as expressed in the same report, y expressed that he “likes telephoning his parents everyday” [68]. the father submits that such arrangement currently, and will continue to, ensure a connection between the children and each parent and help quell separation anxiety being demonstrated by y. 72. it is submitted that the school holiday periods are different to the pressures of the school terms. where the parties are contemplating week-about blocks in the summer school holidays, there is no reason why half-school holiday blocks in the autumn, winter and spring school holidays cannot also be accommodated. 73. upon the conclusion of school holidays, it is submitted that it is neither reasonable nor in the best interests of the children for the father to be proscribed from delivering them to school on the first day of term (in the alternate pattern). it is important that all parents be involved in important events such as that and it can only serve to assist x and y for them to enjoy that normality with their father. the mother’s proposals imply so lack of capacity of the father in this regards, which is manifestly uncharitable to him. the father is clearly capable. 74. as to the father’s proposal for alternation of school holiday time in paragraph number 6 of his minute of order. it provides that the school holiday time commence at “9 am on the first monday following the last day of term”. why? the father has agreed to maintain the pattern during school term that the children spend time with the mother on odd weeks (1, 3, 5, 7 and 9), despite his initial proposal to swap the weekends around. if the mother’s orders for the school holidays are promulgated it would mean that the children would spend two weekends in a row with her, four times per year. in the circumstances of this particular case, such a regime goes against the spirit of the wishes of the children in the premises of their particular needs. the father’s proposal will provide a structure that the children will readily understand (the alternate weekends) and dovetail nicely into the school holiday regime. indeed, x, who appears to have an orientation towards counting her days notes that “dad misses out on a weekend every term. i think every second term mum could have us odd weeks, that is not a huge difference” (fr2:16:50). the father’s proposal ameliorates this concern of x and is of no harm to the mother’s relationship with the children. the father’s proposal is a practical change that is consistent with the children’s best interests for the myriad of reasons above. more time on birthdays, mothers day and alike 75. as outlined above the father proposes slightly longer periods for birthdays, mothers day, fathers day and alike. the differences in the position to the mother are set out above. 76. the more the children are able to spend time with each parent on special days the better. this is evident from both the first and second family reports. 77. moreover, the husband contends that it is in the best interests of the children to move to a living situation in which they share equal shared time with each parent. it is submitted that this will give the children a meaningful relationship with both their parents as they grow and develop through their formative years. written submissions – financial precis of the relief of sought by the husband 1. in summary, the husband seeks:
a. that the parties do all such things forthwith so as divide the shareholdings in such listed companies held in the wife’s name between the parties equally, with the shareholdings to be transferred in each individual listed entity such that the cgt burden is equally absorbed, b. that within 2 months of the division of the shares, the husband pay the wife $339,818 (“the sum”) – the calculations which are set out below (the effect of which is 38% adjustment to the wife of the non-superannuation assets, when the sum is added to the other non-superannuation assets the wife shall retain) , c. that contemporaneous to the payment of the sum:
i. the husband shall discharge the mortgage over the b street, suburb e property, ii. the wife shall transfer her interest in the b street, suburb e property to the husband,
d. default provisions which provide for the sale of the b street, suburb e property, which are different to the wife’s orders to the extent that:
i. the sale price and reserve are to be determined by a valuer nominated by the president of the australian property institute in the act, ii. reflect the intention of paying the sum with interest payable per the rules following the event of default,
e. no superannuation adjustment between the parties, including the wife’s h super fund pension as valued by mr bb (which allows the wife to retain 51% of the parties’ respective superannuation and allocated pension benefits, f. the usual orders that allow each party to retain his or her assets to the exclusion of the other, g. the usual orders for the parties to indemnify the other for debts in their sole name, with each party to also indemnity the other as to any loans alleged to be owing to their respective family, h. the transfer of charitable obligations to cc charity from the wife to the husband, i. the usual section 106a orders.
2. the parties have agreed upon the sale of the motor vehicle 1 and to share its proceeds equally, such as that might be. 3. the parties have agreed upon the provision from the husband to the wife of digital photographs and video recordings in his possession of the children, to the date of separation, 24 august 2017. the assets and liabilities asserted by the husband 4. the calculations of the husband’s case are based upon the following asset pool:
liability to the husband’s mother 5. it is noted that the liability of the husband to his mother (as set out in his financial statement) was post-separation and included funds that were advanced for legal fees. the court is not requested to have regard to this debt when determining the assets and liabilities of the parties. the husband’s calculations as to the adjustment to be made to the wife have, consequentially, not taken that debt into account. post-separation expenditure 6. the wife alleges that the husband withdrew the sum of “approximately $53,000” from the parties’ joint account from 1 july 2017 (w36:198). the wife says she withdrew “approximately $15,500” (w36:199) from the joint account during the same period. the wife opines that the husband did not spend those funds on “regular bills” such as rates, utilities etc. the wife opines that she, however, did spend her withdrawals on joint living expenses. the wife’s analysis of her own spending and that of the husband are broad conclusions. the husband maintained that he had spent the funds he withdrew for “various joint expenses including costs relating to the b street, suburb e property whilst ms trayden occupied the home” (h45-46:202). further the husband notes in his evidence that $28,884 that he received as a result of a tax refund which was paid into the joint account. it apparently forms a part of the funds withdrawn from that account that the wife complains of. as is evident from his affidavit, the husband together with his family agreed for the husband to make the donation on behalf of them all (so as to maximise the charitable use of the gift) in his name and obtain a tax refund which would be subsequently donated to the church (h46:203-206) for charitable purposes. the husband was taken through the relevant transactions and his evidence was not meaningfully challenged. indeed, it would seem to be agreed that the funds were diverted for charitable purposes and that it served to reduce his taxable income consequentially. 7. returning to the money which used by the husband, it appears rather that the backbone of the wife’s addback case appears to be one not of waste per se but one which draws into question the husband’s commencement of leave without pay shortly before separation in august 2017 and its continuance following separation until he resumed work in april 2018 (see wife’s case outline paragraph 3). 8. the wife during her cross-examination conceded that the husband had ceased his working prior to separation because he was unwell. indeed, the wife gave evidence that the husband had taken periods off work and changed his working arrangements because of health issues during the cohabitation. there were periods when the wife was working and the father cared for the children whilst he was on leave. it was not suggested that there was an intention on the part of the husband to “sit on his hands” on those occasions that he took a leave of absence, during cohabitation. nor that he had pre-planned his cessation of working shortly before separation to diminish the pool. 9. indeed the wife, in the context of the first family report, noted the history of the husband to dr j (see paragraph 76 of the first family report). 10. as at the interview on 11 october 2018 with ms j (a period subsequent to the husband resuming work) there was a recognition at that time as to how the husband’s health still concerned her and the history of it so far as it affected his work. indeed the wife in her affidavit noted that when the husband commenced worked with company k that he had “great difficulty” with working 5 days per week and was fatigued (w17:101). the husband’s underlying and conceded medical pathologies, at that time, persisted in the context of the high emotion following separation. the concerns expressed by the wife to ms. j, belies a contention that the husband has been feigning illness to avoid working. the husband was unwell and as he improved returned to work. if it were a design, it is counter intuitive for him to have returned to the workforce. 11. at any rate, from the best of my recall and one stands to be corrected, it was not put to the husband that he had expended the funds withdrawn from the joint account “recklessly, negligently or wantonly” or with a design “to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets.” ( see kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famcafc 70). 12. to the best of recall, it was not put to the husband that he had dealt with funds withdrawn from the joint account extravagantly. (see falcken and wade [2019] fam cafc 140 at paragraph 69). 13. the wife has not established that to the requisite standard (which in this case would be on the balance of probabilities, not briginshaw) that the husband’s expenditure was reckless, negligent nor wanton. there is no evidence to suggest that husband had lived extravagantly upon the funds drawn from the joint account. or that the husband had ceased worked intentionally and sat on his hands with the intent of diminishing the asset pool.(see d and d [2005] famca 356 paragraph 150) 14. it is noted that there is generally some controversy whether notional “addbacks” are permissible, this maybe as a matter of lore rather than law. this controversy was resolved by the full court in vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51. 15. thus it is agreed between counsel for the husband and the wife that the court may “addback” notional assets. however, in this case, it is contended on behalf of the husband that the court would not, for the reasons set out above. effect of orders proposed by the husband 16. pursuant to the husband’s proposed financial orders, the wife will receive/retain the following:
17. the contributions to the non-superannuation asset pool and superannuation asset pool are argued to be different. accordingly, they should be assessed in separate pools. the wife’s h super fund pension and the other forms of superannuation 18. the wife’s superannuation in the accumulation stage is less than the husband.
19. the wife has a h super fund pension in the payment phase which has been valued by mr bb (see affidavit filed 15 october 2020). the husband has a h super fund defined benefit interest, which is not in the payment phase. the wife holds an advantage in the total value of their respective benefit:
20. the court has a wide discretion as to how to deal with superannuation in all of its different iterations. as aforementioned, the wife’s pension has been valued by mr bb. the wife in her case outline document argues that the h super fund – pension in the payment phase ought be regarded as a matter for consideration under s.75(2) (see paragraph 2 in “outline of case – property”). this contention is rejected. if the h super fund – pension were intended be viewed as a mere income stream, merely relevant for s.75(2) there would be no point to the valuation regulations. 21. it is noted that full court semperton & semperton [2012] famcafc 132 provided as follows:
[190] it is considerations of this sort that encourage us to accept that “one size does not fit all”. or put another way, why one approach to a particular problem should not be seen as the preferred or the correct approach. ideally, a judicial officer will be alive to the nuances of each individual dispute, including the reasonable wants and desires of each of the parties, and thus seek to craft an order that will provide individual justice for both parties. [191] such an approach, in our view, sits comfortably with what the majority of the full court said in coghlan & coghlan (supra) (our emphasis added):
in summary, then, the trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case. if superannuation is not included in the list of property but rather made the subject of a separate pool, it will be necessary where a splitting order is sought, or extremely prudent where no such splitting order is sought (in order to ensure that justice and equity is achieved) to: (a) value the superannuation interest (according to the regulations if an order under part viiib is sought or according to the regulations or otherwise if no order is sought), (b) consider and make findings about the types of contributions referred to in s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) which have been made by the parties to the superannuation interests on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach depending on the circumstances, (c) consider the other factors in s 79(4) being the matters in s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), and (d) ensure that pursuant to s 79(2) the orders in relation to the parties’ property, and any order under part viiib in relation to superannuation interests are just and equitable.
22. this is not a case where the only asset of substance is the wife’s h super fund pension in payment phase. the husband has a h super fund defined benefit (not in payment phase). each party has accumulation superannuation benefits. moreover, the wife stands to receive an adjustment of cash from the non-superannuation assets. furthermore, the wife has the opportunity to salary sacrifice the pension amount, the majority of which is tax-free, back into superannuation, reducing her tax liability on pay as you go income, topping back up the superannuation balance. 23. this is not case where it is appropriate to simply have regard to the h super fund pension as an “income stream”. per trott, coghlan and semperton it is submitted that the court should have regard to the wife’s h super fund pension as valued by mr bb and considered in the context of the pool of superannuation. 24. the court is not asked to “double dip”, by having regard to the income stream arising from the pension in s.75(2). the approach adopted by the husband in the treatment of the h super fund – pension and the husband’s defined benefit, in the premises of this case, is appropriate. 25. noting the differential between the accumulation superannuation, the pension and the defined benefit: it is submitted that the court would make no adjustment in relation to these interests (when taking into account contributions and s.75(2) matters as set out below). this at any rate, favours the wife. contributions both financial and non-financial 26. the parties were married in 2002 and separated on 24 august 2017. whilst perhaps not lengthy, it is certainly not a short relationship. it is of sufficient enough length that there have been a multitude of continuous financial and non-financial contributions of substance. 27. the parties’ respective assets and liabilities at the commencement of cohabitation are set out at paragraphs 184 and 185 of the husband’s affidavit. the differential being that the husband had$38,394 in savings where the wife had $23,000 in savings. they otherwise had some superannuation (unquantified), motor vehicles and personalty. 28. the husband parties first child, x, was born in 2008. their second child was born in 2010. 29. the husband asserts that he was the major bread winner, although a respective comparison of historical income taxation returns does not form a part of the evidence (it is noted that the wife took leave without pay for parenting purposes in 2012 and was stay at home parent from 2012 to mid-2016 per w16:89). the wife and the husband reduced their hours to care for the children. but it is conceded that the wife was the primary home maker following the birth of x. it is notable, that the parties were childless for 6 years of their almost 15 year cohabitation. 30. per the first family report the husband explained his role in parenting:
[25] mr trayden reported that he has been an involved father since the birth of his children. he reported that he has rarely worked full time since the children were born, he worked either three days or four days per week for the majority of their lives. when not engaged in paid employment, mr trayden reported that he either cared for the children or participated in ministry work for his church. he reported that there were regular periods where ms trayden worked in paid employment and he cared solely for the children's needs, for example, a regular day per week for some periods of the children's lives. he reported that he took approximately eight weeks of parental leave after the birth of each child.
31. the wife noted that “prior to separation, mr trayden and i took turns caring for the children for week blocks during school holidays” (w17:97). the husband gave evidence that he would assist with the children’s bedtime routine when he returned home from work (h41:180). there was no material challenge to the husband being an active and involved father prior to separation, who was familiar with and engaged with the children’s treating practitioners since the diagnosis of x (although the wife argued discord in the post-separation period). 32. as to post-separation parenting, the husband commenced parenting proceedings on 11 december 2017. there were a number of interim hearings, the interim parenting orders that have largely regulated the post separation period were made on 16 november 2018 and 21 december 2018 which provided, inter alia, that the children live with their mother, the father spend 4 nights a fortnight, check in times and half of the school holidays with the children. 33. thus the children have spent substantial and significant time with the husband both in the sense of the school term, which was buttressed by the check ins, and during school holidays. per the first family report and the interview with ms. r, it was noted that:
[57] it is ms r's opinion that both parents have positive relationships that help x in her development. ms trayden has a positive attachment relationship with the children, she reads them well and is able to give them what they need emotionally. mr trayden is an active father who engages the children in activities that challenge them, this helps x to grow in confidence and self-esteem.
34. as to child support, the wife did not apply for same until early 2019 (w35:190). having said that the husband paid the school fees for the children in 2018, amounting to $12,200. pursuant to the administrative assessment the husband pays $355 per fortnight plus the private school fees (w36:192). 35. the wife was in exclusive occupation of the b street, suburb e property from the date of separation until around 27 january 2018. the husband has been in exclusive occupation of the b street, suburb e property from around 27 january 2018 until the date of trial. the husband wishes to retain the b street, suburb e property, which is not opposed by the wife. 36. in or about october 2014, the wife commenced receiving her h super fund pension (in relation to which she has had exclusive use since separation) and also a redundancy of $48,000. there is no evidence to suggest that the redundancy was calculated on the basis of a period that commenced before the cohabitation. it is an asset that arises in the context of other contemporaneous contributions both financial and non-financial. whilst it arises from the wife’s employment, it is not in the class of a gift or an inheritance. it is noted that the wife has had exclusive receipt of the $331 per week from the h super fund pension (w fs item 15 page 3). 37. the wife has had exclusive receipt of the carers allowance and family allowances. the gifts from the husband’s parents 38. on the subject of the gifts from the husband’s parents the wife concedes (w37:207) that the total gifts were $280,000. there is no disagreement that the funds advanced were in the nature of gifts. the wife gave evidence that the “i experienced those gifts to be made to both of us”. the husband’s case is that the funds were gifted to him. the husband sets out in his affidavit (h45:196-201) the tranches in relation to which funds were gifted to him. the first of which was $31,400 on 29 january 2003. 39. the nature of the wife’s “experience” was elaborated upon during cross-examination. the wife gave evidence, which was challenged, that the husband had a discussion with her about the first tranche of $31,400 (applied to the mortgage secured over the suburb n property) wherein it was allegedly suggested to her that it was a gift to both of them. the husband was resolute that the gift was to him. the wife conceded that she did not speak directly to the husband’s parents about that tranche. indeed, the wife did not speak to the husband or the husband’s parents about the subsequent tranches of $250,000. thus the wife’s experience, such as that may be, is limited to the first tranche and based upon her alleged conversation with the husband regarding an alleged conversation with his parents. as aforementioned, the first tranche occurred in 2003. the subsequent tranches occurred in 2010 ($100,000 applied to the mortgage secured over the suburb n property), 2013 ($100,000 applied to the mortgage secured over the b street, suburb e property) and 2015 ($50,000 applied to the mortgage secured over the b street, suburb e property). even if the wife’s first “experience” is accepted (which is not conceded), there is no evidence to conclude that this experience applied to the subsequent tranches. the wife had no direct conversation with the husband about any of the tranches and no conversation at all with the husband about the subsequent tranches. 40. in kessey & kessey [1994] famca 162 the full court said (at 81,150):
in other words, a contribution by a parent of a party to a marriage to the property of the marriage will be taken to be a contribution made by or on behalf of the party who is the child of the parent unless there is evidence which establishes it was not the intention of the parent to benefit only his or her child. (bold emphasis added)
41. the wife has not adduced evidence that it was not the intention of the husband’s parents to benefit him with regards to the successive tranches, aside from that one conversation in 2003. it is submitted that the court should thus follow kessey. 42. the authority of pierce & pierce [1998] famca 74 refers to the weight that should be given to initial contributions, where the full court said at [28]:
in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution. in the present case that use was a substantial contribution to the purchase price of the matrimonial home: see also campo and campo (unreported, full court (ellis, lindenmayer and finn jj), sydney, delivered 19 may 1995 at pages 21 and 22 of the joint judgment) and zahra and zahra (unreported, full court sydney, delivered 3 october 1996, per ellis j. at page 10). (bold emphasis added)
43. these gifts are not “initial contributions” but gifts from the husband’s parents in relation to which the wife made no direct or indirect contribution. having said that, the application of pierce is not myopic and it is necessary for the court to have regard to the gifts from the husband’s parents in the context of all the other relevant contributions. 44. however as is said in pierce the court must also have regard to the “use made by the parties of that contribution”. the funds were used by the husband to attenuate the parties’ mortgages secured over the suburb n and b street, suburb e properties. in that regard it is noted:
a. (h42:186-187) the suburb n property was acquired in october 2002 for $305,000, in relation to which the parties borrowed $244,000 (the gifts from the husband’s parents which were applied to this mortgage were in the quantum of $131,400). the property was sold in january 2014 and the parties received net proceeds of $574,000 b. (h42:188-191) the b street, suburb e property was acquired in june 2012 for $855,000 with a mortgage in the same amount (the b street, suburb e property was leased for around 18 months before the parties moved in). upon the sale of suburb n, the entirety of the proceeds of suburb n were applied to the attenuation of the b street, suburb e mortgage. then a further sum of $150,000 was gifted to attenuate the b street, suburb e mortgage.
45. as was said by his honour judge phipps in scrivens & scrivens [2016] fcca 2681:
“the exercise of assessing contributions is not a mathematical one. in pierce & pierce the court assessed contributions as 70/30 after 10 years and the husband’s initial contribution was a significant factor in this. it is not a matter of doing a mathematical adjustment taking the full court’s 70/30 assessment after 10 years as a base. all factors, including the 17 years of the relationship, must be taken into account”
46. it is not a matter of performing an analysis of the savings made by the reduction of the mortgage interest or the extent to which the capital can be said to have uplifted the wealth of the parties. it is simply that the gifts of circa $131,400 applied to the mortgage of suburb n served not only as a springboard, but also underpins much of the parties’ wealth such as it is today. the $150,000 gift applied to the b street, suburb e mortgage reinforced these contributions. it is that these gifts are of such weight so as to sound meaningfully in the assessment of the husband’s contributions to the non-superannuation asset pool. summary of contribution to non-superannuation assets 47. in the premises, the husband should be assessed as at the date of trial as having contributed 62%, so far as it pertains to contributions to the non-superannuation assets. contributions to superannuation assets 48. each of the parties commenced the relationship with some superannuation, albeit not quantified (h42:184-185). per the affidavit of mr bb, the wife joint the h super fund scheme in 2000 (ps7). 49. there parties have contributed to their respective superannuation following separation on 24 august 2017. however, the court does not have a valuation of the superannuation interests of the parties as at the date of separation. 50. the court is invited to conclude that, in the premises of the cohabitation, the contributions to the superannuation interests (whether accumulation, defined benefit or in payment phase) should be treated as equal. section 79(4)(e) – consideration of the provisions of section 75(2) 51. the approach to section 75(2) so far as it pertains to section 79(4)(e) was considered by in waters and jurek (1995) flc 92-635. 52. the husband’s health has improved since separation and he describes himself as being in “good health” (h40:176). it is submitted that the wife is in good health. 53. the wife is presently working school hours monday to thursday from 9.30 am to 2.30. pm. this is some 20 hours per week (w38:212). the wife works a full day, however, on the tuesday and wednesday afternoons when the children are with the husband (w38:216). she describes herself as an “executive level” employee such that she works longer days on “these other days in order to meet work requirements”. pursuant to the very minimum agreed between the parties, the children will be living with the father for one half of school holidays and during school term: 5 nights and an afternoon per fortnight. with the increasing involvement of the husband both as to the children’s day- to-day care, but as to medical/therapeutic needs the opportunities for the wife to shift her work hours to full days present itself (w38:216). the parenting difference of what is effectively 1 night per week during school term (with one of those nights attenuated by an afternoon with the father) and the increasing involvement of the husband as a result of same, is a substantial shift towards opening up opportunities for the wife to work more. 54. the wife earns $60,788 per annum (per her financial statement which attests to a salary of $1169 per week) from those 20 hours per week. the husband works full-time hours 4 days per week and earns $117,000 per annum. were the wife to work those extra days and hours during the 5 days per fortnight, plus the afternoon on the alternate friday: the difference between her “executive level” income and that of the husband’s is not sizeable. 55. the husband will continue to pay child support at a significant level and the children’s school fees of circa $16,892 per year. 56. the wife will receive a superannuation contribution of 15.4%, whilst the husband will receive the rate 9.5% or the base amount payable at the superannuation guarantee rate. this is a meaningful differential. 57. the wife is higher qualified than the husband, holding a master’s level qualification. the father bachelors level. it is noted there are many years of work life for both parents post children reaching maturity. 58. prospectively, both the husband and the wife are well placed to earn comfortable incomes. further, they are sharing the parenting of the children, albeit not equally at first instance but very substantially. in the premises, no adjustment is warranted pursuant to s.79(4)(e). summary 59. having regard to all of the matter averted to above, it is submitted that the husband’s proposal as to the financial relief is just and equitable. the husband intends to retain the b street, suburb e property. the husband seeks the transfer of the shares occur prior to the period to pay the wife commencing, such that he can identify the share portfolio as an asset for the purposes of refinancing.
written submissions filed on behalf of the respondent
118 the respondent’s written submissions were filed on 2nd june 2021. they were as follows (footnotes omitted):
written submissions of respondent wife outline 1. these submissions have been prepared in accordance with orders made by this honourable court on 30 october 2020, following a two-day hearing ending on that day. the orders in relation to the timeframe for each party to file their respective submissions have been amended a number of times primarily as a result of the delay on behalf of the husband. 2. the applicant husband filed submissions of 50 pages on 4 february 2021, after many delays prior to that date. orders were subsequently made in chambers by the court on 11 february 2021 requiring that new submissions be filed by the husband of a maximum of 20 pages (10 pages in relation to parenting and 10 pages in relation to property). the husband filed his further submissions (of 24 pages length) on 11 march 2021. this document will be referred to in these submissions as “the husband’s submissions”. 3. in the husband’s submissions he attempts to change his case, yet again, in relation to some aspects that were conceded at trial or where the case run at trial was different. that is, the husband is now seeking different orders than he did at the conclusion of the trial. in particular, the husband seeks to revisit the issue of parental responsibility for health issues. this is an issue where the husband’s position changed dramatically from day 1 to day 2 (as set out below). as a result of the change of case by the husband at the commencement of day 2 of the trial, some aspects of the wife’s case changed or became unnecessary. significantly, dr j had not yet been cross-examined and could have been cross-examined about this issue if it remained a live issue between the parties. 4. there is a long line of cases which make it clear that a party is bound by the way in which their case is run at trial. it is not open to the husband to change his case at the end of the trial, especially when the wife is prejudiced as a result of the way in which the case was run at trial. 5. there is also a concern on behalf of the wife as to the way in which the husband has referenced the evidence of dr j. attached to these submissions is an aide memoire setting out some of the parts of dr j’s evidence quoted in the husband’s submissions and which, it is submitted, was a misrepresentation. in addition, the aide memoire identifies parts of the husband’s submissions which are contrary to the evidence of dr j and where the substance of those submissions were not put to dr j in cross examination. 6. the relationship of the parties and the conduct of these proceedings has been significantly adversely affected by the husband’s extraordinary focus on the single incident of family violence between the parties that occurred on the date of separation. as a result of this focus, the parties have been unable to form a cooperative and communicative post separation parenting relationship. the husband has also made decisions based on this focus that have impacted the property proceedings, including his decision to take leave without pay for an extended period, during which time he paid no child support. 7. in relation to parenting matters the wife seeks equal shared parental responsibility excepting in relation to medical issues, for which she seeks sole parental responsibility (this was an agreed position at trial). she also proposed that the children live with her and spend time with the father for four nights per fortnight and one additional afternoon. at the end of the trial the wife had accepted that a position of 5 nights per fortnight was appropriate, commencing first term 2021. this would be achieved by essentially extending the father’s weekend time to include the sunday night. given the delays this time has not yet commenced. the wife proposes that this extended time commence from the beginning of the next school term, following the delivery of judgment. 8. the husband’s parenting application changed dramatically on the second day of the hearing. at the commencement of the hearing the husband was seeking:
a) that he have sole parental responsibility for all matters, including medical matters relating to the children, including that the mother not be permitted to attend medical appointments, and b) that the children live with him and spend time with the mother for four nights per fortnight.
9. on the second day of hearing his application changed so that he then sought that:-
a) the mother have sole parental responsibility for medical matters, including that the father not be permitted to attend medical appointments unless invited, and b) in relation to the arrangements for the care of the children, that there be a gradually increasing arrangement until the children lived in an equal care arrangement between the parties.
10. in this matter the following are the key issues in dispute: parenting
a) the father’s fixation on the incident of family violence at separation and the impact that this has on the parties’ ability to form a cooperative parenting relationship, and b) the stability provided to the children by the continuation of the current arrangements.
property
c) the treatment of the wife’s h super fund superannuation pension, d) add backs sought by both parties, e) the treatment of the capital sums received by the parties from the husband’s parents during the relationship, f) post-separation contributions, and g) the appropriate section 75(2) adjustment taking into account the husband’s higher income and the wife’s continued majority care of the children (on her proposal).
credit 11. some aspects of the husband’s evidence and other behaviour cast doubt on his credibility. in a general sense the husband was vague and often unresponsive in answers during cross examination. on occasions it would take a number of questions on the same topic before an appropriate concession was made. 12. two aspects of the husband’s behaviour highlight that he was willing, on occasions, to be less than honest in his dealings. 13. firstly, the wife was given sole parental responsibility for medical matters pursuant to orders of this court made on 16 november 2018, after hearing. pursuant to those orders, the wife was obliged to provide to the father information about the children’s health. the father also had authority to contact the medical providers to obtain further information if he desired it. the father conceded that, in compliance with the mother’s obligation, she had provided more than 160 emails. many of those emails were quite detailed, while others were short updates. on no more than one or two occasions did the father ever seek further information from the mother in response to these emails. the father did not contact any of the children’s health providers for further information in this period. 14. despite this abundance of information being provided to the father about the children’s health, he told dr j that he was “locked out” of receiving information about his children’s health. he asserted in his trial affidavit that he “received limited information” about x’s health matters. 15. secondly, on the death of the husband’s father, $77,000 was received by his mother. it was decided that this money should be donated to charity. because his mother had a low income, the husband arranged for his mother to provide the monies to him so that he could make the donation and claim it as a tax deduction. this had the effect of reducing his taxable income for the 2016 tax year, and he received a $29,000 tax refund as a result. these funds were then also donated to charity providing the husband with a further tax deduction on his 2017 taxable income. 16. when the wife sought child support in january 2019 a nil assessment was the initial result. the husband considered that that assessment was an appropriate outcome. the wife was required to challenge that assessment and ultimately an assessment was made for child support to be paid of about $9,000 per annum plus full school fees, noting the child support payable to the wife was reduced to take into account an equal contribution by the wife towards the cost of school fees. the husband’s approach to this issue was concerning given the artificial reduction of his taxable income in the relevant years and his lack of insight as to the impact on the wife and her support of the children. parenting matters 17. the mother proposes that the children continue to live with her and spend substantial and significant time with their father. the structure of the time that she proposes will ensure that the children have regular time with their father, with only short gaps in between that time. this is in accordance with the recommendations of dr j. 18. the structure of the mother’s proposal was put directly to dr j. she agreed that her proposal met her concerns about stability for their care and that the time that they have with each parent not have gaps longer than four days. dr j did not support the graduated increase to time as proposed by the father. 19. at the end of the trial the parties were in agreement that there should be equal shared parental responsibility for all issues excepting medical matters, where the mother should have sole parental responsibility. as stated above, the husband should not be permitted to resile from his agreement to this position at the trial, especially given that the decision was made prior to completion of cross examination of the wife and prior to the commencement of cross examination of dr j. the wife was not cross-examined about these issues and, similarly, dr j was not cross-examined as a result of this concession and the parties’ (at that time) agreement about parental responsibility. 20. the husband’s apparent abandonment of that concession bodes poorly for his ability to support future co-operative parenting. the court will recall that the independent children’s lawyer generously invited the father to indicate any further concerns that he might hold with respect to the mother’s parenting or care of the children generally. he could offer none. in that context, his changed position is baffling. 21. in the husband’s submissions it is suggested that section 61da of the act applies given that no findings will be made about family violence. with the greatest of respect, the parties are in agreement that there was an incident of family violence at separation. they just do not agree as to who the aggressor was in that incident and recognised the limited utility in court resources being applied to the analysis of that issue. 22. the wife has conceded that equal shared parental responsibility in relation to other aspects should be made. if the court decides to determine the issue of parental responsibility for medical matters, the following submissions are made. the parties had ongoing and significant difficulties in the exercise of their joint parental responsibility prior to the wife being granted sole responsibility for medical matters. these problems included whether to advise x of her diagnosis of autism and more than one medical provider withdrawing or threatening to withdraw from treatment of the children as a result of husband’s interactions with them. court intervention was required in the management of these issues. 23. in relation to informing x of her diagnosis, in the husband’s submissions it is suggested that there should be some inference arising from the fact that the wife did not call any of the treatment providers. in circumstances where those providers were reluctant to continue treatment for the children as a result of them being engaged in the dispute between parties, it would have been surprising if they were willing to provide an affidavit for this purpose. no inference should be drawn. 24. the father’s initial application for him to have sole parental responsibility for all aspects of parental responsibility is difficult to comprehend. noting that the parties have had equal shared parental responsibility for all matters save for medical, and the mother has had sole parental responsibility for medical matters since november 2018, the father accepted that she had performed her role in managing the children’s health needs well. he also accepted that she had sought appropriate advice and had followed that advice. none of the medical providers considered that the mother had dealt with the children’s health needs other than appropriately. dr j opined that the mother was more able to be “child centred in her assessment of the children’s needs” and that their health needs would be “better met by the mother having sole parental responsibility.” 25. dr j concluded, in relation to parental responsibility for medical issues, as follows:
“it is in the best interests of the children that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children’s health. in considering all of the assessment information, including the reading material, it appears that the mother is more able to be child centred in her assessment of the children’s needs. it appears that the mother is more able to make health decisions in the children’s best interests. it appears likely that the children’s health needs will be better met by the mother having sole parental responsibility. if parental responsibility is shared, there is the risk that the children could be deprived of care they would benefit from and subjected to care that they would not benefit from.”
26. the only complaint that the father made about the mother’s management of health issues for the children was about the information provided by her. as noted above, ultimately the father accepted that the mother had provided him with substantial information about the children’s medical issues and that he had not taken the opportunity to either seek more information from the mother or from the relevant medical provider. 27. in those circumstances, it is submitted that the father’s initial position can only be understood on the basis that he considered that the mother should be penalised because she, according to him, was the aggressor in the incident at or about separation. 28. indeed, until your honour had discussed this issue with him at some length during his evidence, the father was fixated on the violent incident at separation and on having findings made that the mother was the aggressor and that she had perjured herself in her previous evidence. 29. it is noted that neither party was cross examined about this incident and the mother does not seek that findings are made about it, other than that there was a violent interaction between the parties at separation. it is submitted that no finding, other than this one, is open to the court given the lack of cross examination of each party about the incident. this approach was not accidental and discussions occurred with your honour (including with the father’s counsel) about why this pragmatic approach to these historical matters was appropriate. 30. the importance, however, of the incident is not about whether or not one or both parties were at fault, it is about the father’s focus on the incident and the impact it has on the parties’ ability to effectively co-parent. 31. the father currently seeks gradually increasing time until the children live equally with both parents. it is the father’s own evidence that the parties are unable to co-parent effectively7. the reason he gives for this is that he considers that the parties will not be able to co-parent well until the mother has admitted that she lied about the incident at separation. the conclusion, however, that the parties are unable to co-parent effectively is the obvious conclusion in any event. 32. the father has taken the opportunity to discuss the incident at separation with every medical provider treating the children, the children’s school and the church that the parties attended during the relationship (noting that the father no longer attends this church). from the church, the father sought condemnation of the mother. as stated above, his dealings with medical providers, including by discussing this incident with them, have contributed to a number of medical providers either withdrawing, or threatening to withdraw, treatment for the children. 33. in the husband’s submissions it is suggested that the wife also discussed the incident at separation with some medical providers. given that the husband provided his version to these medical providers (which suggested that the wife was the aggressor) it was not unreasonable for her to advise her contrary position. it was never suggested that her involvement with the medical providers was the cause of any withdrawal, or threat of withdrawal, of any of these providers. the weight of the evidence (including subpoenaed material) does not support that conclusion. 34. of course, the father also discusses this incident at length with the family report writer in the interviews for both reports. it was clear in his evidence that he wanted to be able to discuss the incident but felt constrained as a result of your honour’s comments and the other discussions that had occurred during the case. 35. the father is partially correct when he says that the parties cannot effectively co-parent as a result of the incident at separation. the reason, however, is because of the father’s intense focus on the incident and inability to move forward unless the mother admits fault and that she has lied about the incident. 36. dr j was particularly concerned that the parties were not able to improve their co-parenting relationship in the period of more than 12 months between the interviews for her 2 family reports. this is particularly concerning given that the difficulties in their co-parenting relationship were identified as a significant issue for the children in both reports. 37. because of these difficulties in their co-parenting relationship, it is not reasonably practicable for the children to live in an equal time arrangement. 38. the children each have special needs. part of those needs result in a need to not have long gaps between the time that they spend with each parent. partly because of those needs, dr j emphasised the need for the stability of the children’s care arrangements. in this regard the submissions of the icl are adopted. dr j did not support any graduated increases in time without consultation with the children’s psychologists. it is intended by the wife that the children’s psychologists would have input when the parties undertake child inclusive mediation in the future. 39. the icl recommends that the parties review the arrangements for the children’s time with their father in early 2022. the mother accepts that a review of the children’s time is appropriate but proposes that the timeframe for such review should not be earlier than 2 years from the date of judgment. by the beginning of next year, the children will not have had a lengthy period for the orders to apply. the children need a break from the court proceedings and the disputes between the parties. having the review at a later time would better allow those arrangements to have settled and, hopefully, the parties will have had the opportunity to work on their co-parenting relationship. 40. for the purposes of the review of the children’s arrangements, it is proposed that the process should be child inclusive and there should also be input from the children’s respective psychologists. section 60cc factors 41. section 60cc(2)(a) - it is agreed that the children have a meaningful relationship with both parents. the orders proposed by the wife will allow for a continuation of that meaningful relationship, together with meeting the children’s special needs by ensuring small gaps between the children’s time with each parent. the children do not need to move to an equal time arrangement in order to be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with the father. this seems to be an implication from the husband’s submissions. 42. section 60cc(2)(b) – it is also agreed that the children are not at risk in either party’s care. 43. section 60cc(3)(a) - dr j concludes that her recommendations (for a continuation of the current arrangements) is largely “in agreement with the children’s wishes (for their care arrangements to remain as stable as possible for the next few years).” she notes that y expressed a view that he would like to have, effectively, a day-about arrangement with both parents. she concluded that y will be likely to adapt to arrangements that were not precisely in accordance with his wishes. 44. section 60cc)3)(b) - in the husband’s submissions, he takes issue with the opinion of dr j that the children have a primary carer attachment to the mother. the father did not challenge dr j in cross examination, about that opinion. the father does not set out the basis given by dr j for arriving at this conclusion. in that respect, dr j said the following:-
“the children have a positive emotional attachment to each of their parents. it appears that they have a primary carer attachment to their mother. this is evidenced by the children’s care history and the children (especially y) repeatedly seeking out their mother for comfort. the emotional attachment between the children and their father, while it appears not to be a primary carer attachment relationship, is nevertheless a strong and important emotional attachment for the children.”
45. section 60cc(3)(c) - both parties have appropriately taken the opportunity to involve themselves in children’s lives and to participate in significant decisions. any issues in relation to the father’s engagement with medical providers has been addressed above. 46. section 60cc(3)(ca) - for the period from separation until august 2019, the husband did not meet his full obligations for child support. of particular note, he did not provide any financial assistance directly to the wife notwithstanding that she then had to rent accommodation after he had insisted on taking occupation of the former matrimonial home from the wife and children. this is an appropriate criticism of the husband. the husband says on a number of occasions that he pays child support and school fees. in fact, his periodic payments of child support to the wife are reduced taking into account the wife’s half share of the school fees. it is not the case that he pays full child support plus school fees. he pays a reduced amount of child support plus school fees. 47. section 60cc(3)(d) - the likely effect of separation from both parties was a critical issue for dr j. she recommended that there be only short gaps between the time that the children spend with each parent during school term times. the wife has adopted dr j’s recommendations in this regard. 48. section 60cc(3)(e) - not relevant 49. section 60cc(3)(f) - both parties have a relevant capacity to provide for the needs of the children. there is no basis to find that the husband has a greater capacity to provide for the children’s education or other needs than the wife and the inferred criticism of the wife (or her intelligence) in the father’s submission is disrespectful and unfounded. there is also no basis in the evidence to find that the mother’s mental health is a factor regarding her capacity to provide for the needs of the children. 50. section 60cc(3)(g) - not relevant 51. section 60cc(3)(h) - not relevant 52. section 60cc(3)(i) - both parties have shown that they have an appropriate attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood. an exception to this appears to be the husband’s fixation on the wife being found guilty of perjury and or of being the aggressor in the incident at separation. this adverse view appears to distort the husband’s attitude to all issues relating to parenting. as pointed out earlier, the husband considers that the parties will not be able to co-parent unless and until the wife admits her guilt of perjury and of being the aggressor incident. 53. section 60cc(3)(j) - there was a family violence incident at separation. this is not a significant factor for the court to consider given that neither party suggests that family violence was otherwise a factor within the relationship or subsequent to separation. neither party seeks to limit the other party’s care of the children because of family violence risk considerations. 54. section 60cc(3)(k) - the wife previously had a family violence order in her favour. there are no current family violence orders in favour of either party. 55. section 60cc(3)(l) - the wife seeks that any review of the orders made by the court should not occur earlier than two years from the date of orders being made. by that time the children will be 15 and 13 years of age. the wife proposes that the mediation that the parties participate in at that time should be child inclusive. this will enable the parties to make decisions taking into account the children’s views at that time. this proposal will also ensure that the parties have a significant break from involvement in court proceedings. specific issues 56. costs were reserved by the court for the following court events,-
a) 19 april 2018 – the father’s objection to the production of documents by dd psychology. it is noted that ms ee, of d psychology, had undertaken an assessment of the mother, at the father’s insistence, as to whether she satisfied the criteria for diagnosis with autism spectrum disorder. the father had communicated with d psychology. the father was requested to provide to the mother, voluntarily, his communications with them. he refused to do so. the father then objected to the subpoena subsequently issued by the mother. that objection was dismissed after written submissions. the mother seeks her costs of preparing and filing a subpoena, preparing submissions in relation to the objection and attending court on 19 april 2018. b) 4 june 2018 - the father filed an application in a case on 18 may 2018. that application was later dismissed by consent on 4 june 2018 with costs reserved. the father sought that the mother provide him with original photographs regarding her injuries from the incident at separation. no submissions are made in the husband’s submissions and so no response can be given. in addition the wife was not cross examined about this issue.
property the property pool 57. an aide memoire is attached to these submissions setting out the assets and liabilities of the parties. the document also sets out the net effect of the parties’ respective positions before the court. it is noted that the parties recently agreed to update the valuation of the property owned by the parties in b street, suburb e, act. that valuation discloses (which is understood be agreed) a valuation of $1,125,000. the wife has amended her position as to the amount of payment payable to her as a result of this amended valuation. the cash payment from the husband that the wife now seeks is $720,000 (plus she would retain 60%of the shares, monies in her bank accounts and other property in the wife’s name). it is submitted, in accordance with the attached aide memoire, that this would result in an approximate 60% outcome to the wife. 58. the parties have by agreement, in the period since the hearing concluded, implemented the sale of the motor vehicle 1 and the equal distribution of the sale proceeds ($500 each). the wife does not press paragraph 26 of her minute of orders sought as a consequence.[56] 59. the key issues in dispute between the parties about the assets and liabilities are set out in this section. treatment of wife’s h super fund 60. the wife’s h super fund entitlements are being received by the wife as a pension in the payment phase. this arises from a voluntary redundancy she took in 2015. there is no superannuation split sought by either party in relation to this entitlement. a family law valuation (flv) therefore does not need to be prepared. 61. the monies received by the wife are an income stream only. the flv is artificial and is only required when a split is sought. the amount received by the wife is $331 per week (approximately $17,000 per annum). this amount should be treated as a financial resource in the hands of the wife and not included as an asset at the flv. that pension is treated as income in the hands of the wife for the purposes of taxation, child support and the assessment of commonwealth benefits. it would be inequitable to treat it as a superannuation asset, as sought by the husband, while allowing the consequences of its characterisation as income, by commonwealth agencies, to remain unchanged. 62. in the case of welch & abney, cited below, the full court considered the decision of semperton, also cited below, in detail. the court was faced in that case with a complaint by the husband that the wife’s superannuation in the payment phase was not included as an asset for the capital amount which represented the flv. the court said the following:-
“principles emerging from the full court decision in semperton 57. as we have said, the decision of the full court in semperton was cited to his honour and was the subject of submissions before him. 58. the principles espoused by the full court in that case have particular resonance for the instant case because there, as here, no splitting order was made by the primary judge.... 59. the full court’s reasons in semperton contain a detailed discussion of various authorities which discussion need not be repeated here. suffice to note that each of may j, in her honour’s separate judgment, and the plurality (thackray and ryan jj) in a joint judgment, emphasised that whilst a trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case, the discretion is guided by statements of principle, including that the nature, form and characteristics of the subject interest must be considered, whether or not a splitting order of the interest is made. 117. the characteristics of the pension — which see it as starkly different from, say, the cash proceeds from the sale of the former matrimonial home — need to be taken into account within the broad-based discretion provided for by s 79 in general and the assessment of contributions in particular (difficult though that may be). (quote from hayton v bendle [2010] famca 592, (2010) 43 fam lr 602) 61. crucially, at [175] of their joint judgment the plurality in semperton emphasised that the mandatory requirement expressed in s 90mt(2) of the act to determine an amount in relation to a “superannuation interest” as defined arises only when the superannuation interest is to be split.”
63. it is noted that neither party seeks a superannuation split of the wife’s pension. therefore, the wife’s superannuation pension cannot be considered as a capital sum. there is no evidence directly comparing her pension entitlements with the superannuation entitlements of the husband. her entitlements provide her with a modest to very small income and the husband receives the indirect benefits of that income (in that it forms part of the income relied upon for child support purposes). all other components of the wife’s superannuation have been utilised for the benefit of the parties. 64. the court should not include in the assets to be divided between the parties, the capitalised value of her h super fund entitlements. add backs sought 65. the wife seeks an add back in respect of the funds that the husband withdrew from joint accounts and the husband’s personal accounts post separation. at the date of separation there was a sum of $42,748 in the joint account (this amount included $5,000 recently received by the wife from her grandmother’s estate). the husband withdrew, in total,$53,045 from joint funds for his own personal use. he did this during a period when he elected not to work at all. in the same period, the husband was not paying child support to the wife, despite the children living primarily with her. 66. usually, monies used for the necessary and reasonable living expenses of a party are not considered amounts that should be added back. in this case, however, the only reason the husband needed to use joint funds for his living expenses was because of the choice that he made not to work. the period that the husband did not work was from about july 2017 to april 2018 (a period of about 9 months). it is submitted that this amount should therefore be added back to the pool. 67. in the husband’s submissions it is suggested that the husband had medical grounds for not working for the period referred to above. there is no medical evidence to support that proposition. the husband could have called medical evidence if that is what he sought to rely upon. at page 69 of wife’s tender bundle is a record of conversation between the husband and mr l at gg shops. this was obtained from the material under subpoena from m church. the husband made clear that he could go back to work at any time. he admitted that this was the case under cross examination. 68. if the court decides that the amount should not be added back as a result of the husband’s withdrawal of the funds, then it is submitted that they should nonetheless be added back as a result of waste. it is only as a result of the husband’s decision not to work that any argument for withdrawing the funds arises. the wife should not have to bear the loss suffered by the parties as a result of this decision on behalf of the husband. 69. in the husband’s submissions it is argued that the court cannot find waste, as defined in cases, unless the specific question is put to the husband suggesting, in the words of the definition, that he “recklessly, negligently or wantonly” expended the funds he withdrew in this period. the court can come to a conclusion about the behaviour of the husband on the basis of the evidence before it, and a direct question using the words of kowaliw does not need to be put. 70. in the alternative, the monies withdrawn by the husband should be taken into account as a factor under section 75(2)(o). effectively, the husband had access to approximately $53,000 of joint funds for his own benefit, without having provided any evidence of his use of those funds. more importantly, he used those funds when he had the capacity to return to employment at any time. 71. a comparison is made in the husband’s submissions between the, relatively small, amount withdrawn by the wife same period. in this period the husband paid no child support and, for at least part of that time, lived in the former matrimonial home at b street, suburb e rent-free. 72. at the commencement of the trial the husband was seeking an add back for the sum of$1,920 paid to the wife’s account from the ndis funds. it is understood that the husband had conceded that an add back of this amount was not justified. nonetheless, this amount is included in the balance sheet in the husband’s submissions. no submissions are made in relation to this amount. accordingly, is not known whether the husband continues to seek an add back for this amount or whether this is just an oversight. 73. if the husband continues to seek an add back for this amount, then there is no basis for that to occur. this very small amount was directed by the wife into her account during the period that the husband was withdrawing significant amounts, referred to above, and for which an add back is sought. there is no dispute that she used these monies to assist her to support the children during the lengthy period that no child support was paid. in any event, the amount held by the wife in her sole account is greater than this sum. it has either been used by the wife for support of herself and the children or it still exists in her account. in either situation, there is no basis to add back this amount. 74. the husband also includes the wife’s piano in the pool of assets. there is no valuation of this asset and the wife does not concede any value. the wife owned the piano at the commencement of the relationship. it had been understood that the husband did not press for the inclusion of this asset in the pool of assets. in any event, there is no evidence as to the item or its value that will assist the court. 75. at the commencement of the hearing, it was noted that the husband’s h super fund entitlements had not been valued to obtain the flv. we undertook to obtain the flv for this fund prior to submissions, and this has occurred. it is noted that the value of the husband’s h super fund superannuation entitlements is $285,940.99 (which has been rounded to $285,941 in the attached aide memoire). it is noted that this amount was advised to chambers, with the consent of all parties, on 17 november 2020. the fund has also been provided with procedural fairness and has no objections to the orders sought by the wife. a copy of the letter from the fund can be provided if required. similarly, procedural fairness has been provided to the trustee of g super fund (the other fund from which a super split is sought by the wife) and no objection is made to the orders sought by the wife. contributions 76. it is submitted on behalf the wife that contributions would be considered to be relatively equal up to the date of separation excluding, for the moment, the lump sum amounts received by the parties from the husband’s parents. 77. the parties had modest, and similar, assets at the commencement of the relationship19. during the relationship both parties worked and earned income and both parties were involved in the care of the parties’ children. the husband earned a higher income than the wife and the wife was more involved in the homemaker and parent role than the husband. on this basis a finding of relative equality up to separation is justified. 78. during the parties’ relationship they were gifted sums totalling $280,000 by the husband’s parents. part of the monies were received as early as 2003 and the most recent gift was received in march 2015. each party bears an evidentiary onus to prove the intention of the husband’s parents as to whether or not the monies were intended to be provided to the benefit both parties, or just their child. in the case of mabb, the full court considered a “strong indicator” of an intention to benefit both parties that a property was transferred into the names of the spouses jointly. 79. in this case some of the monies received were paid onto joint mortgages and other monies were paid into the parties’ joint accounts. despite the onus borne by the husband, he did not produce any evidence in support of the proposition that the monies were intended to benefit him alone. in particular, he could have called evidence from his mother (noting that his father is deceased). he chose not to call that evidence. the court is entitled to draw an adverse inference that the evidence of his mother would not have assisted his case. 80. the only evidence that the husband gives about the gifts is by way of conclusionary statements where he uses the words “gifted me” in his evidence. in all the circumstances, especially given the husband’s failure to call evidence which could have clarified this issue, it is submitted that the court should conclude that the intention of the husband’s parents was to benefit both parties. 81. in the husband’s submissions he refers to the decision of kessey without reference to the later decision of mabb clarifying kessey. in mabb, the full court said this of the earlier decision in kessey:-
“each party bore an evidentiary onus to establish the facts to support their respective contentions. while it is reasonable to assume, as the full court did in kessey, that the presumed intention of the donor is to advantage the child in the marriage, it is no more than an evidentiary device. clearly as fogarty j said in gosper, that presumption can be rebutted by evidence of the actual intention that accompanied the gift and in this case, the transfer of the land to the parties jointly is a “strong indicator” of intention. true it is that in this case, there was no direct evidence from the husband’s mother about what she (and her husband) intended when they transferred the land to the parties, her honour’s conclusion was an inference drawn from the facts and circumstances of the evidence before her honour which included the fact that the transfer of the property was to both of the parties. there is no error in such an approach and the wife was not obliged to call evidence from the husband’s parents.” (at paragraphs 37 & 38)
82. as stated above, the two factors supporting a finding that the husband’s parents intended that the gift be to both parties are that the gift was made to joint accounts (including mortgage accounts) and that the husband could have, but failed to, call his mother to give evidence. 83. if the court finds that the monies were intended to be gifted to the husband alone, as he asserts, then a decision needs to be made about the weight to be given to that contribution. in this respect the court is required to consider the contributions made by the parties over the whole of the relationship in an holistic way, taking into account the myriad of contributions made by both parties throughout the relationship and up to the present. 84. the total of the monies received, over the period of time from 2003 to 2015, was $280,000. this is approximately 19-20% of the non-superannuation pool. an adjustment of 10% to the husband would, in effect, give him a dollar for dollar credit in the contributions assessment. that is, a 10% adjustment would mean that there is a 20% differential between the parties’ respective contributions. it is submitted that an adjustment of no more than 5% is appropriate taking into account the contributions made by both parties over their long marriage. 85. the husband seeks an adjustment to him of 12% of the non-superannuation pool. in dollar terms this is an amount of approximately $175,000, or a differential between the parties of 24%, which equates to $350,000. effectively then, the husband seeks an adjustment to him of a greater dollar amount than was gifted. taking into account the myriad of other contributions made by the wife, it is submitted that this would be an extraordinary conclusion. although the court does not talk in terms of “erosion of contributions”, nonetheless it would be a highly unusual case for contributions to increase substantially in value over time. 86. the parties separated in august 2017. in the period from that date until the present time, the wife has had the majority care of the children. that is approximately 3 ½ years up to the date of these submissions. 87. for the period from august 2017 until august 2019, it is agreed that the husband paid no child support to the wife. 88. from separation until about 17 january 2018, the wife and the children resided in the parties’ unencumbered, former matrimonial home at b street, suburb e act. during this period, the husband resided with his mother at her unencumbered property and paid no rent. at the husband’s insistence, the wife and children vacated the property at that time so that the husband could solely live in the property. therefore, from january 2018 up to the present date (about 3 ½ years) the husband has had rent-free/mortgage-free accommodation at the b street, suburb e property whilst the wife, with the children, has been required to obtain rental accommodation. in the period up to august 2019, she had to do this without any financial assistance from the husband. 89. this sole occupation of the property, rent-free, whilst the wife needed to obtain rental accommodation, is a relevant and significant factor in the assessment of the contributions of the parties25. at the time of the final hearing in october 2020, the wife had paid in excess of $70,000 in rent. 90. it is submitted that the contribution-based assessment should be considered to be:-
a) 57.5/42.5% in favour of the wife if the court finds that the monies provided by the husband’s parents were intended to benefit both parties. the basis for the differential in favour of the wife is the post separation care of the children with, for a significant part of that time, no child support paid by the husband, together with the husband’s rent-free use of the former matrimonial home, at his insistence. b) 52.5/47.5% in favour of the wife if the court finds that the monies provided by the husband’s parents were intended to benefit the husband only. in that situation, the wife’s post separation contributions and the husband’s rent-free use of the former matrimonial home would more than counterbalance any adjustment in favour of the husband for those gifts. both parties had small superannuation balances at the commencement of the relationship. the parties’ respective contributions to the superannuation pool should be considered to be equal.
section 75(2) factors 91. according to his financial statement filed 23 october 2020, the husband earns $2,297 gross per week (approximately $120,000 per annum). the husband has chosen to only work part-time hours on the justification that the needs of the children prevent him from working longer hours. that assertion is not credible in circumstances where his care of the children is primarily experienced over a weekend per fortnight and limited after school time. there is no medical basis for the husband’s decision. his capacity to earn income is approximately $180,000-$240,000 per annum if he chose to work full time. the court should take into account this amount as his income for the purpose of this assessment. 92. the wife’s income is approximately $70,000 per annum. this is a significant disparity between the parties. 93. the wife will also have, on her proposal, the continued primary care of the children, who are aged 11 and 13 years. 94. the wife is in receipt of her h super fund pension which, as noted above, is approximately $17,000 per annum. in combination with her income from her employment, her financial resources are still substantially less than the husband’s income and his capacity to earn income. 95. these factors justify an adjustment in favour of the wife. it is noted that 10% of the non-superannuation pool is approximately $146,000. it is submitted that a 10% adjustment in favour of the wife is appropriate. 96. in relation to superannuation, the husband is able to accumulate superannuation at a higher rate than the wife given his higher income and earning capacity. in addition, the wife will continue to have the primary care of the children on her case. it is submitted that a 60%outcome on superannuation is appropriate in those circumstances. this would involve a small adjustment of 10% to the wife. summary of property matters 97. it is submitted that an appropriate outcome would be 60 – 65% (rounded down from the submissions above) to the wife and 35 – 40% to the husband. the outcome proposed by the wife, as set out in the aide memoire attached, would result in the wife receiving approximately 60% of the net non-superannuation assets. 98. the wife has increased the amount to be paid to her to achieve this outcome as a result of the higher value of the b street, suburb e property. the payment the wife now seeks is $720,000. the wife would also receive 60% of the shares and retain her bank accounts and other property in her name (and by reference to the aide memoire, the total property she would then receive is around $878,000). 99. in addition, the superannuation entitlements of the parties should be divided so that the wife receives 60% of the total (not including the wife’s h super fund pension). this would result in a superannuation split in favour of the wife of approximately $200,000. the wife seeks a$100,000 superannuation split from both of the husband’s funds.
independent children’s lawyers written submissions
119 the independent children’s lawyers written submissions were filed on 25th november 2020. they were as follows:
written submissions of the independent children’s lawyer (icl) 1. the proceedings relate to the children x trayden born in 2008 (“x”) and y trayden born in 2010 (“y”). 2. these written submissions are in the context of a trial that spanned two days in october 2020 before judge neville in the federal circuit court in canberra. 3. it is noted that throughout the trial, the father abandoned his initial position as detailed in his case outline, and the parties reached an agreed position as to parental responsibility and that the children should move to a ‘5/9 arrangement’ between their parents (in the mother’s favour) from term 1 2021. 4. as the icl understands it, the issues that remain in dispute are as follows:
a. whether the time that the children spend with their father should increase past the ‘5/9 arrangement’ at some point into the future, b. school holiday arrangements, c. further mediation or ‘review’ of the care arrangements at some point into the future.
competing proposals the icl understands the competing proposals of the parties to be as follows: the father’s position 5. the father amended his position throughout the trial. the icl understands that his final proposal as to him spending time with the children is as follows:
a. that between now and the end of the school year 2020, the current interim orders remain in place, b. certain agreed orders apply for the christmas/january school holiday period in 2020/2021, c. from the start of term 1 2021, the children spend time with him for 5 nights each fortnight, d. from the start of term 3 2021, the children spend time with him for 6 nights each fortnight, e. from the start of term 3 2021, the children spend time with him for 7 nights each fortnight, f. that the children spend equal time between the parents in school holiday periods in increasingly large blocks of time.
6. the icl is unsure of the father’s position as to any future ‘review mechanism’ as to the care arrangements. the mother’s position 7. the mother amended her position as to time with the father throughout the trial. the icl understands that her final proposal as to the children spending time with the father is as follows:
a. that between now and the end of the school year 2020, the current interim orders remain in place, b. certain agreed orders apply for the christmas/january school holiday period in 2020/2021, c. from the start of term 1 2021, the children spend time with the father for 5 nights each fortnight, d. that the children spend equal time between the parents in school holiday periods in increasingly large blocks of time.
8. the icl understands through comments made by the mother’s counsel at trial that she intends that any future ‘review mechanism’ occur two years from the date of the orders. the icl’s position 9. icl gave her view as to appropriate orders at the end of the trial. her final proposal as to the children spending time with the father is as follows:
a. that between now and the end of the school year 2020, the current interim orders remain in place, b. certain agreed orders apply for the christmas/january school holiday period in 2020/2021, c. from the start of term 1 2021, the children spend time with the father for 5 nights each fortnight, d. that the children spend equal time between the parents in school holiday periods in a week-about arrangement commencing the term 1 2021 school holiday period.
10. the icl maintains her view that these care arrangements should be reviewed by way of a form of child inclusive and child informed review mechanism (such as mediation), such mechanism to include each of the child’s psychologists. reasons behind the icl’s position 11. the icl does not agree with the father’s proposal that the children’s time with him should automatically increase at certain intervals of time. the expert witness dr j advised that any progression of time with the father should be more focused on how the children are coping and their developmental needs as opposed to intervals of time. 12. it is submitted that the evidence of the expert witness suggested that at this point in time, it is not possible to determine when each child (especially y) will be ‘ready’ to spend increased time with the father. this supports the orders sought by the icl that time should only increase if guided by professionals as to the children’s readiness – as opposed to automatically increasing at certain intervals of time. it is noted that y especially has not coped particularly well since separation and it is submitted that his wellbeing and ‘readiness’ must be considered a priority. 13. it is also noted the evidence of the expert witness suggested that the children will cope with seven day blocks during school holiday periods. this has informed the icl’s position as to school holiday time. such a position also lessens the number of changeovers between parents and allows each parent to take the children away for holidays. 14. the icl submits that the court can take comfort from the evidence of the mother as to her ability to make appropriate concessions and child focused decisions for the children (even if they are against her own interests). one example of this was the mother’s oral evidence as to her ability to put her own plans aside during ‘her time’ with y to allow him to attend a football match with the father. 15. the icl submits that in the context of a ‘review’ of the arrangements in around early 2022, that if the psychologists advise that the children should spend more time with the father at that point, that she is likely to agree. 16. as to the timing of the ‘review’ of these arrangements, the icl submits that 12 months is an appropriate timeframe for such event to occur. there is no real ‘magic’ to this timing, however it is suggested that a one year period gives both parties and the children time to settle into the new arrangements.
outline of principle - parenting
120 in u v u, gummow and callinan jj stated the perhaps obvious point that becoming a parent has implications for a person’s freedom to do as he or she wishes, including very often where he or she chooses to live. being a parent necessarily imposes obligations and restrictions. their honours said, at [92]: [57]
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
121 in the same case, hayne j said, at [176]:
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.
122 in ams v aif, kirby j simply observed that there is, in parenting cases that involve relocation, a “large element of judgment, discretion and intuition.”[58]
123 in the same case, hayne j said (internal citations omitted):[59]
[204] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
124 in a number of respects, the concerns and observations that i have noted reflect the varied interplay of facts, circumstances, legal principle and discretion, which are the warp and woof of all trials. such matters were more elegantly put by the high court in the joint judgment of gleeson cj, gummow and kirby jj in fox v percy, in the court’s consideration of appellate intervention. their honours said (internal citations omitted):[60]
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.
125 it is also important to set out now the jurisprudential framework or scaffold in part vii of the act to which the court must have due regard.
126 in mazorski v albright, in the light of, and by reference to, relevant full court authority, brown j conveniently set out an overview of principle in relation to part vii of the act. respectfully and gratefully, i adopt brown j’s comments:[61]
[3] the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))
127 her honour also made important observations about the term “meaningful”, as used in part vii of the act, in the context of what is comprehended by a “meaningful relationship.” at [20] – [26], her honour outlined a range of considerations. i set them out below, and again respectfully (and gratefully) adopt brown j’s observations:[62]
[20] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.
[21] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.
[23] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):
[196] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.
[24] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
128 in addition to the above, i recall kay j’s important observation in godfrey v sanders, at [36], admittedly in a different context to what is the situation in the present proceeding, where his honour said (emphasis added):[63]
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
129 similar comments were made by dessau j in relation to a long-distance and meaningful relationship in m v s at [45] (emphasis added):[64]
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
130 the comments by kay j in godfrey & sanders, and by dessau j in m v s, were cited with approval by the full court in mccall v clark at [116].[65] similarly, the full court in sigley v evor approvingly canvassed the same decisions, at [131] – [136] and again at [182] – [183].[66]
131 subject to what is said below, the repeated reference in the cases mentioned to the quality of a parent-child relationship is not relevantly dependent upon the quantity of the time spent between the two. regrettably, the father here seemed so often to be focussed at least as much, if not more so, upon ensuring the amount of time with the children rather than taking proper account of the quality of his relationship with them.
132 further, i should note that in sigley v evor, at [136], the full court also commented as follows (emphasis added):[67]
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
consideration & disposition - parenting
133 without canvassing all aspects of the evidence because of the comments in the course of outlining the evidence, i need only note here the following.
134 first, where-ever there is any conflict in the account of events between the parties, and absent any supporting independent evidence to the contrary, i strongly prefer and accept the evidence of the mother to that of the father. moreover, as is clear from her evidence, dr j similarly supports the mother’s account and evidence more generally in relation to parenting matters.
135 secondly, without necessarily referring to each paragraph in s.60cc(3), i should be taken to follow them sequentially.
136 the views of the children are basically as recorded in the two reports of dr j and in the parents’ respective materials. given their ages, some weight should be given to them, but the court must also have regard to the various other matters that relevantly impact upon them, such as y’s “need for cuddles” from his mother, therefore questions about what weight can or should be given to them. likewise, x’s asd is a consideration in the attribution of weight, together with the evidence of dr j in this regard.
137 there is no question that both children have a close and loving relationship with both parents. x however seems to be quite acutely aware of the tensions and difficulties between her parents. as already noted, y in particular has a very close attachment, and likely “need” to some degree, to be very close to his mother. these matters are also relevant to sub-paragraph (g), among others.
138 in relation to the “considerations” set out in sub-paragraphs (c), (ca), (e), (f) and (i), recalling what has already been observed in the course of these reasons, and without repeating them, in my view: (i) the children have a close relationship with both parents, (ii) the mother has a much more intuitive, methodical and child-centred approach in relation to the children’s needs, while the father, though well-intentioned, often seems very focussed on the amount rather than the quality of his time with the children, to their detriment. plus, he has an unrelenting, almost zealous, need to have “input” to all decisions, which has led to some health care providers opting not to treat the children because of the father’s interventions. his zeal and often self-focus must somehow be significantly tempered, (iii) the mother works assiduously to involve the father in many matters regarding the children but he is never relevantly satisfied. this regularly leads to ongoing “discussions”, if it is appropriate to call them such, but which must inevitably slow much decision-making regarding the children’s best interests, and doubtless too continues to exhaust the mother. the father is relentless in the prosecution of his views, (iv) the parties communicate with the children without much difficulty in the father’s case, and well, in the case of the mother, (v) the care and “maintenance” of the children is not a major issue, on the evidence, save in relation to the issue of child support, as set out earlier in these reasons, (vi) there are really no practical difficulties regarding the children spending time with the parents, other than those already noted, and (vii) there are no substantial issues, other than those recorded throughout these reasons, regarding the general capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s needs, including their intellectual and emotional needs. for reasons already given, in my view, the evidence strongly supports the mother being the parent who most practically and intuitively provides the greater, more properly structured, psychologically and emotionally attuned care of the children, and significantly more so than does the father, (viii) in terms of “attitude” to the children and responsibilities regarding parenthood, the comments already made show clearly where the court’s views rest. this is not intended to be overly critical of the father, but for the reasons given, the mother carefully and properly focusses on the children, while the father, for various reasons, although thinking that he is child-focussed, either is unable or unwilling to break out of his various fixations and pre-occupations of his own concerns. the father’s past interventions with the children’s health care providers is a cause of very significant concern, as is his relentless desire or need to have “input” to decisions relating to such matters. the father’s parenting position has been made all the more difficult because of it constantly changing regarding his orders sought. that too does not augur well for the future, absent the father getting relevant assistance to aid him in such matters.  the children have a close relationship with both parents, (ii) the mother has a much more intuitive, methodical and child-centred approach in relation to the children’s needs, while the father, though well-intentioned, often seems very focussed on the amount rather than the quality of his time with the children, to their detriment. plus, he has an unrelenting, almost zealous, need to have “input” to all decisions, which has led to some health care providers opting not to treat the children because of the father’s interventions. his zeal and often self-focus must somehow be significantly tempered, (iii) the mother works assiduously to involve the father in many matters regarding the children but he is never relevantly satisfied. this regularly leads to ongoing “discussions”, if it is appropriate to call them such, but which must inevitably slow much decision-making regarding the children’s best interests, and doubtless too continues to exhaust the mother. the father is relentless in the prosecution of his views, (iv) the parties communicate with the children without much difficulty in the father’s case, and well, in the case of the mother, (v) the care and “maintenance” of the children is not a major issue, on the evidence, save in relation to the issue of child support, as set out earlier in these reasons, (vi) there are really no practical difficulties regarding the children spending time with the parents, other than those already noted, and (vii) there are no substantial issues, other than those recorded throughout these reasons, regarding the general capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s needs, including their intellectual and emotional needs. for reasons already given, in my view, the evidence strongly supports the mother being the parent who most practically and intuitively provides the greater, more properly structured, psychologically and emotionally attuned care of the children, and significantly more so than does the father, (viii) in terms of “attitude” to the children and responsibilities regarding parenthood, the comments already made show clearly where the court’s views rest. this is not intended to be overly critical of the father, but for the reasons given, the mother carefully and properly focusses on the children, while the father, for various reasons, although thinking that he is child-focussed, either is unable or unwilling to break out of his various fixations and pre-occupations of his own concerns. the father’s past interventions with the children’s health care providers is a cause of very significant concern, as is his relentless desire or need to have “input” to decisions relating to such matters. the father’s parenting position has been made all the more difficult because of it constantly changing regarding his orders sought. that too does not augur well for the future, absent the father getting relevant assistance to aid him in such matters.
139 there is little or no question about the general capacity of the parents, for the further purposes of sub-paragraph (f) and other parts of s.60cc(3), to provide for the material needs of the children.
140 although canvassed a number of times already, it remains important to consider the somewhat infamous august 2017 incident between the parties at separation. in my view, it warrants separate attention and can be properly looked at under s.60cc(3)(m).[68]
141 the august 2017 incident at separation was, and remains, the only matter of family violence. the father’s pre-occupation with it, and at various times since, his need to find vindication against the mother, remains a cause of significant disquiet and concern for the court. the event was distressing for both parties. the mother has moved on, to the degree that she has been able to do so, in the light of the father’s unrelenting campaign to have some accounting for it. the court cannot, on the evidence before it, make any relevant findings about instigator or principal perpetrator. in my view, it being now so relatively long ago, its weight or relevance is, at best, negligible. everyone, but most especially the father, needs to let it go and move on, so that they can focus upon the best interests of the children. it will very likely also assist him, indeed everyone, to do so.
142 in the course of his cross examination, the father was asked questions about the incident in the context, and in the light, of him writing to certain members of his church at the time. the relevant correspondence was drawn to his attention from the tender bundle (pp.71 – 72).[69] summarily, as set out in this correspondence, the father sought, among other things, that the mother be formally admonished and condemned by the church for her actions as described by the father. fortunately, the church did not proceed as the father wished. regrettably, others on his behalf pursued the mother. in my view, such action was completely improper.
143 in the course of the hearing, i questioned the father about other christian teachings such as forgiveness as perhaps being a more positive course to pursue. of course, this is not a court of morals or ethics. that said, i simply need to record that, in my view, the father’s actions to press his (and the mother’s) local church to admonish her was a lamentable and completely inappropriate course. among other things, it clearly showed that the father, at the time, and in many respects repeated since, had (and may still have) little or no insight into the impact upon the mother, and in turn on the children, of his fixation upon this very unfortunate event in august 2017. hopefully it will suffice to recall from the beatitudes the following (mt 5,7): blessed are the merciful, they shall have mercy shown them, and the instruction to forgive infinitely (mt 18,21 – 35).
144 in addition to these reasons, i accept and adopt the submissions by the mother, and also by the icl. those submissions support, as these reasons also confirm, that the best interests of the children are served by the mother having sole parental responsibility regarding the health care for the children. otherwise, parental responsibility is to be shared equally between the parents.
145 in the light of all the evidence and the findings and comments made by the court along the way, and in the light of the statutory considerations, the orders as sought by the mother are, in my firm view, in the best interests of the children. the orders so sought and to be made are least likely to result in further litigation.
146 to the degree that it is relevant to record, the orders also relevantly satisfy the requirements of s.65daa.
outline of principle - property
147 in chapman v chapman, the full court said, firstly at [19] - [21] (strickland and murphy jj, bryant cj agreeing) (emphasis added):[70]
[19] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
148 regarding matters of “weight”, also in chapman, the full court said, at [64]:
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).
149 in vass v vass, the full court said, at [138] – [139]:[71]
[138] there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) 49 fam lr 387 – or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108 - is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered.
150 the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.[72]
151 in ajo & gro, at [46], subject to the matters outlined from stanford and bevan above from chapman, the regular “four-step” process will be undertaken here. that process begins with (i) the identification and value of the net property of the parties, (ii) assessment of the contributions of the parties under s.79(4), (iii) consideration of the factors under s.75(2), and finally (iv) consideration and determination of what orders are just and equitable between the parties in all of the circumstances, having regard to all the evidence and in the light of the principles outlined.
152 “contributions” were a vexed issue in this matter, albeit in a limited number of respects. it is important therefore to note the following from fields v smith, where the full court said (bryant cj and ainslie-wallace j, may j agreeing), at [75] and [168] (emphasis added):[73]
[75] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed. [168] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.
153 in gollings v scott the full court said, at [65] and [68] (emphasis added):[74]
[65] in ajo & gro and ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104, (2005) 33 fam lr 134 the full court identified three clear categories of cases where it was appropriate to notionally add back to the pool assets which were said by the full court to “no longer exist”. those three categories were: monies spent on legal fees, (b) monies disbursed by way of premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and,(c) monies lost by one party either during or after the marriage as a result of a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets or as a result of reckless negligent or wanton behaviours which had the effect of reducing or minimising the value of assets.
... [68] as a general rule once the parties have separated, subject to obligations of maintenance and support, and subject to the type of considerations described in kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092 relating to waste, each party is entitled to get on with his or her life independent of the other. the husband would be free to go about spending the money he earned post-separation in the furtherance of his relationship with ms y if he chose to do so providing that at the same time he properly met his obligations towards his wife and children for their due support. it would not normally be appropriate some years after separation to require each of the parties to account for any monies they had spent post-separation so as to determine whether or not that expenditure was reasonably necessary for their own self-support, and to the extent that it was not, to determine whether it would be proper to add it back into the pool of assets available for division between the parties...
154 more recently, in vass v vass, the full court said, at [138] – [139] (emphasis added):[75]
[138] there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) 49 fam lr 387 – or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108 - is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered. [139] the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.
155 finally, in accordance with multiple other, earlier authorities, also in chapman, at [39], the full court said (emphasis added):
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.
consideration & disposition – property
156 in the light of the evidence canvassed earlier in these reasons, i need only note the following somewhat summarily.
157 the parties are aged respectively 46 (husband) and 45 (wife) years. in general terms, there are no health issues to speak of, although there was regular reference to the father indicating that he was regularly afflicted with fatigue and some other conditions during the relationship, and certain levels of anxiety and the like following the separation. this, he said, left him unable to work full time for a significant period of time, post separation. there was evidence before the court indicating that he could have returned to work full-time had he so wished during his period of working lesser hours. no medical evidence for any of these matters was provided.
158 there are, of course, health issues in relation to the children (aged 13 and 11), for which the mother bears the bulk of the care and responsibility. she did not, and could not, reduce her labours across the board, post separation because she was the primary carer of the children. the parties’ relationship was for approximately 15 years.
159 before finalising the size and composition of the property pool, the following matters need to be considered. both parties provided aide-memoires that set out the respective property pool claims. relatively speaking, there are only a few matters of substance that separates them. those issues are set out below.
160 issue 1: the wife’s h super fund superannuation: pursuant to a valuation he obtained, the husband ascribed a family law value of $363,232 to the wife’s very modest h super fund pension (which arose from a voluntary redundancy she took in 2015), it is in the payment phase. she receives each week the sum of $331 from this pension. in accordance with authority discussed presently, and because the husband does not seek any splitting of the wife’s pension, it is inapposite that it be ascribed any value, and certainly not a capitalised value. it is proper for the court to treat it only as a financial resource in the wife’s hands.
161 further, the wife’s pension is understandably, and realistically, treated as income for the purposes of the assessment of commonwealth benefits, and for taxation and child support purposes.
162 the two full court decisions in semperton and in welch & abney confirm that, whilst a trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case, the discretion is guided by statements of principle.[76] this includes, for example, the nature, form and characteristics of the subject interest which must be considered, including whether or not a splitting order of the interest is sought or made.
163 in the light of the statements of principles in the two full court decisions referred to, the husband’s position regarding the capitalisation of the wife’s h super fund pension, and its inclusion in the property pool, is unsupportable.
164 issue 2: add backs: the second area of contention for the purposes of confirming the details of the asset pool concerns the regularly contested area of “add backs.”[77] factually, the principal area here concerns the father’s times of “under employment” or non-employment, for a period of time, from july 2017 until april 2018 (9 months), during which time he was also not paying child support. he was paying half of the children’s school fees. during this period the father withdrew $53,045 from joint funds for his personal use.
165 it would usually be the case that funds used for living expenses are not treated as warranting to be added back to the property pool. here, however, the wife argues that it was the husband’s decision either not to work, or not to work full-time. as already observed, the husband contended that he suffered from various maladies that prevented him from working. he provided no medical evidence in this regard. and there was evidence before the court of him indicating to others that he could have worked full-time if he so wished. nor did the husband provide any evidence as what the appropriated funds were used for.
166 in my view, it is best in these circumstances to deal with this “claim” or aspect of dispute under s.75(2) (o) of the act. the evidence and the wife’s submission, and in the light of the principle referred to, are more than sufficient for this sum to be added back to the pool. although considered elsewhere, during this period also, the husband was living rent-free in the former marital residence while the wife was renting a property for herself and the children. moreover, as a matter of justice and equity, the husband’s claims have no substance in this regard.
167 a related matter of little consequence is that the husband sought to have added back to the pool the sum of $1,920 paid to the wife from ndis funds. it seemed that the husband may have, in more recent times, backed away somewhat from seeking this pittance of a sum to be added back, particularly in circumstances where the funds in question (a) benefit the children directly, and (b) the wife’s bank statements are before the court and are included in the asset pool in any event. to include it would, among other things, raise the prospect or risk of some double-dipping. formally, i refuse to add back that sum into the pool in the unlikely event that such a course was still pressed.
168 the husband also sought to include into the pool of assets the value of a piano. it is not, and cannot be, disputed that the piano belonged to the wife prior to the marriage. nor can it be disputed that there is no valuation of it before the court. there being no valuation, no value of such an “asset” can or should be ascribed to it, perhaps least of all by the person who has never owned it. the piano, to which the husband suggested that a value of $3,000 should be ascribed, does not fit into any of the proper or usual categories for add backs. it will not be so included in the pool.
169 the other values in relation to superannuation and other matters are essentially agreed. for the reasons given, the asset pool will be taken as set out in the wife’s aide-memoire, as follows:
170 i should only add that after the hearing and earlier this year, the wife brought an application to re-open the proceeding to seek to adduce further and more recent evidence regarding the value of the former marital residence. ultimately, that issue was resolved by consent, albeit that it took (so it seems) a not insignificant period of time and some extra effort to resolve this aspect without the need for court determination. the more recently agreed value of that property will be taken as set out in the aide-memoire.
171 the wife sought her costs of that application and filed submissions in this regard. the husband likewise filed written submissions. although the costs sought by the wife were comparatively modest, i propose reserving her costs in relation to that application, pending any other application regarding costs more broadly.
contributions
172 in general terms, i accept the characterisation of contributions set out in the wife’s submissions in relation to the contributions during the marriage as being basically equal. there is little in the husband’s submissions that relevantly challenges this account, other than some fine-tuned parsing of a few matters that really make little difference to contributions during the relationship.
173 the parties had few assets at the commencement of the relationship, and during it, both parties worked and earned income and both were involved in the care of the children. for a significant part of the relationship, the husband was (in somewhat colloquial terms) the predominant “bread-winner” and the wife the person primarily responsible for homemaking. that said, the wife undertook employment outside the home when she could.
174 during the relationship the husband’s parents gifted the parties a significant sum, by way of a series of individual gifts of money. the total sum was $280,000. the issue here, at trial and to be determined is whether this was a gift solely to the husband or to the couple. perhaps unsurprisingly, the husband asserts the former, while the wife contends for the latter.
175 it is uncontested that the funds were used by the parties to pay down joint mortgages and or into joint account(s). according to authority, the onus is upon the party to provide evidence in support of that party’s position. here, the husband could have, but did not, call his mother in relation to her intention (and that of her deceased husband) regarding the payment of these sums of money.
176 in the recent full court decision in mabb, the plurality of ainslie-wallace and aldridge jj said, at [37] – [38]:[78]
[37] each party bore an evidentiary onus to establish the facts to support their respective contentions. while it is reasonable to assume, as the full court did in kessey, that the presumed intention of the donor is to advantage the child in the marriage, it is no more than an evidentiary device. clearly as fogarty j said in gosper, that presumption can be rebutted by evidence of the actual intention that accompanied the gift and in this case, the transfer of the land to the parties jointly is a “strong indicator” of intention. [38] true it is that in this case, there was no direct evidence from the husband’s mother about what she (and her husband) intended when they transferred the land to the parties, her honour’s conclusion was an inference drawn from the facts and circumstances of the evidence before her honour which included the fact that the transfer of the property was to both of the parties. there is no error in such an approach and the wife was not obliged to call evidence from the husband’s parents.
177 the third member of the full court in mabb, kent j, commented to similar effect, at [110] – [120].
178 in all of the circumstances, and in particular the failure of the husband to call his mother regarding the intention of the donors of the monetary gifts, plus the fact that the funds were used to benefit both parties with the paying down of joint debt and the family more generally, in my view clearly points or leads to the inference that the gifts were to both parties. should it need to be noted, the failure to call a relevant witness – here the paternal grandmother – will entitle the court to view that failure as significant. more formally put, based upon the principles outlined in the long-standing decision in jones v dunkel, an unexplained failure to call a material witness may (not must), in appropriate circumstances, lead to an inference that the uncalled evidence would not have assisted that party’s case.[79] in my view, given how contested the issue of the “monetary gifts” was, and that the intention of the father’s parents was crucial, his unexplained failure to call his mother was a significant omission.[80] the relevant inference must, in my view, be drawn.
179 in my view, in the light of the evidence canvassed above, it cannot be disputed that since separation, the wife has had the greater proportion of the care of the children, thus for some 3½ years or so (as at the date of the trial in october 2020). the period of primary care is even greater now of course. none of this is said critically of the husband, it is a statement of fact.
180 it is also a statement of fact that between august 2017 and august 2019 the husband paid no child support.
181 next, i accept the following propositions: (a) between august 2017 and 17th january 2018, the wife and children resided at the former marital residence. during this period the husband lived with his mother and paid her no rent, (b) following the husband’s insistence, the wife and children left the former marital residence and rented elsewhere, while the husband lived at that residence. thus, the husband lived rent- and mortgage-free at the former marital residence while the wife and children lived in rental accommodation. the wife said that she has paid in excess of $70,000 in rent as at the time of the final hearing. obviously, when the children lived with the husband it was at the former marital residence. i accept that the wife’s rental was without any financial assistance from the husband. these factors are relevant to the assessment of contributions.
182 in my view, in the light of all the evidence, there should be a relatively modest contribution-based assessment in the wife’s favour of 4.5%
section 75(2) factors
183 there is a significant difference in the income of the parties. although the husband says that he does not work full-time because of his care of the children, and thereby earns approximately $120,000 per year, in my view, the court can and should consider the husband as being capable of working full-time, especially where there is no medical or other independent evidence to support his contention: alas, another significant and unexplained omission. his full-time earning capacity, on the limited evidence, is approximately $180,000 + per annum. the wife’s annual income is approximately $70,000.
184 even taking into account the wife’s modest h super fund pension of $17,000 per annum, her income is significantly less than that of the husband.
185 as already noted a number of times, the wife has, and will continue to have, the primary care of the children.
186 in my view, on the very limited issues under this section of the act, there should be a modest assessment in the wife’s favour of 7%.
187 regarding superannuation, given the income disparity between the parties, but also having regard to their relatively young years, meaning that they each have a significant period of time available in their income-earning lives to accumulate reasonable amounts of superannuation, in my view, there should be a further adjustment to the wife in this regard of 6%.
disposition & conclusion
188 at the so-called “fourth step” in property proceedings, the court is required to assess whether the overall result is relevantly “just and equitable” for the purposes of s.79(2) of the act.[81]
189 accepting, as there must be, that there is invariably a certain, general “range” within which property orders might reasonably be made, in the light of the evidence and findings made throughout these reasons, including the findings and assessments made regarding contributions, and the s.75(2) factors, in my view a just and equitable division of the parties’ property is 60% in the wife’s favour, and 40% to the husband. the disposition and division of the parties’ property, reflecting that percentage division, should be as sought by the wife as noted in the aide-memoire provided for the purposes of the final hearing. in my view, those orders, and the percentage division i have determined, are just and equitable in all of the circumstances.
190 i noted earlier in these reasons the court’s decision to reserve the wife’s costs regarding the application to re-open to adduce new and updating evidence regarding the value of the b street, suburb e property. absent any other application regarding costs more generally within 14 days, i will deal with that discrete application for costs based on the submissions already filed.
associate: dated: 3 november 2021 w
[1] transcript (29th october 2020) p.55. hereafter, “t” followed by relevant page number. unfortunately, the transcript for the second day of the trial did not following sequentially the page numbering from day one, but simply recommenced at p.1. in what follows, it will be specified from which day/date the reference is taken or given. the easiest way of distinguishing the references will be “ta” for the first day of the hearing, and “tb” for the second, followed by the relevant page number.[2] t 76 – 77.[3] hsiao v fazarri [2020] hca 35; (2020) 94 aljr 961; (2020) 383 alr 446; (2020) 61 fam lr 465.[4] see tb 33.[5] ta 20 – 21. see also ta 26 and 27, where the father confirmed that his distress, and other issues regarding fatigue, lack of sleep and the like, stemmed, in large measure, from the breakdown of the marriage. other than the two reports from dr j as the family consultant, no evidence in relation to his medical and psychological state, was provided by the father.[6] ta 22 – 23.[7] ta 23 – 24.[8] ta 26.[9] ta 26 – 29.[10] ta 30.[11] ta 30 – 31.[12] see the somewhat pernickety discussion at ta 30 – 34.[13] ta 34.[14] ta 34 – 35.[15] ta 36 – 37.[16] ta 38.[17] ta 41. an earlier, similarly unnecessary discussion regarding the division of certain frequent flyer points can be found at ta 38 – 39.[18] ta 43 – 44.[19] ta 45 – 47.[20] see ta 48 – 50.[21] ta 50 – 51.[22] ta 55 – 59.[23] ta 59.[24] ta 60. similar comments and confirmations are found at ta 62, 66, and 74 – 77. these latter references contain content from the father’s emails to the mother regarding what he told dr p “in light of how the separation was achieved.” again, the father’s tunnel-vision and fixation of certain things, notably the events at separation, and how, in his view, they were relevant to the provision of specialist health care for the children, was alarming. it bordered on the bizarre.[25] ta 65.[26] ta 69 – 71.[27] ta 79 – 80.[28] t 81. see further ta 82 – 84. other members of the church unfortunately became involved in the matter, who accused the mother, in writing, of improper conduct (other words were used). in my view, this should never have occurred, but i do not propose to canvass these matters further. [29] ta 85.[30] see ta 85. see further the longer discussion at ta 85 – 88.[31] ta 96.[32] ta 96.[33] ta 98 – 99.[34] ta 102.[35] tb 2.[36] tb 3.[37] tb 35 & 36.[38] tb 36.[39] t 37.[40] tb 48.[41] tb 50 – 51.[42] tb 52.[43] tb 52 – 53.[44] tb 56 – 57.[45] tb 57 – 58.[46] tb 58 – 59.[47] tb 61 – 62.[48] dr j had earlier indicated (par.9) that both parents had confirmed that their mental and physical health had improved, and that there were no concerns that either parent suffered from a mental illness that impaired their parenting capacity.[49] tb 16.[50] tb 19.[51] tb 20.[52] tb 20 – 21.[53] see tb 22 and 23 respectively.[54] tb 24.[55] “new 2021 rules”: rule 2.14(1)(a). “old 2001 rules: rule 2.10(1)(g) “have a space of not less than 8mm between the liens of printing.”[56] notwithstanding the sale of the vehicle, it has nonetheless been included in the table of assets and liabilities, simply for the sake of convenience, noting also that it is in fact a de minimis issue. [57] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[58] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[59] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[60] fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[61] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[62] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[63] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[64] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[65] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[66] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[67] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[68] formally, the incident can also be properly considered under s.60cc(3)(j).[69] see ta 81 – 82. see also the father’ detailed letter, dated 28th november 2017 (exhibit c), to the m church council, in which he sought, among other things, to have the mother formally rebuked for her “ungodly behaviour.” in that correspondence, he alleged that the mother had injured herself in relation to the incident in august 2017.[70] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[71] vass v vass [2015] famcafc 51; (2016) 53 fam lr 373.[72] see the detailed discussion in bevan v bevan [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) 279 flr 1; (2013) 49 fam lr 387 at [57] – [89]. [73] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[74] gollings v scott [2007] famca 397; (2008) 37 fam lr 428; ajo & gro v ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 33 fam lr 134.[75] vass v vass [2015] famcafc 51; (2016) 53 fam lr 373.[76] see sempterton v semperton [2012] famcafc 132; (2013) 47 fam lr 626 at [87] – [91] (may j); at [159] – [162] & [175] (thackray & ryan jj); welch & abney [2016] famcafc 271; (2016) flc 93-756 at [59] and [61].[77] this area of jurisprudence is well-trodden yet remains regularly fertile in property disputes. it is sufficient simply to note the statement of principle in ajo & gro v ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 33 fam lr 134 at [30] – [31].[78] mabb & mabb (2020) flc 93-947.[79] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 at 308, 312 and 320-321.[80] the father’s evidence, such as it was, was to the effect that he did not know that he could or should. given the experience of his lawyers, this cannot and is not a suitable or otherwise apposite “explanation.”[81] see ajo & gro 33 fam lr at [46], and bevan 279 flr at [59] – [85]..