last updated: 7 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cobb & papworth [2023] fedcfamc2f 715
orders
the court orders by consent that:
live with order
and the court further orders that:
parental responsibility for the child
parents to engage with support services
spend time arrangements for the child with the father 2023 and 2024  until such time as the father provides to the mother’s solicitor a certified copy of the certificate demonstrating that he has completed twenty sessions of the men’s behaviour change program with e counsellors in town c, or an equivalent program: (i) for or up to two (2) hours each fortnight supervised by city f family support services, or such other supervision service that the parents agree upon, (ii) the father is solely responsible for the costs associated with the supervised time, (iii) both parents will comply with the rules and reasonable directions of the supervision service, (iv) if the mother cancels a scheduled visit for the child with the father then the child will have a make-up visit within the next week if possible, or as otherwise agreed. (b) upon the father providing to the mother’s solicitor a certified copy of the certificate which demonstrates that he has completed the men’s behaviour change program (“the certificate”): (i) commencing on the weekend following provision of the certificate, and for three calendar months thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, with the first three occasions of time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (ii) following the expiration of three calendar months, and until the commencement of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, with the first three occasions of overnight time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (iii) commencing on the first weekend of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, and continuing throughout the school terms in 2024, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday, (iv) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.   for or up to two (2) hours each fortnight supervised by city f family support services, or such other supervision service that the parents agree upon, (ii) the father is solely responsible for the costs associated with the supervised time, (iii) both parents will comply with the rules and reasonable directions of the supervision service, (iv) if the mother cancels a scheduled visit for the child with the father then the child will have a make-up visit within the next week if possible, or as otherwise agreed.  ) the father is solely responsible for the costs associated with the supervised time, (iii) both parents will comply with the rules and reasonable directions of the supervision service, (iv) if the mother cancels a scheduled visit for the child with the father then the child will have a make-up visit within the next week if possible, or as otherwise agreed.  i) both parents will comply with the rules and reasonable directions of the supervision service, (iv) if the mother cancels a scheduled visit for the child with the father then the child will have a make-up visit within the next week if possible, or as otherwise agreed.  ) if the mother cancels a scheduled visit for the child with the father then the child will have a make-up visit within the next week if possible, or as otherwise agreed.   upon the father providing to the mother’s solicitor a certified copy of the certificate which demonstrates that he has completed the men’s behaviour change program (“the certificate”): (i) commencing on the weekend following provision of the certificate, and for three calendar months thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, with the first three occasions of time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (ii) following the expiration of three calendar months, and until the commencement of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, with the first three occasions of overnight time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (iii) commencing on the first weekend of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, and continuing throughout the school terms in 2024, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday, (iv) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.   commencing on the weekend following provision of the certificate, and for three calendar months thereafter, each alternate saturday from 10.00am until 4.00pm, with the first three occasions of time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (ii) following the expiration of three calendar months, and until the commencement of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, with the first three occasions of overnight time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (iii) commencing on the first weekend of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, and continuing throughout the school terms in 2024, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday, (iv) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.  ) following the expiration of three calendar months, and until the commencement of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday, with the first three occasions of overnight time to be spent in the presence of the paternal grandmother, (iii) commencing on the first weekend of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, and continuing throughout the school terms in 2024, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday, (iv) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.  i) commencing on the first weekend of new south wales public school term 1 in 2024, and continuing throughout the school terms in 2024, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday, (iv) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.  ) during each new south wales public school term school holiday period in 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father, (v) for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.   for one block period of up to three nights, and unless otherwise agreed in writing, during the first week of the school holiday period from 3.00pm on friday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (vi) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.  ) during the new south wales public schools christmas school holiday period at the end of 2024 the provisions of order 8 (b) (iii) are suspended, and the child will spend time with the father for three block periods of up to four nights each, and if not otherwise agreed in writing, during the 2nd, 4th and 6th weeks of the christmas school holiday period from 3.00pm the friday until 4.00pm the following tuesday.
spend time arrangements for the child with the father commencing in 2025 and thereafter  during new south wales public school terms, commencing on the first weekend of each school term, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on friday until commencement of school or 9.00am on monday, (b) for one half of each of the new south wales public school term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday period: (i) for the first week in odd years, commencing from 3.00pm on the last day of school and continuing until 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period, and (ii) for the second week in even years, commencing from 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period and continuing until the commencement of school or 9.00am on the first day back at school. (c) during the new south wales public school christmas holiday period: (i) when the school holiday period commences in an even year, from 3.00pm on the 2nd monday of the school holiday period until 4.00pm on the 4th monday, and from 3.00pm on the 5th monday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (ii) when the school holiday period commences in an odd year, from 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm two weeks later, and from 3.00pm on 22 january until 4.00pm on 29 january.   for one half of each of the new south wales public school term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday period: (i) for the first week in odd years, commencing from 3.00pm on the last day of school and continuing until 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period, and (ii) for the second week in even years, commencing from 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period and continuing until the commencement of school or 9.00am on the first day back at school. (c) during the new south wales public school christmas holiday period: (i) when the school holiday period commences in an even year, from 3.00pm on the 2nd monday of the school holiday period until 4.00pm on the 4th monday, and from 3.00pm on the 5th monday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (ii) when the school holiday period commences in an odd year, from 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm two weeks later, and from 3.00pm on 22 january until 4.00pm on 29 january.   for the first week in odd years, commencing from 3.00pm on the last day of school and continuing until 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period, and (ii) for the second week in even years, commencing from 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period and continuing until the commencement of school or 9.00am on the first day back at school.  ) for the second week in even years, commencing from 4.00pm on the sunday that is the midpoint of the school holiday period and continuing until the commencement of school or 9.00am on the first day back at school.   during the new south wales public school christmas holiday period: (i) when the school holiday period commences in an even year, from 3.00pm on the 2nd monday of the school holiday period until 4.00pm on the 4th monday, and from 3.00pm on the 5th monday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (ii) when the school holiday period commences in an odd year, from 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm two weeks later, and from 3.00pm on 22 january until 4.00pm on 29 january.   when the school holiday period commences in an even year, from 3.00pm on the 2nd monday of the school holiday period until 4.00pm on the 4th monday, and from 3.00pm on the 5th monday until 4.00pm the following monday, and (ii) when the school holiday period commences in an odd year, from 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm two weeks later, and from 3.00pm on 22 january until 4.00pm on 29 january.  ) when the school holiday period commences in an odd year, from 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm two weeks later, and from 3.00pm on 22 january until 4.00pm on 29 january.
special occasions for the child with the father  on father’s day each year, and if on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with him, then from 10.00am until commencement of school or 9.00am the following monday, (b) at christmas time: (i) in even years, from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in odd years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in even years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in odd years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.   at christmas time: (i) in even years, from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in odd years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in even years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in odd years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.   in even years, from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in odd years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in even years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in odd years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.  ) in odd years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in even years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in odd years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.  i) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in even years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in odd years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.
special occasions for the child with the mother  for the whole of the mother’s day weekend each year, (b) at christmas time: (i) in odd years, from 4:00 pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in even years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in odd years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in even years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.   at christmas time: (i) in odd years, from 4:00 pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in even years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in odd years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in even years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.   in odd years, from 4:00 pm on christmas eve until 4.00pm on christmas day, and (ii) in even years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in odd years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in even years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.  ) in even years, from 4.00pm on christmas day until 4.00 pm on boxing day. (iii) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in odd years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in even years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.  i) during the easter long weekend, save and except for when easter falls during the school holidays, in which event the school holiday arrangements will apply: in odd years from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on easter thursday until 4.00pm on easter saturday, and in even years from 4.00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school or 9.00am the following tuesday.
changeover arrangements  the father will be accompanied to changeover by another adult, who is known to the child, (b) the father will notify the mother by text message of the name of the adult who will accompany him to changeover, and (c) the father will remain in the car while the mother delivers the child to the nominated adult for changeover of the child to the father.   the father will notify the mother by text message of the name of the adult who will accompany him to changeover, and (c) the father will remain in the car while the mother delivers the child to the nominated adult for changeover of the child to the father.   the father will remain in the car while the mother delivers the child to the nominated adult for changeover of the child to the father.
child’s communication with the father  on christmas day between 9.00 am and 9.30 am, (b) on the child’s birthday between 5.00 pm and 5.30 pm, and (c) to facilitate such communication the father will place a call to the mother’s mobile telephone number, and the mother will ensure that her telephone is switched on, charged and has sufficient credit for the child to speak with and see the father, and will use her best endeavours to encourage the child to speak with the father.   on the child’s birthday between 5.00 pm and 5.30 pm, and (c) to facilitate such communication the father will place a call to the mother’s mobile telephone number, and the mother will ensure that her telephone is switched on, charged and has sufficient credit for the child to speak with and see the father, and will use her best endeavours to encourage the child to speak with the father.   to facilitate such communication the father will place a call to the mother’s mobile telephone number, and the mother will ensure that her telephone is switched on, charged and has sufficient credit for the child to speak with and see the father, and will use her best endeavours to encourage the child to speak with the father.
father has liberty to attend events when child is spending time with him
paediatrician referral for the child
parents to keep each other informed of their contact details
restraints affecting the father  ingesting any medication when the child is in his care, or during the period of 12 hours prior to the child coming into his care, unless such medication is prescribed for him by a registered medical practitioner, and provided that the medication is used by the father strictly in accordance with the prescription of the registered medical practitioner, (b) ingesting any illicit substance when the child is in his care, or during the period of 12 hours prior to the child coming into his care, (c) discussing with the child the spend time arrangements with her outside of the court ordered arrangements, (d) criticising any aspect of the child’s development, or the child’s dress or physical appearance, in the presence of the child or within her hearing, (e) criticising any aspect of the mother’s care of the child, in front of the child or within her hearing, (f) attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.   ingesting any illicit substance when the child is in his care, or during the period of 12 hours prior to the child coming into his care, (c) discussing with the child the spend time arrangements with her outside of the court ordered arrangements, (d) criticising any aspect of the child’s development, or the child’s dress or physical appearance, in the presence of the child or within her hearing, (e) criticising any aspect of the mother’s care of the child, in front of the child or within her hearing, (f) attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.   discussing with the child the spend time arrangements with her outside of the court ordered arrangements, (d) criticising any aspect of the child’s development, or the child’s dress or physical appearance, in the presence of the child or within her hearing, (e) criticising any aspect of the mother’s care of the child, in front of the child or within her hearing, (f) attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.   criticising any aspect of the child’s development, or the child’s dress or physical appearance, in the presence of the child or within her hearing, (e) criticising any aspect of the mother’s care of the child, in front of the child or within her hearing, (f) attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.   criticising any aspect of the mother’s care of the child, in front of the child or within her hearing, (f) attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.   attending the child’s day-care centre, pre-school or school, school events, social events, extracurricular activities, including sporting events, when the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, unless with the mother’s written consent, or unless at the express request of the relevant body.
restraints affecting both parents  making any rude, unkind or negative comment about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family, in the presence or within hearing of the child, (b) permitting the child to remain in the presence or within the hearing of anyone else who is speaking in a rude or negative way about the other parent, (c) subjecting or exposing the child to family violence, (d) permitting the child to remain in the presence of any person who is perpetrating family violence.   permitting the child to remain in the presence or within the hearing of anyone else who is speaking in a rude or negative way about the other parent, (c) subjecting or exposing the child to family violence, (d) permitting the child to remain in the presence of any person who is perpetrating family violence.   subjecting or exposing the child to family violence, (d) permitting the child to remain in the presence of any person who is perpetrating family violence.   permitting the child to remain in the presence of any person who is perpetrating family violence.
authorisation to liaise and receive information about the child
communication between the parents
parents to immediately inform each other of any serious illness, injury or emergency affecting the child
discharge of the appointment of the independent children’s lawyer
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge carty
introduction
background  w born in 2007, 15 years old at hearing, (b) y, born in 2015, 7 years old at hearing, (c) the subject child, x born in 2019, 3 years old at hearing, and (d) z born in 2021, 17 months old at hearing.   y, born in 2015, 7 years old at hearing, (c) the subject child, x born in 2019, 3 years old at hearing, and (d) z born in 2021, 17 months old at hearing.   the subject child, x born in 2019, 3 years old at hearing, and (d) z born in 2021, 17 months old at hearing.   z born in 2021, 17 months old at hearing.   appears drug affected, (b) is abusive, violent or aggressive towards any person present, or (c) attempts to abscond with the child, then the paternal grandmother must cease the time and immediately advise the mother, and if the father has absconded with the child, then inform the police. the paternal grandmother also undertook to notify the mother if she was unable to supervise time on any occasion.[16]   is abusive, violent or aggressive towards any person present, or (c) attempts to abscond with the child, then the paternal grandmother must cease the time and immediately advise the mother, and if the father has absconded with the child, then inform the police. the paternal grandmother also undertook to notify the mother if she was unable to supervise time on any occasion.[16]   attempts to abscond with the child, then the paternal grandmother must cease the time and immediately advise the mother, and if the father has absconded with the child, then inform the police. the paternal grandmother also undertook to notify the mother if she was unable to supervise time on any occasion.[16]
the legal principles
“in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.”
dcouments relied upon  outline of case document (final hearing) filed 16 november 2022, (b) amended initiating application filed 14 october 2022, (c) her affidavit filed 14 october 2022, and (d) a number of exhibits.   amended initiating application filed 14 october 2022, (c) her affidavit filed 14 october 2022, and (d) a number of exhibits.   her affidavit filed 14 october 2022, and (d) a number of exhibits.   a number of exhibits.   outline of case document (final hearing) filed 18 november 2022, (b) his affidavit filed 14 october 2022, (c) affidavit of ms k filed 8 november 2022, (d) family report of ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (e) a number of exhibits.   his affidavit filed 14 october 2022, (c) affidavit of ms k filed 8 november 2022, (d) family report of ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (e) a number of exhibits.   affidavit of ms k filed 8 november 2022, (d) family report of ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (e) a number of exhibits.   family report of ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (e) a number of exhibits.   a number of exhibits.   case outline (final hearing) filed 16 november 2022, (b) family report prepared by ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (c) a number of exhibits.   family report prepared by ms s dated 1 february 2022, and (c) a number of exhibits.   a number of exhibits.
the proposals of the parties
the mother’s proposal   that the child communicate with the father via telephone (audio only) on the following days and times with the mother to initiate and facilitate the call to the father’s mobile telephone: (i) at 9:00am on father’s day, (ii) at 9:00am on christmas day, (iii) at 5:00pm on the child’s birthday, and (iv) for the purposes of this order the father shall advise the mother’s solicitor within 7 days of the date of this order of the mobile telephone number to be called for this communication.   at 9:00am on father’s day, (ii) at 9:00am on christmas day, (iii) at 5:00pm on the child’s birthday, and (iv) for the purposes of this order the father shall advise the mother’s solicitor within 7 days of the date of this order of the mobile telephone number to be called for this communication.  ) at 9:00am on christmas day, (iii) at 5:00pm on the child’s birthday, and (iv) for the purposes of this order the father shall advise the mother’s solicitor within 7 days of the date of this order of the mobile telephone number to be called for this communication.  i) at 5:00pm on the child’s birthday, and (iv) for the purposes of this order the father shall advise the mother’s solicitor within 7 days of the date of this order of the mobile telephone number to be called for this communication.  ) for the purposes of this order the father shall advise the mother’s solicitor within 7 days of the date of this order of the mobile telephone number to be called for this communication.   attempting to contact the child or mother by any means, including through a third party except if the contact with the child is in accordance with the orders, (b) approaching or coming within 100 metres of any place where the child or mother might reside from time to time, (c) approaching or coming within 100 metres of any place where the child might attend day care, preschool or school from time to time, (d) knowingly approaching or coming within 100 metres of the child or the mother at another location, and (e) removing the child from any day care, preschool or school, or from the care of the mother or any other person at any other location in whose care the mother has placed the child.   approaching or coming within 100 metres of any place where the child or mother might reside from time to time, (c) approaching or coming within 100 metres of any place where the child might attend day care, preschool or school from time to time, (d) knowingly approaching or coming within 100 metres of the child or the mother at another location, and (e) removing the child from any day care, preschool or school, or from the care of the mother or any other person at any other location in whose care the mother has placed the child.   approaching or coming within 100 metres of any place where the child might attend day care, preschool or school from time to time, (d) knowingly approaching or coming within 100 metres of the child or the mother at another location, and (e) removing the child from any day care, preschool or school, or from the care of the mother or any other person at any other location in whose care the mother has placed the child.   knowingly approaching or coming within 100 metres of the child or the mother at another location, and (e) removing the child from any day care, preschool or school, or from the care of the mother or any other person at any other location in whose care the mother has placed the child.   removing the child from any day care, preschool or school, or from the care of the mother or any other person at any other location in whose care the mother has placed the child.
the father’s proposal
during school term:   every second weekend, commencing the first friday after the date of these orders from the conclusion of school friday, or 5.00 pm if friday is a non‑school day, to the commencement of school monday, or 9.00am if a non-school day, (b) for one half of each of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods as agreed and, in default of agreement, for the first week in odd years and the second week in even years, (c) for one half of the long summer school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement, in fortnightly blocks, save for the christmas arrangements as set out herein, (d) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with the father, from 5:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 5:00 pm on father’s day, and (e) on each of the child’s and the father’s birthdays, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   for one half of each of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods as agreed and, in default of agreement, for the first week in odd years and the second week in even years, (c) for one half of the long summer school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement, in fortnightly blocks, save for the christmas arrangements as set out herein, (d) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with the father, from 5:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 5:00 pm on father’s day, and (e) on each of the child’s and the father’s birthdays, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   for one half of the long summer school holidays as agreed and in default of agreement, in fortnightly blocks, save for the christmas arrangements as set out herein, (d) if father’s day falls on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with the father, from 5:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 5:00 pm on father’s day, and (e) on each of the child’s and the father’s birthdays, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   if father’s day falls on a weekend when the child is not already spending time with the father, from 5:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 5:00 pm on father’s day, and (e) on each of the child’s and the father’s birthdays, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   on each of the child’s and the father’s birthdays, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   in even years, from 5:00 pm on christmas eve until 12:00 noon christmas day, and (b) in odd years, from 12:00 noon christmas day until 5:00 pm boxing day.   in odd years, from 12:00 noon christmas day until 5:00 pm boxing day.   in even years from the conclusion of school on easter thursday until 12:00 noon easter saturday, and (b) in odd years from 12:00 noon easter saturday until the commencement of school the tuesday following easter monday.   in odd years from 12:00 noon easter saturday until the commencement of school the tuesday following easter monday.   if mother’s day falls on a weekend when the child is to be spending time with the father, from 5:00 pm on the saturday before mother’s day until 5:00 pm mother’s day, and (b) on each of the child’s and the mother’s birthdays, if the child is to be spending time with the father on those occasions, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   on each of the child’s and the mother’s birthdays, if the child is to be spending time with the father on those occasions, for a minimum of two hours if the birthday falls on a school day and a minimum of four hours if the birthday falls on a non-school day.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party in the presence or hearing of the child, and shall remove the child from the presence or hearing of any other person doing such, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, and shall remove the child from the presence or hearing of any other person doing such.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, and shall remove the child from the presence or hearing of any other person doing such.
the proposal of the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”)
assessment
specific issues
restraints
dispute resolution
in the alternative, if the court finds that the father does not pose an unacceptable risk of harm:
17.1 a psychiatric assessment including his capacity for emotional regulation, cannabis use, and any other diagnosis with such an assessment to include a treatment and or rehabilitation plan, 17.2 undertake the recommended treatment, 17.3 a parenting course such as d parenting program 17.4 engage with family support services to assist with parenting skill, and 17.5 providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
17.2 undertake the recommended treatment, 17.3 a parenting course such as d parenting program 17.4 engage with family support services to assist with parenting skill, and 17.5 providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
17.3 a parenting course such as d parenting program 17.4 engage with family support services to assist with parenting skill, and 17.5 providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
17.4 engage with family support services to assist with parenting skill, and 17.5 providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
17.5 providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
18.1 on the first weekend of each month from 10am to 4pm on either saturday or sunday,
discharge of the icl
notations:   a psychiatric assessment including his capacity for emotional regulation, cannabis use, and any other diagnosis with such an assessment to include a treatment and or rehabilitation plan. (ii) undertaking the recommended treatment. (iii) completing a parenting course such as d parenting program. (iv) engage with family support services to assist with parenting skills (v) providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.  ) undertaking the recommended treatment. (iii) completing a parenting course such as d parenting program. (iv) engage with family support services to assist with parenting skills (v) providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.  i) completing a parenting course such as d parenting program. (iv) engage with family support services to assist with parenting skills (v) providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.  ) engage with family support services to assist with parenting skills (v) providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.   providing the mother with a report from the treater as to the father’s compliance with recommendations and progress with treatment.
issues for determination  the spend time arrangements for the child with the father, including whether the risks of harm for the child in the care of the father are so high as to warrant ongoing and long term supervision by a professional agency of the child’s time with the father, and (b) allocation of parental responsibility for the child.   allocation of parental responsibility for the child.
the evidence
the mother’s failure to provide evidence from mr q
“disputed questions of fact must be decided by a court according to the evidence that the parties adduce, not according to some speculation about what other evidence might possibly have been led... and there are cases where demonstration that other evidence could have been, but was not, called may properly be taken to account in determining whether a party has proved its case to the requisite standard. but both the circumstances in which that may be done and the way in which the absence of evidence may be taken to account are confined by known and accepted principles which do not permit the course taken by the court of appeal of discounting the cogency of the evidence tendered by asic.” at [167], the plurality then referred to jones v dunkel, as an example of the application of such principles, quoting: ...“that any inference favourable to the plaintiff for which there was ground in the evidence might be more confidently drawn when a person presumably able to put the true complexion on the facts relied on as the ground for the inference has not been called as a witness by the defendant and the evidence provides no sufficient explanation of his absence”.
the father
the paternal grandmother ms k   the child’s clothes dirty, worn out and not appropriate for the climate, (b) she has seen bruising on the child. bruising of the child is noted in the referral to x-ray in early 2021, (c) she saw that the child’s eye was turning in. the mother agrees she took the child to an optometrist in mid-2021 and that the child needed a strong optometry prescription[46], and (d) she has seen the child’s bottom and privates swollen and sore. the father and grandmother took the child to the doctor and commenced to apply a cream which was recommended, and the child’s condition cleared. there is no doubt that the child had dermatitis and nappy rash in early 2021.   she has seen bruising on the child. bruising of the child is noted in the referral to x-ray in early 2021, (c) she saw that the child’s eye was turning in. the mother agrees she took the child to an optometrist in mid-2021 and that the child needed a strong optometry prescription[46], and (d) she has seen the child’s bottom and privates swollen and sore. the father and grandmother took the child to the doctor and commenced to apply a cream which was recommended, and the child’s condition cleared. there is no doubt that the child had dermatitis and nappy rash in early 2021.   she saw that the child’s eye was turning in. the mother agrees she took the child to an optometrist in mid-2021 and that the child needed a strong optometry prescription[46], and (d) she has seen the child’s bottom and privates swollen and sore. the father and grandmother took the child to the doctor and commenced to apply a cream which was recommended, and the child’s condition cleared. there is no doubt that the child had dermatitis and nappy rash in early 2021.   she has seen the child’s bottom and privates swollen and sore. the father and grandmother took the child to the doctor and commenced to apply a cream which was recommended, and the child’s condition cleared. there is no doubt that the child had dermatitis and nappy rash in early 2021.
the court child expert ms s (“the expert”)
“it is apparent that one of the parties in this matter appears to be mendacious about the facts of this matter...this could prevent [x] having a meaningful relationship with the father which is concerning”[47]
“...appeared adept at providing information that she thought should be said and this is not uncommon with parents who have experienced considerable childhood and adolescent trauma”.   the mother has a very traumatic family background, she is street wise and she has used various strategies to gain ascendency over the father in this case, (b) the expert found it difficult to identify which of the parents had held the balance of power in their relationship, (c) the mother has not always been the victim in the family violence between herself and the father. the father has been the victim in some of the situations, (d) the father has difficulty reading and writing, and has had a limited education. he has spent most of his life in a small village, and is from a socially disadvantaged background. he does not have a good understanding of interpersonal relationships. he says what he thinks and is not measured in his approach. he is well intentioned but not always able to regulate his responses, and (e) if the father thought he was causing harm to the child by his comments to her during supervised time, then he would refrain from making such comments. he has limited insight. there are issues which he needs to address, and he wants to change.   the expert found it difficult to identify which of the parents had held the balance of power in their relationship, (c) the mother has not always been the victim in the family violence between herself and the father. the father has been the victim in some of the situations, (d) the father has difficulty reading and writing, and has had a limited education. he has spent most of his life in a small village, and is from a socially disadvantaged background. he does not have a good understanding of interpersonal relationships. he says what he thinks and is not measured in his approach. he is well intentioned but not always able to regulate his responses, and (e) if the father thought he was causing harm to the child by his comments to her during supervised time, then he would refrain from making such comments. he has limited insight. there are issues which he needs to address, and he wants to change.   the mother has not always been the victim in the family violence between herself and the father. the father has been the victim in some of the situations, (d) the father has difficulty reading and writing, and has had a limited education. he has spent most of his life in a small village, and is from a socially disadvantaged background. he does not have a good understanding of interpersonal relationships. he says what he thinks and is not measured in his approach. he is well intentioned but not always able to regulate his responses, and (e) if the father thought he was causing harm to the child by his comments to her during supervised time, then he would refrain from making such comments. he has limited insight. there are issues which he needs to address, and he wants to change.   the father has difficulty reading and writing, and has had a limited education. he has spent most of his life in a small village, and is from a socially disadvantaged background. he does not have a good understanding of interpersonal relationships. he says what he thinks and is not measured in his approach. he is well intentioned but not always able to regulate his responses, and (e) if the father thought he was causing harm to the child by his comments to her during supervised time, then he would refrain from making such comments. he has limited insight. there are issues which he needs to address, and he wants to change.   if the father thought he was causing harm to the child by his comments to her during supervised time, then he would refrain from making such comments. he has limited insight. there are issues which he needs to address, and he wants to change.
consideration of the relevant matters
s. 60cc (2) (a) benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
“...agreed that she did not think that ...[the father]...would harm [x], but did not think that he should have unsupervised visits, because of the tension between them and the issues in this matter.”[57]
“...appeared to really enjoy playing with him. [mr papworth] was child focussed and concentrated on [x]...he supported her with her play and spoke with her in a quiet and calm manner. [x] responded really well to this...[mr papworth] was observed to show a strong level of parental involvement and sensitivity to [x]. he was responsive to her needs and demonstrated a capacity for a level of parental reflective functioning...was able to actively engage and sustain interaction and play with [x]. [x]was particularly distressed when leaving her father and protested at leaving him. she ran back several times and started to sob. at no time did she show any fear of her father...”[59].
s.60cc (2) (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
january 2020- the alleged choking incident
“partner stated that while in an argument pt collapsed and started shaking uncontrollably and violently and also making a choking noise...”
events leading up to final separation on 23 april 2020
alcohol
cannabis and prescription medication
“reduced the dose from 200mg to 150mg last time, has experienced some pains [...] and the plan was to reduce the dose to 100mg bd today to slowly wean off the dose.”
“asking for [pain relief medication]– taken the last [medication] this am – the dose was reduced to 100mg bd, says the pain is back again, started smoking make him sleep last night- sleeping not great, smoking cannabis every second to third day”.
“[mr papworth] was angry for not having the [pain relief medication] 200mg script again – threw away the radiology referral for scans – raised his voice saying that he will take [illicit drugs] to manage his pain and sue the medical centre – did not wait until i did the script for [pain relief medication] 100mg – threw away the ct referral as well – left with anger – no future appointments with me again due to his aggressive behaviour.”
relevant additional considerations
“police observed the child to be very happy and interacting well with [papworth] and his parents. the house was very cleaned and well maintained and the child was dressed appropriately. at the time of attending the child was eating an appropriate breakfast. as [papworth] followed police out to their vehicle, the child became highly distressed and only calmed down once he picked her up and gave her a cuddle. it is clear that there is a strong bond between the pair...”   completing the men’s behaviour change program in which he was enrolled and had commenced at the date of hearing[133], (b) completing a d parenting program parenting program at fss, (c) engaging with an intensive family support program, and (d) implementing a clear pathway for the child’s time with the father, with changeovers perhaps at the contact centre.   completing a d parenting program parenting program at fss, (c) engaging with an intensive family support program, and (d) implementing a clear pathway for the child’s time with the father, with changeovers perhaps at the contact centre.   engaging with an intensive family support program, and (d) implementing a clear pathway for the child’s time with the father, with changeovers perhaps at the contact centre.   implementing a clear pathway for the child’s time with the father, with changeovers perhaps at the contact centre.
allocation of parental responsibility for the child
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 june 2023
dated: 16 june 2023
[1] exhibit k[2] exhibit l[3] respondent’s outline of case, annexure b[4] mother’s affidavit paragraph 20[5] ibid, paragraph 5 the mother says “w’s father is mr h”. during her oral evidence the mother said that mr h is not w’s biological father, and that the mother has never been in a sexual relationship with mr h. she said that she and mr h were living together and that the mother was best friends with his daughter who “went astray”, and that the mother remained living with mr h after this, they remained friends and that w has a parental relationship with mr h.[6] father’s affidavit filed 14 october 2022 paragraphs 17-21[7] mother’s affidavit, annexure c-1; father’s affidavit annexure b[8] paragraph 122-124[9] father’s affidavit paragraph 87[10] mother’s affidavit paragraph 134[11] father’s affidavit annexure c[12] mother’s affidavit annexure c-5[13] ibid annexure c-4[14] ibid annexure c-12[15] ibid annexure c-39[16] ibid annexure c-9[17] pursuant to s. 62g family law act 1975 (cth)[18] mother’s affidavit paragraph 160[19] ibid annexure c-25[20] mother’s affidavit c-27[21] ibid c-37[22] ibid paragraph 235[23] ibid paragraph 236[24] ibid annexure c-39; father’s affidavit annexure e[25] ibid annexure c-41[26]exhibit k[27] exhibit l[28] expert report paragraph 42. there was no challenge to the family consultant’s evidence in this paragraph. [29] mother’s affidavit paragraph 154[30] ibid, paragraph 271.the expert read the affidavit of mr u, filed on 28 july 2020. the expert noted that mr u alleges that the mother was physically and mentally abusive towards him, particularly when affected by alcohol or cannabis [at 24]. the father did not rely upon mr u’s affidavit at the trial.[31] expert report paragraph 24[32] mother’s affidavit paragraph 69-71[33] mother’s affidavit paragraph 71[34] expert report paragraph 73[35] expert report paragraph 47[36] expert report paragraph 11[37] ibid 37[38] the father deposes that he saw mr q sitting in the mother’s car outside the office building in town o when he attended for the family report interviews: father’s affidavit at paragraphs 160-161[39] exhibit o[40] mclelland dcj, gill and schonell jj at [20] and following[41] father’s affidavit paragraph 194[42] exhibit h[43] affidavit of ms k filed 8 november 2022 (“k”) at paragraph 14-15[44]k paragraph 18[45] k paragraph 25[46] mother’s affidavit paragraph 218[47] expert report paragraph 66[48] ibid paragraph 85[49] ibid paragraph 47[50] ibid paragraph 28[51] ibid paragraph 47[52] ibid paragraph 39[53] ibid paragraph 44[54] ibid paragraph 10[55] expert report paragraph 55[56] expert report paragraph 53[57] ibid paragraph 45[58] expert report paragraph 40[59] expert report paragraph 81[60] expert report paragraph 93.[61] exhibit m[62] father’s affidavit paragraph 131; expert report paragraph 25[63] ibid paragraph 66-68 and annexure a[64] around august/september 2018 [65] mother’s affidavit [27] [66] ibid [29][67] ibid [32] [68] ibid [37] [69] ibid [39][70] ibid paragraph 35[71] mother’s affidavit paragraph 55[72] ibid paragraph 64[73] ibid paragraph 61-64[74] father’s affidavit paragraph 60[75] mother’s affidavit paragraphs 74-75[76] exhibit q is a call log which demonstrates that the father attempted to call the mother on numerous occasions between 7 january 2020 and 14 january 2020[77] ibid paragraph 76[78] ibid paragraph 68[79] expert report paragraph 40[80] mother’s affidavit paragraphs 78-82[81] father’s affidavit paragraph 70[82] mother’s affidavit paragraph 78-79 [83] ibid paragraph 80[84] ibid paragraph 81 [85] exhibit c[86] exhibit n[87] mother’s affidavit c-1[88] section 140 evidence act 1995 (cth)[89] father’s affidavit paragraph 50[90] mother’s affidavit paragraph 94 [91] ibid paragraph 100 [92] father’s affidavit paragraph 74[93] expert report paragraph 25[94] mother’s affidavit paragraph 112[95] exhibit e[96] mother’s affidavit paragraph 46[97] ibid at paragraph 5[98] father’s affidavit paragraph 36[99] father’s affidavit paragraph 136-140[100] ibid paragraph 144-146[101] father’s affidavit paragraph 48[102] ibid paragraph 50[103] ibid paragraph 50[104] expert repot paragraph 28[105] exhibit b[106] exhibit b [107] ibid annexure c-8[108] mental health care plan[109] consistent with father’s affidavit paragraph 130[110] ibid annexure c-26[111] ibid annexure c-40[112] expert report paragraph 71[113] expert report paragraphs[114] exhibit m[115] father’s affidavit paragraph 162-170[116] father’s affidavit paragraph 166[117] mother’s affidavit paragraph 124[118] father’s affidavit paragraph 185[119] exhibit m[120] ibid paragraph 165[121] father’s affidavit paragraph 99-100[122] mother’s affidavit paragraph 169[123] father’s affidavit paragraph 101[124] exhibit b[125] father’s affidavit annexure g[126] ibid paragraph 176[127] ibid paragraph 188[128] ibid annexure c-19[129] ibid annexure c-20[130] exhibit p[131] expert report paragraph 81[132] exhibit m[133] father’s affidavit paragraph 155[134] expert report paragraph 45[135] mother’s affidavit filed 14 october 2022 paragraph 258[136] see subsection 65daa of the act