last updated: 16 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
canton & canton [2023] fedcfamc2f 836
orders
the court orders that:
3a. pending payment of the settlement sum in accordance with order 2:  the husband is entitled to sole use and occupation of the town b property, (b) the husband is to meet all minimum mortgage repayments and all rates, insurances and other property outgoings for the town b property during his occupation, (c) the husband is to keep the property in good order and repair, fair wear and tear excepted, (d) within fourteen (14) days at a date and time to be advised by the wife's solicitor in writing to the husband, the husband is to allow the wife or an agent appointed by her to attend the town b property to inspect the property and to take photographs on the property. the husband is restrained from being present during such inspection, although the husband may engage an agent to attend on his behalf, and (e) the husband is restrained from redrawing any money from the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage encumbering the town b property or from further encumbering the property or in any way dealing with his interest in the property save in accordance with these orders.   the husband is to meet all minimum mortgage repayments and all rates, insurances and other property outgoings for the town b property during his occupation, (c) the husband is to keep the property in good order and repair, fair wear and tear excepted, (d) within fourteen (14) days at a date and time to be advised by the wife's solicitor in writing to the husband, the husband is to allow the wife or an agent appointed by her to attend the town b property to inspect the property and to take photographs on the property. the husband is restrained from being present during such inspection, although the husband may engage an agent to attend on his behalf, and (e) the husband is restrained from redrawing any money from the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage encumbering the town b property or from further encumbering the property or in any way dealing with his interest in the property save in accordance with these orders.   the husband is to keep the property in good order and repair, fair wear and tear excepted, (d) within fourteen (14) days at a date and time to be advised by the wife's solicitor in writing to the husband, the husband is to allow the wife or an agent appointed by her to attend the town b property to inspect the property and to take photographs on the property. the husband is restrained from being present during such inspection, although the husband may engage an agent to attend on his behalf, and (e) the husband is restrained from redrawing any money from the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage encumbering the town b property or from further encumbering the property or in any way dealing with his interest in the property save in accordance with these orders.   within fourteen (14) days at a date and time to be advised by the wife's solicitor in writing to the husband, the husband is to allow the wife or an agent appointed by her to attend the town b property to inspect the property and to take photographs on the property. the husband is restrained from being present during such inspection, although the husband may engage an agent to attend on his behalf, and (e) the husband is restrained from redrawing any money from the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage encumbering the town b property or from further encumbering the property or in any way dealing with his interest in the property save in accordance with these orders.   the husband is restrained from redrawing any money from the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage encumbering the town b property or from further encumbering the property or in any way dealing with his interest in the property save in accordance with these orders.
13a. the husband is declared to be the owner of the c artworks, the household contents at the town b property, his motor vehicle 2, the business stock, the husband's tools and any other property in his possession which is located at the town b property.  file and serve a response, affidavit and financial statement by 4 august 2023, (b) attend court in person upon the return date of such application. leave will not be granted to appear by telephone or video. prior to the court entertaining any application to re-open, the husband will be required to explain his non-participation in the proceedings to date and the court will also expect the husband to pay the wife's costs or satisfy the court as to why he should be relieved of the obligation to do so.   attend court in person upon the return date of such application. leave will not be granted to appear by telephone or video. prior to the court entertaining any application to re-open, the husband will be required to explain his non-participation in the proceedings to date and the court will also expect the husband to pay the wife's costs or satisfy the court as to why he should be relieved of the obligation to do so.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
background
why the court is proceeding on an undefended final basis  in the event of compliance by the husband with these orders that the matter be forward listed for further case management directions, and (b) in the event of the husband not complying with the orders the matter may be forward listed for an undefended final hearing. the order specifically noted that the husband was encouraged to seek urgent, independent legal advice.   in the event of the husband not complying with the orders the matter may be forward listed for an undefended final hearing. the order specifically noted that the husband was encouraged to seek urgent, independent legal advice.
the law
balance sheet
we consider that generally speaking a person can give some evidence by way of admission as to the value of real estate owned by them which can be accorded weight notwithstanding such weight might be very much less than the weight given to that of a professional valuer, for example. the ordinary common experience of people is that where they own only a few significant assets, such as cars and houses, they are well aware of the purchase price and have some knowledge obtained from a variety of sources about their value.
assets
is it just & equitable to make an order?
assessment of contributions
section 75(2) factors
just & equitable outcome
the wife’s costs application
conclusion
associate: dated: 7 july 2023
dated: 7 july 2023