last updated: 26 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
vincent & strong [2023] fedcfamc2f 1234
orders
amended pursuant to rule 10.13 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 21 september 2023the court orders that:  ensure that all documents required to be exchanged between parties pursuant to chapter 6 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) have been exchanged, (b) ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email to sjr@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email to sjr@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   provide to the court by email to sjr@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
background
the hearing
the law
a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:   the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family, and (c) this is the critical subparagraph - having regard to all of the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the persons are not related by family, and (c) this is the critical subparagraph - having regard to all of the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   this is the critical subparagraph - having regard to all of the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
those circumstances may include any or all of the following:   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory, as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.
no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship.
a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
... the presence of a mutually recognised de facto or marital relationship involving a shared life was critical in each of szoxp, crabtree and stanford. in stanford, the continued subsistence of such a relationship explained the making of the “necessary or desirable adjustments” to the property interests of the husband and wife. in contrast, where the “necessary or desirable adjustments” are not made, and one party fundamentally acts contrary to the interests of the other in relation to the property of the couple, it may be possible to conclude that the mutual commitment to a shared life has ceased. the language of s 4aa of the act and its reference to “living together” requires no different approach to determining whether a relationship exists of the kind defined. “living together”, consistently with authority, should be construed as meaning sharing life as a couple. section 4aa does not prescribe any way by which a couple may share life together. its language is sufficiently broad to accommodate the great variety of ways a de facto relationship may exist. that conclusion is supported by the varied factors listed in s 4aa(2). in a given case, some of the factors listed in s 4aa(2) may be relevant and some may be irrelevant, inevitably some may have greater prominence than others. a conclusion that a de facto relationship has ended may also arise because of factors not listed in s 4aa(2). such a conclusion is mandated by s 4aa(3) and (4). in particular, s 4aa(4) is a statutory recognition that what may constitute a genuine de facto relationship is not to be determined in the same way in every case by reference to rigid criteria that must always be satisfied. in that respect, the language of s 4aa(2)(b) does not assume that every de facto relationship must have a “common residence” to some “extent” and of some “nature”. such a construction is entirely denied by s 4aa(3).
chronology of events
our relationship is at breaking point at the moment. i don’t need this kind of help from you.
i’m beginning to think our relationship is unrepairable. the issues are never addressed.
i feel really sad for you.
with a sad emoji face:
we are already drifting apart and after hearing you say you’re going to withhold even more things from me just to avoid a different opinion. i don’t hold much hope for us all. you are a very complex man. good night.
my kids are suffering big time. all three are struggling at school because of our shit. they know their “rock” –
which she confirmed in the witness box was a reference to herself –
is crumbling and crumbling fast and they have no one else to rely on. i’m beginning to think our selfishness to have a relationship is affecting too many people. it used to be effortless but now it is draining.
our relationship is a fucking joke.
i can’t do this any more. sorry. i am done.
we are not united in any way, shape or form. stop pretending we are, for everyone’s sake, please. it’s just making it harder.
...coming and going all night and will be in my room when i’m home.
i am done. i don’t need this shit from you at all. thanks heaps for your support.
as well as a conversation where the parties said the following: [1]
husband: in hindsight, i think it was a mistake us moving in together. i think that was the start of our demise. followed by: perhaps the word “mistake” was too harsh a word. wife: no you are 100% right....this whole relationship was a mistake!
perhaps it might be a good idea if my kids and i are only here when you’re not until i can make some arrangements to get out. it’s not fair on any of us living like this.
with a frowning emoji:
i will get home as late as possible tomorrow night.
husband: i will put 5k in your account tomorrow. in five weeks, when i leave work, i will have some more money then. not sure how much that will be. take what you need to get yourself set up. i really hope that this will make you happy. wife: i think it’s the only option but doesn’t have to be tomorrow. i’m waiting to hear back on a job so can’t do much until i get work really. i will try a little harder now, i guess, but i will start to clear out our stuff. i have three kids i have to deal with through this also. can’t give you a date at this point.
wife: you have just lost a seven year relationship and you are worried about the lawns. i spent six hours at the police station on sat [referring to saturday] - you could have done them then. husband: i’m not going to keep on with this senseless arguing. it will get us nowhere. wife: you’re right. sorry, i forgot. i meant nothing.
husband: you love me, i love you. we’re both hurting for different reasons. take the time you need to fix yourself. i’m here when you’re ready to stop placing blame and work on us. wife: it’s too late. you’ve already let go. you’ve turned your back on me and that is something i have never done to you. husband: that’s funny, i didn’t leave the bed or the home ... wife: i left when i stopped being important to you. i left because it hurts too much to be around you. i am physically, mentally and emotionally exhausted and you’re worried about relationship status and lawns. i have always been there for you. husband: and yet you still continue to argue the point. no wonder you’re so exhausted. you’re right, i’m wrong. can we move on now, please. wife: you’re a single man. do whatever you want. followed shortly by: i don’t think i’ve ever hurt this much in my entire life. i can’t deal with it very well because i’ve never experienced it before.
happy new year. it’s funny, you know. you do way more than tell me i don’t deserve feel special or cared about. you actually do it. both christmas eve and new year i spent without you this year. that really makes me feel good.
i don’t think i can do this any more. i am tired of the ups and downs. just when i thought we were getting on track, here we are again. if you don’t know by now that you are special to me, you never will.
i’ve been begging for your attention and quality time with you, time with someone who thinks about me, and i get five minutes of your time when you come in to get something to eat and then you drive off with things to do. seriously? you wonder why i’m upset.
you were upset before i left. i can’t handle the arguing any more. i want to be close to you but i can’t stand your behaviour.
for someone who apparently hates seeing me hurt and upset, you haven’t said or done much to change it. you’ve forgotten what to do because you haven’t done it for so long.
with a sad emoji face.
for someone who wants to be loved, you’re certainly doing your best to be unlovable.
you know what, don’t bother. it’s obviously too hard for you.
wife: sorry, i’m frustrated and lonely. i need someone to share my life with, someone who genuinely cares about me, and i want to be a positive part of someone’s life, not a burden.
with a sad emoji.
husband: no need to be sorry. i understand. we’re just in a rut. things will get better. i’m sorry i’m not there for you more ... wife: i wish it was just a rut ... husband: it’s probably more like a canyon. lol. [which i interpret as ‘laugh out loud’]
you’re welcome. i love you.
really?
yep.
with, again, a smiling type emoji.
no worries. i love you. i guess the difference between you and me is that i would sleep in a pile of shit next to you ... can’t help but feel like i’ve been taken advantage of today.
taken advantage of? how?
don’t worry. it was just me feeling sorry for myself.
perhaps you could tell me what i just did or said to piss you off so much.
followed by:
i will borrow $1500 from mum to pay you back for my car. thanks.
don’t you dare.
wife: if you want this to work, you need to be real and consistent. husband: i am ... wife: i’m confused as to why you have suddenly changed. husband: changed for the good or the bad? wife: i don’t understand why you are suddenly trying to be nice after saying we’re not compatible any more. we are both after different things in life. husband: i always want to be nice and i will be when you are. i guess the answer to my question is “good” change. after nine years of ups and downs, the fact that we are still together still gives me hope for us. wife: we are still together because i’ve been putting your needs and wants before mine for years. i can’t wait any more. i want to be in a relationship that is as important as your job is.
...extremely unhappy in the relationship and tired of [mr strong]’s empty promises that he was going to (a) pay more attention to our relationship and make it a priority, (b) work less, (c) renovate the property and sell it ... i stayed at home and supported him over all of the years to help him to build the business and i felt that he gave no consideration to my wishes. i said to [mr strong], “that’s it. i’ve really had enough this time. i need someone that gives a damn about our relationship and is going to be there for me. i am done. we are officially no longer”. [mr strong] replied, “well, if that is what you want, ta ta”.
consideration of when the de facto relationship ended
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 23 june 2023
dated: 23 june 2023
[1] exhibit 4