last updated: 14 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pagani & pagani [2023] fedcfamc2f 805
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
myers j:  the wife pay to the husband 50% of the value of the property at b street, suburb c (‘the suburb c property’), (b) the husband do all things necessary to transfer his interest in the suburb c property to the wife, and (c) the husband do all things necessary to discharge the mortgage secured against the suburb c property at his sole expense.   the husband do all things necessary to transfer his interest in the suburb c property to the wife, and (c) the husband do all things necessary to discharge the mortgage secured against the suburb c property at his sole expense.   the husband do all things necessary to discharge the mortgage secured against the suburb c property at his sole expense.
if the parties have made a financial agreement about the property of one or both of the parties that is binding under pt viiia of the act, then, subject to that part, a court cannot make a property settlement order under s 79.
the intention of part viiia is to enable ordinary people to enter into financial agreements which will deal with property and spousal maintenance and avoid the necessity of court proceeding. the agreements can be made before marriage and after marriage, whilst the relationship subsists or they can be made following the breakdown of marriage. the explanatory memorandum observes that it is the legislative intent to encourage the use of financial agreements under this part of the act. to enable such agreements to be binding the legislation requires that each of the parties to the agreements must have independent legal advice. if courts require strict interpretation of the legislation then this would have the effect of making such agreements less available to the broader community. it would positively discourage the use of financial agreements and it would limit the pool of legal practitioners who are equipped and willing to draft and/or advise in relation to such agreements. such strict and inevitably narrow construction would add to the cost of such agreements and may put the cost to prepare and advise on them outside the financial means of the general community. that is not the legislative intent. the legislation does intend that the legal advice ought to be available australia wide through the broad church of legal practitioners, whether specialist or not, whether in major capital cities, or in the suburbs or in the regions. courts should not make the legal practitioners and the parties cross all of the “t’s” and dot all of the “i’s” to enter into and give effect to financial agreements. the form should not defeat the substance. the act does not create a regime of strict compliance and there is a requirement on courts to give purpose to legislation. accordingly, i will not be adopting a strict interpretive approach in terms of both the construction of the legislation and construction of the terms of the agreement. i will adopt the objective approach.
recital r and clause 29 of the agreement ... dealt predominantly with advice in relation to the legal implications of the agreement and each party’s rights and obligations. these statements did not meet all the requirements set out in sub-section 90g(1)(b), particularly there was no reference to advice in relation to whether the agreement was fair or prudent. in our view, such an omission meant that the agreement did not comply with the provisions of s.90g and was not binding upon the parties. it follows that we prefer the approach taken by collier j in j & j (above) to that taken by the trial judge in this case. we are of the view that strict compliance with the statutory requirements is necessary to oust the court’s jurisdiction to make adjustive orders under s.79.
the bill responds to the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in black v black. the bill amends the family law act in particular to limit the technical requirements that people need to meet to enter into prenuptial agreements, while still providing necessary protections to parties, such as the requirement to obtain legal advice. it will restore confidence in the binding nature and enforceability of financial and termination agreements under the family law act. (house of representatives, second reading speech, hansard, thursday, 5 february 2009, p.575).   the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) before signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party and about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to that party of making the agreement, and (c) either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and (ca) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   before signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party and about the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to that party of making the agreement, and (c) either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and (ca) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and (ca) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.  ) a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.
...the requirement for legal advice is an important legislative safeguard. an effective binding financial agreement ousts the court’s jurisdiction to make orders under part viii of the act, allowing parties to deal with their assets without interference from the court. accordingly... s 90g(1)(b) evidences an unambiguous legislative requirement that, in order for an executed agreement to be binding, each party to a financial agreement must be given clear, independent legal advice specifically in respect to each of the matters mentioned therein.
in order to give advice about the effect of an agreement on the rights of a party,... a legal practitioner must establish what those rights are at the time the advice is provided... a party must know more than that some unknown or undefined right is being given up. he or she must have some idea, at least in general, of his or her previous entitlements or rights [...] with he or she may compare the provisions of the proposed financial agreement.
to my mind, the words that appear in section 90g(1) ‘if and only if’, are words of real significance. they have a meaning. the import a requirement for a level of compliance, if the agreement is to be binding, that is clearly a standard or level above and beyond what might be described as substantial compliance. those words ‘if and only if’, make it clear that each of the parties must ensure that that which is required to be contained and dealt with in the agreement, and the annexures to it, is in fact contained, appropriately and completely. compliance must therefore be a full compliance, satisfying the statutory requirements.... clearly, the legislation intended that if this method of parties resolving their differences was to be used without any supervisory power of a court, in a situation where parties’ rights were to be affected, then that which was to be done had to be done fully in compliance with that which the statute set out and required.   pagani] & [mr pagani] pac6933/2021 statement of [mr f] my name is [mr f]. i am a solicitor and partner of the firm, [h law firm], which i operate with my brother, [mr j] and my father, [mr k] (dad). i have been admitted as a solicitor since 1998. in 2011, i was employed as a solicitor at my father's firm, [f law firm]. in or around [early] 2011, i cannot now recall the exact date, [mr l] referred [mr pagani] to me in relation to a financial agreement, proposed to be entered into between [mr pagani] and [ms m]. i had previously met and acted for [mr pagani] in relation to the purchase of real property. at that time i met him face-to-face, i believe at [n venue]. i do not recall whether i met with [mr pagani] during the preparation of the financial agreement. i do not believe that i did meet him in person at that time. at that point he was [working] for [o company]. i recall being provided with a copy of the proposed agreement by [mr l]. dad and i read it and dad said: "i think we need to make a change to protect [mr pagani]'s income''. i do not know whether or not dad spoke with [mr pagani] on the phone. i do not recall speaking with [mr pagani] on the phone. dad then prepared a letter to that effect, and it was sent to [ms pagani’s] lawyers, [p law firm] [dated early] 2011. the letter proposed an amendment to the agreement. we did not receive any response to that letter, or any further copy of the draft agreement. i do not know how the agreement was signed. all that was ever received by our office was the financial agreement, amended as we had proposed, and signed by [mr pagani]. i did not receive any instructions from [mr pagani] in the intervening period, discuss the amended agreement with him or provide him with advice in relation to the agreement. my hard copy file has now been destroyed, but i have retained a copy of the electronic file. annexed hereto and marked "a" is a copy of the complete file that i hold in relation to acting for [mr pagani] with regard to the financial agreement. the file is comprised of the following:
10.1. letter from [p law firm] to [mr l] [dated early] 2011, 10.2. draft pre-nuptial financial agreement (prepared by [ms pagani’s] lawyer), undated, 10.3. letter from my father seeking an amendment to the agreement and dated [early] 2011, and 10.4. a partially signed copy of the pre-nuptial agreement. the partially signed agreement is not witnessed by me, nor is the certificate signed by me. i do not recall how i was provided with a copy of the agreement.
we now require from you to arrange the following: (i) have [mr pagani] peruse this agreement with his lawyer. (ii) provide a schedule of his financial position, so that it may be attached behind schedule 1 of the agreement and schedule 3 of the agreement. the financial position schedule should be in the same format as [ms pagani’s] financial position schedule for consistency. once your client has agreed to the contents of the agreement and provided his financial position schedule, we will make arrangements for the execution of this agreement.  ) provide a schedule of his financial position, so that it may be attached behind schedule 1 of the agreement and schedule 3 of the agreement.
we have provided certain advices to our client, but at present he is unwilling to execute the draft agreement unless is may be modified. our client appreciates that your client has assets as per schedule which, no doubt equates to possibly over a million dollars. our client has not got any assets, but has a wage structure that possibly outweighs your client’s wage. our client believes that the pre-nuptial agreement should be on the basis that your client’s assets are acknowledged and should not be touched by our client and the joint expenses should be jointly contributed, but our clients (sic) wage shall not be touched by your client. in other words, rent, electricity, etc shall be equally contributed by both parties and your clients (sic) wage and assets and our clients (sic) wage and assets (if any) shall be individually kept without claim by either on each other. should your client agree to the above, we may incorporate the above into the agreement. we look forward to your reply.
his honour: just, [mr f], so i can understand your evidence? [mr f]: yes. his honour: the document came back executed by both the husband and the wife? [mr f]: that’s correct. yes. his honour: and you then witnessed the document? [mr f]: yes. that’s correct. his honour: you didn’t witness – you didn’t witness the husband sign it? [mr f]: no. i didn’t – no, i didn’t. no. but i knew of him, your honour, and i knew his signature from previous matters.
72. pressure from clients and embarrassment are not and cannot be excuses for lapses in compliance by lawyers with their professional conduct obligations and should not affect the way a solicitor’s conduct is characterised. lawyers must “scrupulously and fearlessly [uphold their ethical obligations] from day one” (legal services commissioner v wen [2016] nswcatod 36 at [30]). courts rely on lawyers and the documents submitted by them (including representations that the lawyer has properly witnessed a signature on an affidavit.). 73. the actions of the solicitor in the way she ‘witnessed’ her client’s signature on the e-affidavit certainly fell short of the standard of competence and, particularly in this case, the diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent legal practitioner. there is a significant responsibility that reposes in any person who is called upon to witness a document, because in so doing that person represents to the world that he or she saw the person whose signature is being witnessed sign the document. a competent and diligent legal practitioner should not allow herself or himself to depart even momentarily from observing professional standards no matter the circumstances.
his honour: can i just be clear. did you sign that financial agreement? husband: i – i know it’s my signature. i don’t recall when i signed it. i have no recollection of signing it.
his honour can i just ask this question. i’ve seen the copy attached to your client’s affidavit, where’s the original? mr othen: excuse me a moment. the short answer is that we don’t know. as i understand it it’s not put in issue in these proceedings that that is – it’s not in the points of claim that that is not the financial agreement signed by the parties or a copy of it. so it has not really been a live issue in the proceedings. ultimately, your honour, i will make a submission based on.... his honour: we don’t have an original? mr othen: that’s right. that’s as i understand the position.
8. i do not know how the agreement was signed. all that was ever received by our office was the financial agreement, amended as we had proposed, and signed by [mr pagani]. 9. i did not receive any instructions from [mr pagani] in the intervening period, discuss the amended agreement with him or provide him with advice in relation to the agreement.
his honour: can i just ask [mr f] one question. you’ve spoken about the certificate? [mr f]: yes, your honour. his honour: what agreement are you talking about in the certificate? have you got a copy of the certificate in front of you? [mr f]: your honour, is that question for me? his honour: it is, [mr f]. you’ve heard mr ahmad take you through the certificate? [mr f]: yes, that’s correct. yes. his honour: what agreement are you talking about? [mr f]: agreement as in what am i referring to? his honour: yes: i, [mr f], of [r street, suburb s] certify that in relation to an agreement in writing, proposed to be entered into between [ms pagani] ..... and [mr pagani], i advised [mr pagani], my client, independently of the other party before the time at which my client signed the agreement as to the following matters. the effect of the agreement – what agreement are you – what agreement does that certificate refer to? [mr f]: that’s the – the financial binding agreement that was signed by all the parties, your honour. his honour: how does that sit with paragraph 9 of your statement? [mr f]: well, i – i understand that certificate as being the advice that was given in regards to the amended agreement. his honour: just go to paragraph 9. i’m just asking these questions. i want to be very, very clear. “i do not: i do not know how the agreement was signed. the letter received by our office was a financial agreement amended as we proposed and signed by [mr pagani]. i did not receive any instructions from [mr pagani] in the intervening period discussing the amended agreement with him or provide him advice in relation to the agreement? – yes. paragraph 9 is correct? [mr f]: yes. i did not receive any instructions from [mr pagani] in the intervening period to discuss the amended agreement with him. his honour: or provide him with advice in relation to the agreement. in relation to the amended agreement, you never provided advice, is that right? [mr f] your honour, could you please refer – have that question again, sorry? his honour: so that i’m crystal clear, you didn’t provide advice in respect of the amended agreement? [mr f]: once the agreement was amended, i didn’t provide any further advice thereafter. his honour: have you – to be clear, “i do not know” – you say, at paragraph 8: i do not know how the agreement was signed. all that was ever received by our office was a financial agreement amended as we proposed and signed by [mr pagani].? [mr f]: yes, that’s correct. yes. his honour: so that’s correct. and paragraph 9 is correct? [mr f]: yes, and – and then once i received the agreement signed by [mr pagani] with the amendment, there was no further – i – i didn’t receive any further instructions from [mr pagani] thereafter.   either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement),
i will say, if your honour is – if your honour comes to the view that technically the advice was not given on the final form of the agreement, if your honour forms that view – despite what i’ve said, we can see what a technicality that would be in this particular case because the final form of agreement was the original draft plus the very clauses [mr pagani] wanted added. so it’s not as though he didn’t get advice on those – on the clauses or the advice on the original form of agreement. he did, we say. and if you’re satisfied about that, it would be a mere technicality because what advice would he have given? “well, they put in the clauses i asked for. we’re good to go”. so if you get to that point – which in my respectful submission you wouldn’t, but if you get to that point – and that’s – and that’s the basis of not accepting that section 92 (transcript incorrect and should read section 90g) has been complied with, it would definitely be unjust and inequitable not to declare the agreement binding over such a technicality.   the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) one or more of paragraphs (1)(b), (c) and (ca) are not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made)   one or more of paragraphs (1)(b), (c) and (ca) are not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made)   a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made)
....an absence of clean hands according to equitable doctrine which requires that a plaintiff seeking relief not himself be guilty of tainted relevant conduct. we have referred to the doctrine of clean hands because, as with another equitable doctrine, that he who seeks equity must do equity, it invokes notions of reciprocity....
provide a schedule of his financial position, so that it may be attached behind schedule 1 of the agreement and schedule 3 of the agreement....the financial position schedule should be in the same format as [ms pagani’s] financial position schedule for consistency. once your client has agreed to the contents of the agreement and provided his financial position schedule, we will make arrangements for the execution of this agreement.
30.1 a solicitor must not take unfair advantage of the obvious error of another solicitor or other person, if to do so would obtain for a client a benefit which has no supportable foundation in law or fact.
in or around june 2011, [ms q] sent me a copy of the final bfa for signature. i was residing with [mr pagani] in new zealand at the time and recall signing the bfa in new zealand and providing the copy i had signed to [mr pagani]. i understood [mr pagani] would sign the bfa and then post the signed bfa to his lawyer.
mr ahmad: so you’re now telling his honour that – well, just stopping there. at paragraph 8, you say: “i don’t know how the agreement was signed. all that was ever received by our office was the financial agreement amended as we had proposed and signed by [mr pagani].” mr ahmad: so i’m sorry. that’s your evidence? [mr f]: yes. that’s correct, yes. mr ahmad: so you don’t know how it was signed? [mr f]: no. no. because [mr pagani]– at that stage, the client was overseas and we received, from what i recall, it was a digital version signed by him.
associate: dated: 30 june 2023
dated: 30 june 2023