last updated: 14 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dalby & jemmet (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 800
orders
it is ordered:  attending upon the children x and y’s (both born in 2012) school grounds at times the children are not in the father’s care pursuant to the terms of the order of 21 july 2021 save and except for the specific purpose of attending: (i) school functions in the nature of presentations, end of year assemblies, concerts, school excursions and parent/teacher interviews, and/or (ii) for the purpose of fulfilling any role as class representative for either of the children’s classes. (b) attending at any extracurricular activity the children are participating in at times when the children are not in the father’s care pursuant to the terms of the order of 21 july 2022 including but not limited to weekly tuition or training sessions and competitive events save and except for, (i) end of year or season presentations, or (ii) where the mother’s written consent has otherwise been first had and obtained.   school functions in the nature of presentations, end of year assemblies, concerts, school excursions and parent/teacher interviews, and/or (ii) for the purpose of fulfilling any role as class representative for either of the children’s classes.  ) for the purpose of fulfilling any role as class representative for either of the children’s classes.   attending at any extracurricular activity the children are participating in at times when the children are not in the father’s care pursuant to the terms of the order of 21 july 2022 including but not limited to weekly tuition or training sessions and competitive events save and except for, (i) end of year or season presentations, or (ii) where the mother’s written consent has otherwise been first had and obtained.   end of year or season presentations, or (ii) where the mother’s written consent has otherwise been first had and obtained.  ) where the mother’s written consent has otherwise been first had and obtained.
reasons for judgment
judge mcginn
“ 7. each party is restrained and an injunction is hereby granted restraining each of them from:   enrolling the children or either of them in any extracurricular activity that may occur in that period of time when the children are living with or spending time with the other parent pursuant to these orders without the other parent’s written consent first had and obtained, (b) attending at the residence of the other party without the written consent of the other party first had and obtained or to give effect to handovers for the purpose of these orders, (c) communicating with the other party other than by mobile telephone text message and/or email and in respect of issues solely concerning the children’s care, welfare and development, (d) abusing or denigrating the other party to or in the presence of or within the hearing of the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (e) discussing these proceedings or the allegations made in these proceedings with or in the presence of the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (f) booking any interstate or overseas travel for the children to occur in that period of time when the children are living with or spending time with the other parent pursuant to these orders.”
“10. each party shall be at liberty and shall do all things necessary to authorise the other to obtain at their respective expenses copies of all school reports, photographs, newsletters and similar materials issued by any school or any club or other facilitator of extra-curricular activity of which the children participate.”
the orders sought
“that the parties be restrained and an injunction be granted restraining either party from approaching or communicating with the other at any events referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 herein.”
documents relied upon by each party
the evidence of the parties and the family assessment report writer.
the parties’ contentions  the father contravenes interim orders precluding his attendance at events, (b) the father is incapable of controlling his behaviour directed towards the mother and members of her family, (c) the father exposes the children to dysregulated behaviour, (d) the mother is a victim of coercive controlling behaviour at the hands of the father, (e) the father has an inability to communicate with the mother in a respectful fashion, (f) the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the father is incapable of controlling his behaviour directed towards the mother and members of her family, (c) the father exposes the children to dysregulated behaviour, (d) the mother is a victim of coercive controlling behaviour at the hands of the father, (e) the father has an inability to communicate with the mother in a respectful fashion, (f) the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the father exposes the children to dysregulated behaviour, (d) the mother is a victim of coercive controlling behaviour at the hands of the father, (e) the father has an inability to communicate with the mother in a respectful fashion, (f) the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the mother is a victim of coercive controlling behaviour at the hands of the father, (e) the father has an inability to communicate with the mother in a respectful fashion, (f) the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the father has an inability to communicate with the mother in a respectful fashion, (f) the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the orders the mother sought were necessary to enable her to support the children in the activities they were to undertake during their time with her, (g) the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the mother would need to “yield” to the father’s behaviour when he was attending events at the children’s school and where the children’s extracurricular activities were conducted, and (h) the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   the children should have the benefit of their mother attending events without her harbouring a fear or worry of the father behaving badly at such events and causing her to be upset.   there was no separation of the parties in 2013 on account of family violence, (b) at the time of the parties’ separation the children were a few months old, (c) the relationship between the parties was unremarkable and not marked by dysfunction or the involvement of outside agencies, (d) the only event of concern was that which took place between the father and the mother’s husband in 2014, (e) between october 2013 and june 2021 the parties co-parented the children for almost 8 years, (f) the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   at the time of the parties’ separation the children were a few months old, (c) the relationship between the parties was unremarkable and not marked by dysfunction or the involvement of outside agencies, (d) the only event of concern was that which took place between the father and the mother’s husband in 2014, (e) between october 2013 and june 2021 the parties co-parented the children for almost 8 years, (f) the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   the relationship between the parties was unremarkable and not marked by dysfunction or the involvement of outside agencies, (d) the only event of concern was that which took place between the father and the mother’s husband in 2014, (e) between october 2013 and june 2021 the parties co-parented the children for almost 8 years, (f) the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   the only event of concern was that which took place between the father and the mother’s husband in 2014, (e) between october 2013 and june 2021 the parties co-parented the children for almost 8 years, (f) the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   between october 2013 and june 2021 the parties co-parented the children for almost 8 years, (f) the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   the mother despite commencing proceedings in june 2021 only instigated the issue of non-attendance at events following the family assessment report (the “report”) of ms b of 15 december 2021, (g) only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   only x (not y) was uncomfortable with the presence of both parents at the same event, (h) the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   the mother approached the father in mid-2022 at a sports match, (i) on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   on father’s day 2021 the father saw the mother at a child’s sports match without event, and (j) the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.   the children’s interests would not be served by an interim injunction granted 20 december 2021 continuing.
discussions and findings  a sport organised by their father, (b) another sport organised by their father, (c) an extracurricular class organised on one occasion by their father, (d) other extracurricular classes organised by their father without the mother’s knowledge, (e) a third sport, (f) a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   another sport organised by their father, (c) an extracurricular class organised on one occasion by their father, (d) other extracurricular classes organised by their father without the mother’s knowledge, (e) a third sport, (f) a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   an extracurricular class organised on one occasion by their father, (d) other extracurricular classes organised by their father without the mother’s knowledge, (e) a third sport, (f) a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   other extracurricular classes organised by their father without the mother’s knowledge, (e) a third sport, (f) a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   a third sport, (f) a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   a fourth sport which the mother had organised in 2018 with the father going on “his day” and the mother going on “her day”, (g) a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   a fifth sport at clubs at suburb j and suburb l which the father organised, (h) the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   the same sport at k school which was the subject of agreement between the parties and arranged through email from the school, and (i) a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.   a sixth sport, which the father organised and which the mother was happy for x to participate in as long as he wished to do so. x participated during the summer of 2021/22 for about five or six weeks over about two or three hours. the father assisted in the 2020/21 summer. the mother volunteered at this sport on one occasion when the father did not attend in 2022. the mother when dropping the children off for this sport kept herself away until the last session of activities when she joined with the children. the mother would never attend this sport when x was in his father’s care. the father however attended this sport when x was in his mother’s care. this occurred on about six or seven occasions across the summer of 2021/2022.
“you are so stupid insinuating such a thing. who doesn’t like children [ms dalby]! i’d say it was you who has sex with other married men while she’s pregnant with her own children. now that’s not giving a shit about children and your own!... did you volunteer to be [involved with classes] last year? no because you’re a selfish and self-absorbed person who doesn’t get along with other people’s children. you also obviously lack confidence and majorly struggle to articulate anything to people directly without crying to make people feel sorry for you. seously pathetic. you are such a waste of space. you project your ugliness and immatureness onto [x] and [y] because you are so insecure and pathetic. those poor children. i don’t know how you live with yourself, but you live a constant lie.... you idiot.... the people at [suburb d sports] were feral’s [sic] like you.... you’ve never been involved in decisions for the children in the past. you’ve always been self-absorbed and shown a real lack interest [sic] probably because it involved you missing your favourite tv shows with your fat lazy husband.... leave all your immigrant, underdeveloped brain crap off and focus on the task at hand. [x] wants to play for [suburb l]. do not bully him anymore.”
consideration of the parties’ positions   the abuse that she had to put up with during the course of her marriage to the father, (b) the abuse she experienced after the marriage ended, (c) the assault she witnessed on her husband, (d) what happened at n shopping centre, (e) insults received from time to time, and (f) what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.   the abuse she experienced after the marriage ended, (c) the assault she witnessed on her husband, (d) what happened at n shopping centre, (e) insults received from time to time, and (f) what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.   the assault she witnessed on her husband, (d) what happened at n shopping centre, (e) insults received from time to time, and (f) what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.   what happened at n shopping centre, (e) insults received from time to time, and (f) what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.   insults received from time to time, and (f) what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.   what the mother regarded as an interrogation she had endured for many years.
statutory considerations  before the parties’ separation of october 2013 by the punching of walls and the father's conduct towards the mother, (b) at the time of separation on 20 october 2013, (c) in late 2019 at and after the mother left the café in adelaide where the parties had met, and (d) in mid-2021 when the paternal grandfather raised his fist towards the father.   at the time of separation on 20 october 2013, (c) in late 2019 at and after the mother left the café in adelaide where the parties had met, and (d) in mid-2021 when the paternal grandfather raised his fist towards the father.   in late 2019 at and after the mother left the café in adelaide where the parties had met, and (d) in mid-2021 when the paternal grandfather raised his fist towards the father.   in mid-2021 when the paternal grandfather raised his fist towards the father.   that the children's views as expressed to ms b are to be given greater weight than those which have been made known to the father in their discussions with him, (b) x and y have a close and loving relationship with each of their parents. the children are fortunate that each of them have a meaningful relationship with their parents. the children also have meaningful but less substantial relationships with their mother's husband, the paternal grandparents and the wife’s family members. the children's relationship with their mother's husband and the paternal grandparents is only meaningfully supported and facilitated by the mother, (c) each of the parents have participated in the fullest reasonable extent possible in making decisions about x and y's long-term care, welfare and development and each of the parents have spent time with and communicated with the children. the manner in which that has come about has not always been cordial or respectful as might otherwise have been or should have been the case, (ca) there is no issue in this case with respect to the parents’ obligations to maintain x and y, (d) the orders sought by each party do not involve separation of the children from either of the parents. the father proposes no change in the parties’ circumstances other than that the parties not approach each other when they are both present at school and extracurricular activities which both parents should be able to attend. such an order would have little or no effect upon the children as it would see circumstances that are not too far removed, if at all, from that which presently takes place. on the mother’s application the children would lose the benefit of seeing the father as often as they currently do and in particular at extracurricular and school events. however, such a preclusion as the mother seeks would not diminish in any meaningful way the father's relationship with each of the children and would relieve the children of the undue anxiety and worry that they experience when both the parents are present at functions and activities. there is no evidence before me which causes me to find that either of the children's participation in activities or their development of skills or socialisation or their general welfare through involvement in extracurricular or school activities will be adversely affected on account of their father's absence from such activities whilst the children are in their mother’s care, (e) the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   x and y have a close and loving relationship with each of their parents. the children are fortunate that each of them have a meaningful relationship with their parents. the children also have meaningful but less substantial relationships with their mother's husband, the paternal grandparents and the wife’s family members. the children's relationship with their mother's husband and the paternal grandparents is only meaningfully supported and facilitated by the mother, (c) each of the parents have participated in the fullest reasonable extent possible in making decisions about x and y's long-term care, welfare and development and each of the parents have spent time with and communicated with the children. the manner in which that has come about has not always been cordial or respectful as might otherwise have been or should have been the case, (ca) there is no issue in this case with respect to the parents’ obligations to maintain x and y, (d) the orders sought by each party do not involve separation of the children from either of the parents. the father proposes no change in the parties’ circumstances other than that the parties not approach each other when they are both present at school and extracurricular activities which both parents should be able to attend. such an order would have little or no effect upon the children as it would see circumstances that are not too far removed, if at all, from that which presently takes place. on the mother’s application the children would lose the benefit of seeing the father as often as they currently do and in particular at extracurricular and school events. however, such a preclusion as the mother seeks would not diminish in any meaningful way the father's relationship with each of the children and would relieve the children of the undue anxiety and worry that they experience when both the parents are present at functions and activities. there is no evidence before me which causes me to find that either of the children's participation in activities or their development of skills or socialisation or their general welfare through involvement in extracurricular or school activities will be adversely affected on account of their father's absence from such activities whilst the children are in their mother’s care, (e) the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   each of the parents have participated in the fullest reasonable extent possible in making decisions about x and y's long-term care, welfare and development and each of the parents have spent time with and communicated with the children. the manner in which that has come about has not always been cordial or respectful as might otherwise have been or should have been the case, (ca) there is no issue in this case with respect to the parents’ obligations to maintain x and y, (d) the orders sought by each party do not involve separation of the children from either of the parents. the father proposes no change in the parties’ circumstances other than that the parties not approach each other when they are both present at school and extracurricular activities which both parents should be able to attend. such an order would have little or no effect upon the children as it would see circumstances that are not too far removed, if at all, from that which presently takes place. on the mother’s application the children would lose the benefit of seeing the father as often as they currently do and in particular at extracurricular and school events. however, such a preclusion as the mother seeks would not diminish in any meaningful way the father's relationship with each of the children and would relieve the children of the undue anxiety and worry that they experience when both the parents are present at functions and activities. there is no evidence before me which causes me to find that either of the children's participation in activities or their development of skills or socialisation or their general welfare through involvement in extracurricular or school activities will be adversely affected on account of their father's absence from such activities whilst the children are in their mother’s care, (e) the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,  ) there is no issue in this case with respect to the parents’ obligations to maintain x and y, (d) the orders sought by each party do not involve separation of the children from either of the parents. the father proposes no change in the parties’ circumstances other than that the parties not approach each other when they are both present at school and extracurricular activities which both parents should be able to attend. such an order would have little or no effect upon the children as it would see circumstances that are not too far removed, if at all, from that which presently takes place. on the mother’s application the children would lose the benefit of seeing the father as often as they currently do and in particular at extracurricular and school events. however, such a preclusion as the mother seeks would not diminish in any meaningful way the father's relationship with each of the children and would relieve the children of the undue anxiety and worry that they experience when both the parents are present at functions and activities. there is no evidence before me which causes me to find that either of the children's participation in activities or their development of skills or socialisation or their general welfare through involvement in extracurricular or school activities will be adversely affected on account of their father's absence from such activities whilst the children are in their mother’s care, (e) the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   the orders sought by each party do not involve separation of the children from either of the parents. the father proposes no change in the parties’ circumstances other than that the parties not approach each other when they are both present at school and extracurricular activities which both parents should be able to attend. such an order would have little or no effect upon the children as it would see circumstances that are not too far removed, if at all, from that which presently takes place. on the mother’s application the children would lose the benefit of seeing the father as often as they currently do and in particular at extracurricular and school events. however, such a preclusion as the mother seeks would not diminish in any meaningful way the father's relationship with each of the children and would relieve the children of the undue anxiety and worry that they experience when both the parents are present at functions and activities. there is no evidence before me which causes me to find that either of the children's participation in activities or their development of skills or socialisation or their general welfare through involvement in extracurricular or school activities will be adversely affected on account of their father's absence from such activities whilst the children are in their mother’s care, (e) the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   the respective applications of the parties do not raise issues of practical difficulty and expense of x and y spending time or communicating with the parents, (f) each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   each of the parents have the capacity to provide for the children's needs including emotional and intellectual needs other than in respect of the parties’ regard of the father failing to recognise and appreciate the significance of his attitudes and the effect of them upon the children's views and welfare, (g) the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   the children are of an age where their views need to be understood in the context of the respective care provided by their parents and the effect of the children's exposure to the parents’ attitudes particularly in respect of each other and of the father in respect of the mother’s husband, (h) this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   this subsection is not relevant to these proceedings, (i) the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   the father's attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood are such that x and y bear an unnecessary burden in respect of the father's views about their mother and her husband, (j) i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   i have set out the circumstances of family violence in this matter. family violence in this matter is dated but i accept the mother’s submission that in the context the history of this matter the family violence perpetrated by the father against the mother causes her to be fearful. this subsection also speaks of family violence "involving" "a member of the child's family". this subsection permits by its language for account be taken of the father's assault of mr c who is now a member of x and y's family constituted by their mother's marriage to him, (k) there are no current family violence orders in this matter,   there are no current family violence orders in this matter,  & m) proceedings in this matter have been on foot since june 2021. the parties have managed to parent x and y despite the antagonism that constitutes part of their parenting relationship. whilst the children have the benefit of meaningful relationships with each of their parents, their welfare is diminished on account of the anxiety and worry that arises when the children and their parents are both present during the time the children would otherwise spend with their mother. parents when separated should conduct themselves in the presence of each other and the children in a way so as to enable the children to understand and know that the parents maintain a respectful relationship so the children’s sense of well-being extends to their understanding of and experience of their respective relationships with their parents.
the orders to be made
associate: dated: 4 july 2023
dated: 4 july 2023
[1] act 46 of 2006, section 3, schedule one, item 8, operation 1 july 2006[2] hedlund & hedlund [2021] fedcfamc1a 84 at [118].