last updated: 4 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
markwell & ranwick (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 846
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
... erred by demonstrating he viewed the matter through a lens of views he held in earlier proceedings (2014-2016), thus going to a failure to bring an impartial mind to the issues before him.
the mother’s evidence
the mother’s written submissions
strength of appeal there is no adequate reason to make erroneous orders, limiting [d]’s time with her mother (and sister by proxy), yet leaving her in her mother’s care for a further 7 weeks after making the orders. it is submitted this is illogical and supports the appeal. it was plainly wrong to make orders limiting [d]’s time with her mother in circumstances where there was relevant and probative evidence that this would not be in [d]’s best interest. absence of a family report, the report from dcj is the only independent evidence the court has failed to properly rely on and give weight. it is submitted his honour did not have adequate evidence to support the orders and minimise [d]’s time with her mother. it is submitted his honour did not adequately analyse the children’s best interest pursuant to s60cc, as it applies now and into the future. the court applied inadequate weight to the father providing false and misleading information, as substantiated by dcj in their cover letter of november 2022, thus demonstrating apprehended bias. the court placed inadequate weight on [b]’s best interest and limiting her relationship with her only sibling, and the effect this will have on both girls, failing to apply mandatory provisions. his honour failed to admit the mother’s evidence of the audio recordings leading to an unfair hearing and a miscarriage of justice as the evidence was bona fide in that the psychological harm to [d], as identified by dcj, was continuing. it must be asked how the father and [ms an] were so certain on 7 march [d] was “coming home for good this time” with the lack of insight in talking to [d] about this fact. it is submitted his honour preferred the mother to not have access to justice through legal representation given his denial of the mother seeking an adjournment to obtain representation. his honour’s remarks regarding ‘hughes j final orders were predicated on the mother relocating to [city ab] in a particular time’ is ‘plainly wrong’. his honour failed to apply adequate weight to the full compliance by the mother of 14 march orders, thus demonstrating a willingness to facilitate the relationship between [d] and her father. however, there was evidence the father was not, which hh acknowledged verbally on 15 may 2023 where he stated words to the effect ‘i know the father was wanting no contact’. it is submitted this goes to the strength of the appeal in that his honour ignored evidence which: a) identified risk to [d] in her father and his partner’s care, and b) clearly stated it is not in [d]’s best interest to have minimal contact with her mother. it is submitted his honour failed to properly apply weight to child’s best interest in that [d] had a further 7 weeks to grow and nurture her established home routines with her mother and sister, affording her attachment to deepen, in addition to deepening valued and supportive relationships with her teachers and peers and settling more into her school environment, thus making the material change much more difficult for [d] come 2 july. additionally, [d] settled into the alternate weekend time with her father since march. routine and structure are imperative to a child, particularly of [d]’s age, and to have this so materially changed cannot possibly be in her best interest and is of no benefit to [d] in making a major change to her care arrangements. indeed, the evidence of child experts at dcj does not warrant such a radical change to [d]’s care arrangements, thus going to the strength of the appeal. the report dcj sent to the court initially, was not the same report provided to the parties. dcj advised the mother in june that the request to redact the report came from the court. this was done in circumstances where counsel for the father acknowledged this would require a hearing and sought same. his honour declined to re-list the matter. the following day, the ‘alternate assessment’ was provided by his honour’s chambers. under the heading ‘[ms an]’ (p16/25), section 15, risk factors present, this is redacted. it is submitted the content relating to [ms an] in the report initially provided by dcj would have identified the issues relating to [ms an] that are now known to the mother. if dcj are right in the information they have provided to the mother and the court did request for dcj to redact the parts pertaining to [ms an], it is submitted his honour has made an error to properly exercise jurisdiction, failed to afford the mother procedural fairness, limited the mother’s argument, which culminates in a miscarriage of justice, leading to orders that are manifestly unreasonable and plainly unjust. further, it has exposed [d] to risk, which was present in the material before the court. see simmons & simmons at 33, 36, 45, 48, 50 and 52. the prospects of the appeal succeeding are high, therefore it is in [d]’s best interest to grant the orders sought by the mother in this application and if not, to provide clear reasoning why a stay is not applied. addendum authorities simmons & simmons [2023] fedcfamc1a 44 (5 april 2023) johnson v johnson [2000] hca 48 7 september 2000 charisteas v charisteas [2021] hca 29 (6 october 2021) karttunen v finland unreported, united nations human rights committee, ccpr.c/46/d/387/1989, 5 november 1992 at [7.2] discussed in martin et al (eds), international human rights law and practice: cases, treaties and materials (1997) at 527-531 livesey [1983] hca 17, (1983) 151 clr 288 at 293-29 house v the king [1936] hca 40, (1936) 55 clr 499 (17 august 1936) annesley & pembleton [2022] fedcfamc1a 8 (7 february 2022) [76] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97 markarian v the queen (2005) 228 clr 357 at [25] willmore & menendez [2022] fedcfamc1a 73 (20 may 2022) halstron & halstron [2022] fedcfamc1a 65 bbh v the queen [2012] hca 9, (2012) 245 clr 499 cdj & vaj (1998) 197 clr 172 at 87 legal principles: s60cc (2)(b) family law act 1975 (cth) s60cc family law act 1975 (cth) s65 daa family law act 1975 (cth) s65da family law act 1975 (cth) s138 evidence act 1995 (cth) s140 evidence act 1995 (cth)
the father’s written submissions
summary dismissal on 25 march 2022, orders we made by consent in chambers by his honour judge w. neville, arising out of a consent position agreed between the parties on 18 march 2022. order 2 of the orders dated 25 march 2022 provides “that pursuant to s 114 of the family law act 1975 (cth), the first respondent is hereby restrained from filing any application other than a contravention application without first obtaining leave of the court”. at the time those orders were made, the mother was the first respondent, and was the subject of an application to declare her a vexatious litigant. the mother has not sought leave to file the application in a proceeding dated 23 june 2023. the father has not been given an opportunity to oppose leave being granted. the mother has expressly contravened order 2 of the orders dated 25 march 2022. the application in a proceeding should be summarily dismissed, along with costs to the father, pursuant to s 117(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth). stay of orders there mere filing of an appeal is not sufficient grounds for a stay of proceedings to be granted, the granting of a stay is wholly discretionary and should only occur when appropriate circumstances can be established to warrant the granting of the stay. in alridge & keaton (stay appeal) [2009] famcafc 106, the full court elegantly articulated the relevant principles in the determination of a stay. principles relevant to this matter are: that the onus to establish a proper basis for the stay rests with the applicant, that a person who has obtained a judgement is entitled to the benefit of that judgement, and to presume that judgement is correct, the bona fides of the applicant, the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted, a preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal (that is to say, whether the appellant has an arguable case), the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in the child’s living arrangements, and the best interests of the child the subject of the proceedings. the father contends the mother has failed to establish any proper basis for the stay, and that he is entitled to the benefit of his honour judge w. neville’s judgement. the father puts in issue the bona fides of the mother. this matter has a long and protracted history in which the father contends the mother has, time and again, revealed herself to be dishonest, capricious, and prone to continuing conflict. the father contends this application (and, indeed, the appeal) represents another example of the mother’s continual attempts to prolong this litigation. there is no risk in this case that if the stay is not granted, the appeal will be rendered nugatory. the father contends that a preliminary assessment of the strength of the mother’s case on appeal reveals it to be misconceived, baseless, and doomed to fail. whilst the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in the child’s living arrangements is a pertinent consideration in this case, so too is the child’s best interests, which the father contends is living with him from 2 july 2023 pursuant to the 15 may 2023 orders, particularly in light of the numerous adverse findings against the mother contained in his honour’s judgement. restraint against [ms an] the mother has propounded no evidentiary basis why a restraint ought to be granted against the father bringing the children into contact with [ms an], his fiancé. the mother does not particularise what head of power she relies on in seeking the injunction, although noting there is no extant part vii application before the court, it is presumably pursuant to 68b(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth). section 68b(2) says the court may grant an injunction in the terms set out therein where it is “just or convenient to do so”. the father contends that it is neither. the father is engaged to [ms an]. they live together. they have a child together. [ms an] has not, at any stage during these proceedings, been the subject of adverse findings of this court. notwithstanding the mother’s assertions to the contrary, [ms an] has also never been identified as a risk of harm to the child. conclusion if not dismissed summarily, the application in a case filed 23 june 2023 on behalf of the mother ought to be otherwise dismissed, along with costs to the father, pursuant to s 117(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
outline of principle ] this is an appeal from a discretionary judgment. there are well established principles on the limits on interference by an appellate court with such a judgment (see house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499, gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513, (1979) flc 90-716). [18] the principles to be applied in determining an application for a stay of orders both in the general law and in respect of parenting proceedings are also well known (see the commissioner of taxation of the commonwealth of australia v myer emporium limited [no.1] [1986] hca 13, (1986) 160 clr 220 at 222, alexander v cambridge credit corporation (1985) 2 nsw lr 685, jennings construction limited v burgundy royale investments pty limited [1986] hca 84, (1986) 161 clr 681, clemett & clemett [1980] famca 90, (1981) flc 91-013, jrn & ken v ieg & blg [1998] hcatrans 263, (1998) 72 aljr 1329 at 1332). the authorities stress the discretionary nature of the application which should be determined on its merits. principles relevant to this matter include the following: the onus to establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay. however it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any “special” or “exceptional” circumstances, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to presume the judgment is correct, the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, the bona fides of the applicant, a stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all parties - this may involve a court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, a weighing of the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted – this will be a substantial factor in determining whether it will be appropriate to grant a stay, some preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal – whether the appellant has an arguable case, the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements, the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time, and the best interests of the child the subject of the proceedings are a significant consideration.
the constant emphasis of the cases is that before reversal an appellate court must be well satisfied that the primary judge was plainly wrong, his decision being no proper exercise of his judicial discretion. while authority teaches that error in the proper weight to be given to particular matters may justify reversal on appeal, it is also well established that it is never enough that an appellate court, left to itself, would have arrived at a different conclusion. when no error of law or mistake of fact is present, to arrive at a different conclusion which does not of itself justify reversal can be due to little else but a difference of view as to weight: it follows that disagreement only on matters of weight by no means necessarily justifies a reversal of the trial judge. because of this and because the assessment of weight is particularly liable to be affected by seeing and hearing the parties, which only the trial judge can do, an appellate court should be slow to overturn a primary judge's discretionary decision on grounds which only involve conflicting assessments of matters of weight. in the present case it should not have done so at all.
statements of the general principles to be applied by an appellate court when asked to set aside an order made in the exercise of a judicial discretion generally include a reference to the trial judge giving inadequate weight to some factors and excessive weight to others. it is however a mistake to suppose that a conclusion that the trial judge has given inadequate or excessive weight to some factors is in itself a sufficient basis for an appellate court to substitute its own discretion for that of the trial judge. as kitto j. said in lovell v. lovell (1950) 81 clr, at p 533:
“the proposition that the appeal court will consider whether 'no sufficient weight' has been given to relevant considerations is not inconsistent with the principle that the appeal court does not deal with the appeal as if it were exercising the original jurisdiction, even if it considers that insufficient weight has been given to some relevant consideration, it will still not substitute its judgment for that of the primary judge unless it comes clearly to the conclusion for that reason that the discretion has been exercised wrongfully.”
15. it is clear that that test will not be satisfied merely by reason that the appellate court, considering the matter de novo, would itself have arrived at a different result. the fact that a decision on custody depends upon the exercise of a judicial discretion recognizes that in many cases different minds may arrive at different conclusions. 16. the advantage which a trial judge has of seeing and hearing the witnesses is of particular importance in matters of custody where so much depends on an evaluation of the characters and personalities of the parents, and their attitudes, not only to the child, but also to each other. the attribution of comparative weight or importance to various factors will generally be influenced by the impression formed on seeing and hearing each parent, and in appropriate cases the child or children involved. some objective matters such, for example, as relative financial resources and adequacy of accommodation may stand in a different position but in the present case it is not suggested that any error occurred in that respect.
such reasons for appellate restraint are of general application. however, they have particular relevance to appeals within, and from, the family court of australia. this is because of the functions and purposes of that court and the difficult and evaluative decisions which it often has to make. the peculiar nature of decisions relating to the intensely personal questions of the division of the property of parties to a failed marriage and the welfare of their children makes it essential that those who decide appeals respect the onerous responsibilities of those whose decisions they review. they need to recognise that it is of the very nature of such decisions, including those relating to the residence of children, that any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions. this is an inescapable feature of the nature of this jurisdiction.
discretionary judgment [128] this is an appeal against a discretionary judgment and the principles to be applied are well established: house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499, gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513, norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 and cdj v vaj (1998) 197 clr 172. [129] we are mindful of the position of the federal magistrate in relation to complaints about assessment of weight where no error of law or fact is obvious: see gronow v gronow at 519-20 per stephen j. we are also mindful of the necessity to avoid “an overly critical, or pernickety, analysis of the primary judge’s reasons, given the large element of judgment, discretion and intuition which is involved”: see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 per kirby j at 211, a v j [1995] famca 56, (1995) 19 fam lr 260 at 269 per full court (fogarty, lindenmayer and o’ryan jj) and rollings v rollings [2009] famcafc 87, (2009) 230 flr 396 per full court (boland, o’ryan and murphy jj).
sometimes judicial interventions and observations can exceed what is a proper and reasonable expression of tentative views. whether that has happened is a matter of judgment taking into account all of the circumstances of the case. however, one thing that is clear is that the expression of tentative views during the course of argument as to matters on which the parties are permitted to make full submissions does not manifest partiality or bias.  ] ... whether a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question the judge is required to decide. [32] as the plurality in johnson v johnson explained, “[t]he hypothetical reasonable observer of the judge's conduct is postulated in order to emphasise that the test is objective, is founded in the need for public confidence in the judiciary, and is not based purely upon the assessment by some judges of the capacity or performance of their colleagues.” [33] because the test is objective it is important to keep an inquiry about apprehension of bias distinct from any inquiry about actual bias. an inquiry about actual bias in the form of prejudgment would require assessment of the state of mind of the judge in question. no doubt that would have to be done, at least for the most part, on the basis of what the judge had said and done. but to allow an inquiry about whether the judge had in fact prejudged some issue to enter into a debate about what a fair-minded lay observer might apprehend is to introduce considerations that are irrelevant to the issue that is to be decided when a party submits that there is or was a reasonable apprehension of bias.  ] in ebner v official trustee in bankruptcy, the plurality pointed out that application of the apprehension of bias principle requires two steps. first, it requires the identification of what it is said might lead the judge to decide a case other than on its legal and factual merits. and second, there must be an articulation of the logical connection between that matter and the feared deviation from the course of deciding the case on its merits. the plurality in ebner went on to say that “[t]he bare assertion that a judge (or juror) has an 'interest' in litigation, or an interest in a party to it, will be of no assistance until the nature of the interest, and the asserted connection with the possibility of departure from impartial decision making, is articulated.” so too, in this case, the bare assertion that the judge appeared to be biased through prejudgment would be of no assistance without articulation of the connection between the events giving rise to the apprehension of bias through prejudgment and the possibility of departure from impartial decision making. ... [67] ... an allegation of apprehended bias requires an objective assessment of the connection between the facts and circumstances said to give rise to the apprehension and the asserted conclusion that the judge might not bring an impartial mind to bear upon the issues that are to be decided. an allegation of apprehended bias does not direct attention to, or permit consideration of, whether the judge had in fact prejudged an issue. to ask whether the reasons for judgment delivered after trial of the action somehow confirm, enhance or diminish the existence of a reasonable apprehension of bias runs at least a serious risk of inverting the proper order of inquiry (by first assuming the existence of a reasonable apprehension). inquiring whether there has been “the crystallisation of that apprehension in a demonstration of actual prejudgment” impermissibly confuses the different inquiries that the two different allegations (actual bias and apprehended bias) require to be made. and, no less fundamentally, an inquiry of either kind moves perilously close to the fallacious argument that because one side lost the litigation the judge was biased, or the equally fallacious argument that making some appealable error, whether by not dealing with all of the losing side's arguments or otherwise, demonstrates prejudgment.  ] here, however, it was said that “the fact that one party appeared before the judge on seven separate days in closed court raised a different and additional concern.” that concern was identified as the possibility “in such circumstances that the judge's mind will become familiar with the character of the plaintiff's case to an extent that, consciously or subconsciously, there will be a tendency to place the further evidence within the pre-existing mental structure” (emphasis added). but the existence of a “concern” described as the possibility of placing the evidence led at trial into a “pre-existing mental structure” does not demonstrate that the fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might have prejudged an issue to be decided at trial. in order to establish such a reasonable apprehension it is necessary to analyse more closely the connection that is asserted between the conduct and disposition of interlocutory applications and the possibility of prejudgment. [70] the fact that einstein j made several ex parte interlocutory orders and on each occasion directed that those applications, the material in support, the reasons for making the orders and the orders themselves not be disclosed to one side of the litigation did not found a reasonable apprehension of prejudgment of the issues that were to be fought at trial. it may well be that the directions not to disclose material should not have been left in force for as long as they were. perhaps they should not have been made at all. but if their making or the failure to limit their duration was wrong, that did not found a reasonable apprehension of bias.  ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
consideration & disposition  “weight” (pars. 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 15, 21, 30), (b) bias (pars. 2, 3, 12, 14, 17, 18, 20, 24, 25, 26, 34, 35 & 40) (c) procedural fairness (pars. 6, 9, 10, 14, 16, 20, 22, 35) (d) miscellaneous (pars. 1 – 3, 5, 11, 28 & 40)   bias (pars. 2, 3, 12, 14, 17, 18, 20, 24, 25, 26, 34, 35 & 40) (c) procedural fairness (pars. 6, 9, 10, 14, 16, 20, 22, 35) (d) miscellaneous (pars. 1 – 3, 5, 11, 28 & 40)   procedural fairness (pars. 6, 9, 10, 14, 16, 20, 22, 35) (d) miscellaneous (pars. 1 – 3, 5, 11, 28 & 40)   miscellaneous (pars. 1 – 3, 5, 11, 28 & 40)   after the dcj material arrived, unannounced, at the court in november 2022, there was the continuation of the earlier, 5th october hearing (adjourned because of the mother’s ill-health on the day), on 24th november 2022 at which both parties were present via video-link, (b) orders were made on that occasion that provided a timetable for the provision of written submissions in relation to the material provided by the dcj. there was no appeal in relation to those orders, (c) after the second tranche of material from dcj arrived in december 2022, a directions hearing was held on 20th december 2022, again with both parties attending via video‑link, (d) orders were made on that occasion also, which provided for further written submissions in relation to this later material from dcj. there was no appeal from those orders, (e) both parties provided written submissions in accordance with the november and december orders. those submissions were set out in full in the judgment under appeal.   orders were made on that occasion that provided a timetable for the provision of written submissions in relation to the material provided by the dcj. there was no appeal in relation to those orders, (c) after the second tranche of material from dcj arrived in december 2022, a directions hearing was held on 20th december 2022, again with both parties attending via video‑link, (d) orders were made on that occasion also, which provided for further written submissions in relation to this later material from dcj. there was no appeal from those orders, (e) both parties provided written submissions in accordance with the november and december orders. those submissions were set out in full in the judgment under appeal.   after the second tranche of material from dcj arrived in december 2022, a directions hearing was held on 20th december 2022, again with both parties attending via video‑link, (d) orders were made on that occasion also, which provided for further written submissions in relation to this later material from dcj. there was no appeal from those orders, (e) both parties provided written submissions in accordance with the november and december orders. those submissions were set out in full in the judgment under appeal.   orders were made on that occasion also, which provided for further written submissions in relation to this later material from dcj. there was no appeal from those orders, (e) both parties provided written submissions in accordance with the november and december orders. those submissions were set out in full in the judgment under appeal.   both parties provided written submissions in accordance with the november and december orders. those submissions were set out in full in the judgment under appeal.
associate: dated: 13 july 2023
dated: 13 july 2023
appendix a
grounds of appeal the learned trial judge erred by failing to afford the respondent mother procedural fairness. the learned trial judge erred by demonstrating apprehended bias in favour of the second respondent father. the learned trial judge erred by viewing the matter prejudicially leading to erroneous orders. the learned trial judge erred by failing to give adequate weight to probative and relevant evidence, not ensuring discretion is balanced to achieve a 'just' outcome and as such, failed to apply mandatory provisions of the family law act 1975 (cth) objectives to ensure the principles of a meaningful relationship are applied. the learned trial judge erred by failing to properly apply the law and, in particular, but not limited to, a failure to ensure the importance of the maternal and sibling biological relationships are maintained as guided by the best interest principles of the family law act 1975 (cth) and s60b(4) to ensure the united nations rights of the child, article 3, 9 and 12 are applied correctly. the learned trial judge erred by failing to ensure the fair hearing rule and as such, has shown apprehended bias in the decision making that has led to an injustice by not applying the mandatory principles in accordance with s60cc provisions in the family law act 1975 (cth) of the best interests of the child. the learned trial judge erred by not giving adequate reasoning as it relates to the orders, in particular, but not limited to, order 10. the learned trial judge erred by uttering statements about the appellant mother which go beyond the realm of tentative statements, to statements which the fair‑minded lay observer would conclude embodies a failure to be impartial. the learned trial judge erred by not affording the appellant mother's right to procedural fairness and natural justice, in circumstances where the reasonable lay observer would conclude the trial judge could not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the matter before him. the learned trial judge erred by exercising actual and/or apprehended bias. the learned trial judge erred by impermissibly intervening when the appellant mother was speaking, including, but not limited to, during cross-examination of the second respondent father. the learned trial judge erred by failing to properly consider risk of harm to the child, [d], in circumstances where the evidence was that the second respondent father and his partner, [ms an], are persons of interest for psychological harm to [d], thus, the trial judge ignoring prima facie evidence in an act of apprehended and/or actual bias in favour of the second respondent father and failure to consider or properly consider child's best interest and child's safety and welfare. the learned trial judge erred by failing to apply or properly apply weight to the evidence before him. the learned trial judge erred by making orders which breach the fair hearing rule, inconsistent with the litigants in person guidelines and, as such, can be perceived as apprehended bias, demonstrating partiality in favour of the father, illogicality and a mindset that seeks to determine facts other than on their legal and factual merits. the learned trial judge erred by not giving adequate weight to, or properly considering the facts which is mandatory in determining best interests of a child, which can lead the public to lose faith in the judiciary. the learned trial judge erred by making a jurisdictional error by failing to comply with mandatory provisions in the family law act 1975 (cth), including s60cg(1)(a), s60cg(1)(b), the 'best interest' tests in accordance with the provisions set out in s60cc, s60 (b) ( 4 ), by limiting state protections and making findings which are erroneous and unreasonable. the learned trial judge erred by failing to view the material provided by department of communities of justice ("dcj") through a lens that excluded the second respondent father and his partner as a risk to [d], which can be perceived as an act as apprehended bias. the learned trial judge erred by failing to admit the audio recordings tendered into evidence as sought by the appellant mother, in circumstances where one of those recordings was not objected to by counsel for the second respondent father, in an act that demonstrates apprehended bias against the appellant mother and which may be perceived by a fair-minded lay observer as a fixed mindset. the learned trial judge erred by failing to consider the sibling relationship between [d] and her sister, [b]. the learned trial judge erred by making orders on 24 november 2022 to release the material provided by dcj to the parties, then, following an email from counsel for the father to chambers stating ''as part of his honour's orders, i understand he intends to make available the material produced by dcj to the parties. i am now instructed, with great urgency, that the material contained within the dc] file likely contains highly sensitive information about a third party. i need to bring this to his honour's urgent attention. i respectfully seek the matter be urgently re-listed in relation to this discreet issue only", the learned trial judge provided a redacted copy of the dcj report on 25 november without providing the appellant mother the right to be heard on the matter, in an act of what can be perceived by the fair-minded lay observer as apprehended bias. further, the learned trial judge erred by failing in his duty to consider the risk of harm to [d] with the information that was likely contained in the redacted report. the learned trial judge erred by failing to consider the second respondent father's capacity to involve the appellant mother in the child's life, in line with the risks identified by dcj, and probative and relevant evidence of the second respondent father's inability to foster a relationship between the child, [d], and her mother, and sister, [b], which were available to his honour. the learned trial judge erred by failing, in accordance with s11f family law act 1975 (cth), to order a family report. the learned trial judge erred by failing to appoint an independent children's lawyer ("icl") in circumstances where his honour had ventilated the appointment of an icl during proceedings. the learned trial judge erred by failing to bring an impartial mind to proceedings, often referring to the appellant mother's "numerous failed appeals" and “judge hughes' findings", thus demonstrating to the fair-minded lay observer an unwillingness to bring an impartial mind to the matter before him. the learned trial judge erred by demonstrating apprehended bias by expediting the second respondent father's application - contravention of 7 march 2023, and listing the matter for a hearing on short notice in circumstances where it was unlikely the appellant mother would have been able to procure legal representation, thus going to not affording procedural fairness to the appellant mother. the learned trial judge erred by allowing a contravention - application of 7 march 2023 to be filed by the second respondent father and heard on short notice in circumstances where the allegations contained in the application were not afforded for in the orders, therefore not summarily dismissing it. the learned trial judge erred by inferring that the appellant mother was to relocate to [city ab] in a fixed time following the making of judge hughes' final orders, in circumstances where that was not reflected in the orders of 30 june 2020, and where judge hughes made reference to the difficulty in the appellant mother finding accommodation in [city ab]. the learned trial judge erred by making finding of fact the appellant mother slept in her car with [d], in circumstances where the appellant mother adduced evidence proving she was staying in an airbnb the night the second respondent father made that allegation. the learned trial judge erred by discriminating against the appellant mother for the type of accommodation she and the children reside in, having evidence this was the only way she could relocate to [city ab], and in direct contrast to the fact the mother was living in crisis accommodation at the making of the final orders in june 2020. the learned trial judge erred by applying insignificant weight at the attempts the appellant mother had made since 3 days after the making of those final orders on 30 june 2020 to obtain accommodation in [city ab]. the learned trial judge erred by making a finding that if the appellant mother was such a risk to [d], warranting such erroneous orders, then why not remove parental responsibility in relation to [b]. the learned trial judge erred by failing to consider or properly consider the practical difficulties in [d] living primarily with her father, in circumstances where he works overnight shifts. the learned trial judge erred by erroneously finding it was in [d]’s best interest to attend [ae school], where she had met the teacher once in late 2022, as opposed to remaining at a school she has been enrolled at since the start of her education and has an established routine, established relationships with her teachers and peers, thus, going against child’s best interest considerations. the learned trial judge erred by demonstrating bias in favour of both fathers, in circumstances where he showed little to no criticism of them for unilaterally enrolling the children in a school of their choosing, yet found the mother guilty without reasonable excuse, despite in the time she found ongoing accommodation in [city ab], it was school holidays, which resulted in school closures and a school needed to be chosen for [d], and it was reasonable this would be near the school [mr solberg] enrolled [b] in, as it goes to practicality. the learned trial judge erred by not affording the mother an adjournment to properly prepare her material, then is critical for her material lacking key evidence which would have supported the mother's position, thus going to a failure to afford the appellant mother procedural fairness. the learned trial judge erred by not considering or properly considering the appellant mother's impecunious position, contrary to the evidence that was before his honour, in particular the cost of relocating to [city ab], and making an excessive costs order which is beyond her means, in particular, where her application - contravention had merit. the learned trial judge erred by finding the second respondent father, [mr ranwick], had reasonable excuse for withholding [d] from the appellant mother on 9 july 2022 in circumstances where the evidence tendered by the appellant mother, in accordance with orders of 24 november 2022, and the material from dcj provided to the court explicitly state the father was told there is no reason that [d] couldn't be handed over, thus demonstrating the father did not have reasonable excuse to contravene the orders. the learned trial judge erred by not finding the appellant mother met the threshold in accordance with rice v asplund. the learned trial judge erred by finding the second respondent father met the rule of rice v asplund in circumstances where there couldn't possibly have been a change in circumstances given the final orders considered the mother residing in [city ab]. the learned trial judge erred by demonstrating he viewed the matter through a lens of views he held in earlier proceedings (2014-2016), thus going to a failure to bring an impartial mind to the issues before him.
[1] solberg & markwell [2023] fedcfamc2f 552[2] on “waiver” and the requirement that any application for recusal on the basis of bias of any kind be made promptly, see vakauta v kelly [1989] hca 44; (1989) 167 clr 568 at 572 (brennan, deane & gaudron jj) & 579 (dawson j); smits v roach (2006) 227 clr 423 at 439-442 (gleeson cj, heydon & bell jj) & 465-466; michael wilson & partners v nicholls (2011) 244 clr 427 at 449 (gummow acj, hayne, crennan and bell jj).[3] for example, the authorities listed included, and ranged from high court and full court cases on sexual abuse in criminal matters and risk of abuse (bbh v the queen [2012] hca 9; (2011) 245 clr 499; isles v nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) 367 flr 338; (2022) 65 fam lr 288), to human rights litigation involving finland. when asked about such authorities, and quite a number of others, especially a number of recent full court decisions in which appeals have been dismissed and in others, partially allowed, the mother was unable to shed much light on why she relied upon them.[4] aldridge & keaton (stay appeal) [2009] famcafc 106. for a more recent discussion, but no formal ruling, by a differently constituted full court (thackray, ainslie-wallace & murphy jj) of stay applications, where aldridge & keaton (stay appeal) was distinguished but the comments of brennan j in jennings construction ltd v burgundy royale investments pty limited [1986] hca 84; (1986) 161 clr 681 were further considered, see anderson v senior (stay appeal) [2013] famcafc 152; (2013) 279 flr 399; (2014) 50 fam lr 21 at [35], [37] and [38]. see also the comments of the full court (warnick, boland & may jj) in k & b [2006] famca 848; (2006) flc 93-288.[5] gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63; (1979) 144 clr 513 at pp.519-520.[6] cdj v vaj (1998) 197 clr 172. [7] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[8] concrete pty ltd v parramatta design & developments pty ltd [2006] hca 55; (2006) 229 clr 577. his honour, gummow a-cj, concurred, at [4].[9] michael wilson & partners limited v nicholls (2011) 244 clr 427.[10] see also heydon j’s comments, at [117], to the effect that, even on the facts in michael wilson, “prolonged familiarity” was insufficient to establish any relevant apprehended bias.[11] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.