last updated: 23 august 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
leyton & jacks [2023] fedcfamc2f 860
orders
the court orders that:
by consent:  with the mother on mother’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm each year, (b) with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm each year, (c) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) on x’s birthday if a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.30pm in the parent’s care he is not living with that day and from 10.00am to 5.00pm if a non-school day or such other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm each year, (c) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) on x’s birthday if a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.30pm in the parent’s care he is not living with that day and from 10.00am to 5.00pm if a non-school day or such other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) on x’s birthday if a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.30pm in the parent’s care he is not living with that day and from 10.00am to 5.00pm if a non-school day or such other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter noting x will be in the father’s care from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) on x’s birthday if a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.30pm in the parent’s care he is not living with that day and from 10.00am to 5.00pm if a non-school day or such other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   on x’s birthday if a school day from the conclusion of school until 6.30pm in the parent’s care he is not living with that day and from 10.00am to 5.00pm if a non-school day or such other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   if the holiday is interstate the travelling parent provide the other parent at least seven (7) days prior written notice by way of a detailed itinerary including flight and accommodation details and contact telephone numbers, (b) if the holiday is outside the commonwealth of australia, the travelling parent provide the other at least 42 days written notice by way of a detailed itinerary including flight and accommodation details and contact telephone numbers, and (c) the travelling party shall provide the other parent make up time for the time missed to be facilitated by the other parent at a time agreed in writing within three (3) months of the conclusion of the extended holiday.   if the holiday is outside the commonwealth of australia, the travelling parent provide the other at least 42 days written notice by way of a detailed itinerary including flight and accommodation details and contact telephone numbers, and (c) the travelling party shall provide the other parent make up time for the time missed to be facilitated by the other parent at a time agreed in writing within three (3) months of the conclusion of the extended holiday.   the travelling party shall provide the other parent make up time for the time missed to be facilitated by the other parent at a time agreed in writing within three (3) months of the conclusion of the extended holiday.
the court further orders:
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
issues to be determined in this case
the parties and their history leading to this application
the evidence
should the court make an order for equal shared or sole parental responsibility?  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa). (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or  family violence.
the relationship between the parents is one of ongoing chronic hostility and antagonism. they do not trust each other, neither believes that the other parent is a capable and responsible parent.
what are the legal principles the court applies in determining where a child should live?
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
how does the court determine what is in x’s best interests?
do the parties’ proposals provide for a meaningful relationship between x and each of his parents?
is x at risk of harm in either parent’s care?
what is the state of the mother’s home?
...has struggled to downsize and hangs on to possessions as they “may come in handy later” or she is emotionally attached to them. she prefers to call herself a “collector” or “clutterer’ rather than a hoarder.
rubbish was scattered on the front lawn and the small veranda of the house. [ms jacks] could not have been accused of going to any length to conceal her living arrangements prior to the writer's visit. the walk across the rubbish strewn front yard did not fully prepare the writer for the state of [ms jacks]' house. the interior of the small house was cluttered and crowded with a very broad range of materials. these materials seemed to range from displayed china, cup and saucer collections to complete rubbish. there was no apparent order to the material in the house. the house had all characteristics of being the home of a very poorly controlled hoarder. the state of the house was far beyond untidy or cluttered. the house and garden would require a considerable effort by a group of people over a few days and a number of skips to tidy up, clean and declutter. it appears from the documents that this has taken place on at least one occasion. the writer was surprised that the landlord has not evicted [ms jacks] from the house because of the state of the house and front yard.
the area of the house where the writer was and where the interview took place at a small table had changed considerably since the writer had been previously there. the area was no longer one of depressing squalor. the stuff and material of the area had been neatly organised and stacked. the home remains the house of a hoarder. despite the variety of materials of the room being neatly stacked this neatness does not in any way reflect a neat and orderly house. [ms jacks] told the writer that she was expecting a skip to be delivered the next week. this skip will be provided to her by a local volunteer group who have been helping her organise her house. [ms jacks] was full of praise for this group who appear to have provided her with considerable help and support in recent weeks.
does the mother’s home pose a risk to x from a physical safety or hygiene point of view?
the condition of the house is obviously dangerously unsafe. the unsanitary, unhygienic state is not a safe environment for anyone to live, let alone children. reports from inspections carried out by the landlord in the past have identified the mother's home in line with hoarding and squalor. the sanitation issues arising from this are numerous. and it has issues for air quality. dust, odour, and ammonia from decaying waste products can cause serious air quality issues in a hoarder's home. it may be difficult to breathe and respiratory problems may develop. it's dangerous enough to clean up such an environment without respiratory protection, but if people and animals live in these conditions, it could have a very detrimental effect on their health over time. further, cockroaches, rats, flies, and other pests are attracted to rotting food and animal waste products. a severe hoarding situation can become a haven for pests that spread diseases to the people and animals living in these unsanitary conditions. when the mother's previous landlord provided an affidavit to this honourable court, [ms o], it was sworn that neighbours had complained of vermin coming and going from the mother's house. (as per the original)
does the mother’s living situation put x at psychological risk?
he [x] is faced with years of taunting and shaming by his peers because of the condition of his mother's house. [x]'s world will constrict and become very limited if he continues to live in the care of his mother.   is in an emotional bind. he is unable to leave his mother's care voluntarily. to leave his mother would be to abandon her. if he leaves, there will be no one to care for her and to look after her. [x] loves his mother he would be unable to abandon her. to place [x] in his father's care relieves him of the responsibility of making a decision to leave his mother and to abandon her. by placing [x] in his father's care any anger that [ms jacks] and [ms f] express will be at the court and [mr leyton] and not at [x]. [x] remains strongly influenced by his sister and [ms jacks].
if he’s placed at his father’s full-time care, the boy has a chance of getting some perspective on what is happening with his mother and what is happening in her life, rather than becoming completely immersed and enmeshed in it.
the risks are that, if he’s [[x]] is] overwhelmed, he might develop his own emotional problems – anxiety, for instance... another one is he might develop behavioural problems. and the obvious ones are alcohol and drugs. another risk is he just becomes completely devoted to his mother and cares for her for the rest of his life. lives with her, doesn’t realise his own dreams and hopes and ambitions, and his life becomes socially and emotionally circumscribed by his mother’s mental health needs. ...it would be hard for him just to have the emotional energy and the emotional confidence to go out and get into relationships.
his [x’s] level of functioning is quite unique to a 14 year old man, young person. he has recently secured some work at [p company] and using his funds to save up for [lessons] so that he can become a [professional]. he plays instruments. i think i have made a whole long list but i have forgotten because he is just functioning beautifully, socialising very, very well. he has a group of really great friends. we have had to put a little bit of a protective barrier around some of his friends see him as the caretaker or the helper and tend to come with him – to him with issues and drama and, yes, he seems to be the voice of reason. so he is actually probably quite mature in some ways. i believe if you were to ask his teachers he has the utmost respect for authority, very polite, considerate and, yes, his most recent report he was very, very happy with, it was the best report he has ever had with as and bs and he was particularly chuffed about his a plus in music. he works really, really hard to be who he is today and that doesn’t happen in a bubble. so i’m suggesting that the people that are around him are somewhat responsible for that too. as a 14 year old kid he is very unique.   leyton] said, "he is seemingly maintaining a positive attitude. he has a good circle of friends who want to do well at school. he is striving to do the best that he can.... [mr leyton] said that [x] is good at self learning. according to [mr leyton], [x] has made "leaps and bounds with maths."
is the mother’s hoarding behaviour symptomatic of a broader mental health issue?
notice to attend for cross-examination (1) this rule applies only to a trial. (2) a party seeking to cross-examine a deponent must, at least 14 days before the earlier of the following: (a) the first day of the trial in which the affidavit is to be relied on in evidence, (b) the first day the affidavit is otherwise to be relied on in evidence, give to the party who filed the affidavit a written notice stating the name of the deponent who is required to attend court for cross-examination.   the first day of the trial in which the affidavit is to be relied on in evidence, (b) the first day the affidavit is otherwise to be relied on in evidence,   the first day the affidavit is otherwise to be relied on in evidence,   jacks] has shown incredible improvement over the years. both her resilience and confidence have increased. she was definitely happier, confident and more motivated in sessions from that point [the children returning to her care]. [ms jacks] said “anxiety is so much better now” (that she has the kids) and she is “even managing the pain better”. the only thing i can comment on, is the improvement in [ms jacks]’s mental state, confidence and sleeping since her the children chose to stay with her.
would x be at risk of psychological harm if he lived primarily with the father?
i would have some grave concerns of a rapid decline in his mental health and i make that opinion and judgment given that’s how he came to seeking psychological care in the first instance. there was the threat of not being able to spend time with his mum and good, quality time, for a length of time. i think there’s a big risk of [x]’s mental health declining and, yes, it would – it would be something that i think his suicidal ideation, his sense of hopelessness and helplessness would increase with such a dramatic change.
what are x’s views and how much weight should they carry?
i feel ignored all the time....i’ve said all these things over the years... no one listens.
since approximately year 4/2018 i have been worried about my living arrangements. the worry i have is if i am not allowed to have contact with either mum or dad. i would like to be listened to because this is a case that involves me and my wellbeing. i want to have equal care arrangements of 1 week at mum's and 1 week at dads then i don't have to worry about not seeing either parent for some time and my parents will hopefully not disagree and there will be no more need for court. whenever court comes around i get extremely stressed out because i'm worried that i don't have a say in anything and that i will lose all contact with either mum or dad. i think having both parents in my life is extremely important and if i couldn't see my parents, i'm not sure how i would cope. i think having both a mother and father figure is important in a person's life. i want to be like other kids, have a normal life and not have to be stressed and sad because of court.
x is caught in a world of contradictory, opposing emotional forces. he is caught between the emotional forces, emotional influences, emotional demands and emotional needs of his mother, his sister and his father.
i want the court to know i like it as it is now. i just want it (the fighting between his parents) to stop.
what is x’s relationship like with each of the parents and his step-mother?
in an ideal world [mr leyton] and [ms jacks] would have been able to work together to assess how the children were coping with the changes. ideally the parents would have been able to work together co-operatively to support the children as they adapted and responded to the changes that were taking place in their lives. this did not happen.
are each of x’s parents able to meet his needs, including both physical and emotional?
what is the order that is likely to bring an end to any further proceedings?
what are the orders that are in x’s best interests?
associate: dated: 14 july 2023
dated: 14 july 2023