last updated: 2 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jinks & gamba [2023] fedcfamc2f 959
orders
the court orders that:  notify the mother in writing of the decision to be made and the options available and allow seven (7) days for a reply from the mother in writing, (b) consider the mother's views when making the decision and notify the mother of the decision made within seven (7) days of making the decision.   consider the mother's views when making the decision and notify the mother of the decision made within seven (7) days of making the decision.   in term 1, 2 and 3 nsw school holidays in odd numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday to 5.00pm on the second saturday, (b) in term 1, 2 and 3 nsw school holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am on the second saturday to 5.00pm on the third saturday, (c) for christmas holidays in odd numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday to 5.00pm on the fourth saturday, and (d) for christmas holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am the fourth saturday to 5.00pm on the last saturday.   in term 1, 2 and 3 nsw school holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am on the second saturday to 5.00pm on the third saturday, (c) for christmas holidays in odd numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday to 5.00pm on the fourth saturday, and (d) for christmas holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am the fourth saturday to 5.00pm on the last saturday.   for christmas holidays in odd numbered years from 9.00am on the first saturday to 5.00pm on the fourth saturday, and (d) for christmas holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am the fourth saturday to 5.00pm on the last saturday.   for christmas holidays in even numbered years from 9.00am the fourth saturday to 5.00pm on the last saturday.   the mother is to not spend time with the child in the term 1 school holidays in 2024. (b) in lieu, the child is to spend time with the mother from 12.00pm on 21 february 2024 to 2.00pm on 6 march 2024.   in lieu, the child is to spend time with the mother from 12.00pm on 21 february 2024 to 2.00pm on 6 march 2024.   in terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, the child is to be collected by the mother inside the town d airport, or in a public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents and failing agreement inside the town d police station. the father is to collect the child at brisbane airport or an agreed public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents, and failing agreement inside the brisbane police station. (b) in christmas holidays, the child is to be collected by the mother inside the town d airport or in a public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents, and failing agreement inside the town d police station. the father is to collect the child at city e airport or in a public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents, and failing agreement inside the city e police station.   in christmas holidays, the child is to be collected by the mother inside the town d airport or in a public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents, and failing agreement inside the town d police station. the father is to collect the child at city e airport or in a public place with cctv cameras as agreed between the parents, and failing agreement inside the city e police station.   denigrating the other party, their family or friends in the presence or hearing of the child and from permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any third party doing so, (b) exposing the child to any form of family violence as defined by s4ab of the family law act 1975, (c) posting derogatory or denigrating material on social media about these proceedings, any other party to these proceedings or their partners, and causing any third party to make any such post, (d) discussing details of any court proceedings or showing the child any documents related to any proceedings that involve any of the parties, their family or friends, (e) interrogating the child regarding the other parent, the other parent's home, the other parent's relationship.   exposing the child to any form of family violence as defined by s4ab of the family law act 1975, (c) posting derogatory or denigrating material on social media about these proceedings, any other party to these proceedings or their partners, and causing any third party to make any such post, (d) discussing details of any court proceedings or showing the child any documents related to any proceedings that involve any of the parties, their family or friends, (e) interrogating the child regarding the other parent, the other parent's home, the other parent's relationship.   posting derogatory or denigrating material on social media about these proceedings, any other party to these proceedings or their partners, and causing any third party to make any such post, (d) discussing details of any court proceedings or showing the child any documents related to any proceedings that involve any of the parties, their family or friends, (e) interrogating the child regarding the other parent, the other parent's home, the other parent's relationship.   discussing details of any court proceedings or showing the child any documents related to any proceedings that involve any of the parties, their family or friends, (e) interrogating the child regarding the other parent, the other parent's home, the other parent's relationship.   interrogating the child regarding the other parent, the other parent's home, the other parent's relationship.   consuming alcohol above the nsw legal driving limit while in contact with the child, or for twenty-four (24) hours prior to the child coming into her care, (b) referring to the father as anything other than "dad" or "daddy" when speaking to the child or referring to him in the child's presence, (c) that the father be restrained by injunction from referring to the mother as anything other than "mum" or "mummy" when speaking to the child or referring to her in the child's presence.   referring to the father as anything other than "dad" or "daddy" when speaking to the child or referring to him in the child's presence, (c) that the father be restrained by injunction from referring to the mother as anything other than "mum" or "mummy" when speaking to the child or referring to her in the child's presence.   that the father be restrained by injunction from referring to the mother as anything other than "mum" or "mummy" when speaking to the child or referring to her in the child's presence.   communicate with the child's day care or school and obtain all information usually provided to parents at their own cost, including but not limited to school reports, behavioural reports, circulars, newsletters, parent/teacher interviews and the like. (b) obtain records from, and speak with and obtain information from, any of the child's treating medical practitioners.   obtain records from, and speak with and obtain information from, any of the child's treating medical practitioners.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview
the hearing
chronology of events
...lot of violence in the relationship. mother threw father through a wardrobe. mother [redacted] death threat to the father of child [redacted]. mother appears very unstable and there are concerns for the children.
the note goes on to record that the caller said the mother was an:
... an “okay mother” but caller is concerned about her mental state [redacted]. caller states she’s being very nasty. she’s threatened to kill the father [redacted]-  at was a reference to q’s father). the note goes on to say that the caller considered that the mother was:
the note goes on to say that the caller considered that the mother was:
...[redacted] very nasty [redacted]. she is vacillating between wanting him back and being abusive. caller has no reason to think the mother has a diagnosed mental health condition or that she’s unable to care for the kids, although [redacted] she is not coping with the kids.
...making sure you have all your shit. i don’t live and sleep with sluts. and by the way, [x] is off the cards. you’re right. we are done. that was your last slut chance. no more porn, oh no, i’m done. oh, apparently not. missus says count me in. no, still. likes to hide his dirty filth behind her back. s. l. u. t. -
as well as saying:
fuck off to mama -
being a reference to the paternal grandmother, who by then the mother had fallen out with -
or [ms f].
being a reference to ms f.
and you’re right. i’m not carrying on. i’m out because you’re a liar and a cheating slut. my children deserve a man, not a fucking coward pathetic excuse for a man. sluts are grubs. you just fucked with the wrong girl. i’m not as dumb as [ms aa]-
being a reference to the father's ex-partner:
see you in court.
and then, when the father apparently blocked the mother’s access to bank accounts, she said:
the day you blocked me from accounts is the day you said goodbye to me and your daughter, so go and get yourself well and truly fucked. i will lodge her child support today. if they ask me in regards to when you see her, i will tell them this information, also get sent to protective children’s services and of course then the police. call me a cunt for your stupid mental shit? you go to a solicitor. i have legal aid. it’s going to cost you 1800 straight up so put that on your list too, lol. you want to stay with [ms f] stay with the cunt slut. you deserve each other. the first question will be “are there any current avos?” “yes.” “has he been in contact with you?” “yes.” game over. so have a good think today about what you plan on doing. if you're smart, you will apologise, because the next thing i will strip you of is all rights to your daughter, especially when you're abusive in front of her all the time. [q] is old enough to give evidence -
and i pause here to record that, at the time that that particular message was sent, q was all of six (6) years old, this message being sent in 2020.
for all those people that know [mr jinks], his slut missus name is [ms f] -
i pause here to say that is the same person as ms f -
and he walked out on his own daughter on camera to say she was more important than his daughter. dog. cunt. make sure you know i’m not changing the avo. i’ll only be extending it magically. that’s why it has not been changed, because you're still psychotic, and your family. your mother is dead to myself and [x], dead. also start calculating what you owe me because i’m leaving. i’ll give you a tip. i’m going to ...., but you won't see me again. you will not even be able to hunt me. that was your last walkout on your daughter, nut job. make sure you kissed her goodbye. oh, you didn’t? no, you just dumped her again like the cunt you are. i’m actually glad and relieved because you knew it was you last. oh, and you better turn your pool heater off. it's going to get expensive.
the father responds by saying:
i would expect no different from you. pool heater is off, but you don’t have a problem with drinking -
to which the mother says:
i’ll drink whatever the fuck i want in my own home. at least i don’t drink a whole bottle of rum and try and hang myself. note that i walked away when you kicked the chair out from under you -
followed by a wink emoji. and the next message:
actually, count yourself as dead to [x] also. dead.
that cunt should not have her licence if she can't drive into a fucking mechanic. what a tard -
which i take to be an insulting reference to a “retard”:
i don’t give a fuck. go drop dead, like i give a fuck what you do or where you’re going, lol. you and your mother can fuck off.
police do not think she is being truthful and she has demonstrated that in her version of events in which she was mostly evasive.
reading the messages, the victim is the main aggressor and antagoniser in the messages, calling the father names and the like and flaunting the non-contact avo as a way to stop the father seeing their daughter. nevertheless, the father has been continually contacting the victim in breach of the order.
...as the antagoniser of the two, verbally bashing the accused, calling him offensive names and using the “fuck” word regularly. the father appeared to have measured and controlled responses. the victim does flaunt the non-contact avo as a way to stop the accused seeing their daughter and talks about his fake solicitor and the car she alleges is hers but registered to him.   leaning on a window and it cracking, and (b) physically punching the window. i am satisfied that the father punched that window and that he dragged ms f out of the car.   physically punching the window. i am satisfied that the father punched that window and that he dragged ms f out of the car.
i am satisfied that the father punched that window and that he dragged ms f out of the car.
it wasn’t long before i started to observe [ms gamba] to misrepresent things. for example, i was never allowed to meet her “friend”, [mr y], as she told me his wife had left him for another female and she “didn’t know how to tell him”. i later learned [mr y] was, in fact, [ms gamba]’s other partner after i saw pictures of [ms gamba] and [mr y] on facebook together. another example was that she made up a story about how [ms gamba] and i met, as she didn’t want her parents to know we’d met online so she told them we’d met “through a mutual friend”.  , who was the youngest of all the children, had no routine at all. she ate what and when she wanted and slept whenever she wanted. [q], the middle child, was her little king -  at is, q was the mother’s “little king”):   never did anything wrong. even if everything he did was wrong, he was perfect in [ms gamba]’s eyes. then there was [p], [ms gamba]’s oldest boy. [p] was 11 at the time i met him. he seemed to be the one who [ms gamba] would yell at, bully and put down. i witnessed many days where [p] was absolute mistreated and taunted by [ms gamba]. [ms gamba] would approach him and yell at him as loud as she could and continued to do so on and off for hours each day. it upset me to see the way she spoke to [p]. i never said anything to [ms gamba], as these were her children and how she parented was her way. from an outsider's perspective, it was clear to me that the resentment [ms gamba] had for [p] was probably going to send him in a direction in life you wouldn’t want to see any child go.
i accept all of that evidence. the mother was, with ms v, abusing alcohol and grossly neglecting the needs of her children as well as mistreating p.
“i don’t feel safe with mum. she verbally abuses me every day. she drinks every second or third day. i want to go back to nan’s.”
“she verbally abuses me every day. she drinks every second or third day.”
and he said that:
“i want to go back to nan's.”
the law
best interests findings
family court will be more fun, actually. can't wait to see you cry. i have your full mental health and violence history on usb. enjoy. supervised visits in a facs office for an hour a month after a four-hour drive. you will love it.
this is taunting. it is taunting behaviour by somebody who tells me that they are “terrified” by the father and yet, when the shoe is on the other foot and there is some distance between them, she is perfectly happy to send messages to him that are nothing short of malevolent.
mother thinks [x] is anxious and stressed by the experience -  ich by the way, this is the experience of going to see the father):
not sure where she is. calls father “dad” at visits but then refers to him as “[mr jinks]” at home. needs to sleep more and eat less in the two days after the visit. mother aware she cannot change this. provides comfort, pleasant experiences, after visit at times, eg, stop at [jj venue], but often children want to go home.
father: “hope it wasn’t your wanking arm.” [mr m]: “my left hand, bro, and it's numb, lol. old rocky struck again last night.” father: “get fucked. who this time?” [mr m]: “don't tell anyone, please, bro, but i had to stop [...] from punching him out, [...] didn't start on him. give me a call when you can and i’ll fill you in. it’s funny.”
weighing up the competing proposals
conclusion & orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 july 2023
dated: 21 july 2023
crimes (domestic and personal violence) act 2007 - sect 13
stalking or intimidation with intent to cause fear of physical or mental harm13 stalking or intimidation with intent to cause fear of physical or mental harm  a person who stalks or intimidates another person with the intention of causing the other person to fear physical or mental harm is guilty of an offence.
maximum penalty--imprisonment for 5 years or 50 penalty units, or both.   for the purposes of this section, causing a person to fear physical or mental harm includes causing the person to fear physical or mental harm to another person with whom he or she has a domestic relationship. (3) for the purposes of this section, a person intends to cause fear of physical or mental harm if he or she knows that the conduct is likely to cause fear in the other person. (4) for the purposes of this section, the prosecution is not required to prove that the person alleged to have been stalked or intimidated actually feared physical or mental harm. (5) a person who attempts to commit an offence against subsection (1) is guilty of an offence against that subsection and is punishable as if the offence attempted had been committed.