last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
york & york [2023] fedcfamc2f 971
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility and lives with  notify the father via email of any long-term parenting issue which requires a decision with the email to set out her initial view as to the decision that should be made (for example, what school the children should attend), (b) within 14 days of that initial communication, the father shall respond by return email setting out his view about the course of action proposed and any alternative suggestions he has, (c) the mother will consider the father’s view for a period no longer than 14 days and, if necessary, re-contact the father for further information or discussion, (d) that upon the expiration of 14 days from the date of receipt of any alternative view set out in order 3(b) above, and if no agreement can be reached after a genuine attempt to reach agreement, the mother shall make the decision and notify the father forthwith by email of the decision made.   within 14 days of that initial communication, the father shall respond by return email setting out his view about the course of action proposed and any alternative suggestions he has, (c) the mother will consider the father’s view for a period no longer than 14 days and, if necessary, re-contact the father for further information or discussion, (d) that upon the expiration of 14 days from the date of receipt of any alternative view set out in order 3(b) above, and if no agreement can be reached after a genuine attempt to reach agreement, the mother shall make the decision and notify the father forthwith by email of the decision made.   the mother will consider the father’s view for a period no longer than 14 days and, if necessary, re-contact the father for further information or discussion, (d) that upon the expiration of 14 days from the date of receipt of any alternative view set out in order 3(b) above, and if no agreement can be reached after a genuine attempt to reach agreement, the mother shall make the decision and notify the father forthwith by email of the decision made.   that upon the expiration of 14 days from the date of receipt of any alternative view set out in order 3(b) above, and if no agreement can be reached after a genuine attempt to reach agreement, the mother shall make the decision and notify the father forthwith by email of the decision made.   be permitted to commence or proceed with an application for a passport for the children from the department of foreign affairs and trade of the commonwealth of australia pursuant to section 11(1)(b)(i) of the australian passports act 2005, without the consent of the father, and (b) has leave pursuant to section 65y of the family law act 1975 to take the children outside of the commonwealth of australia for the purposes of overseas travel.   has leave pursuant to section 65y of the family law act 1975 to take the children outside of the commonwealth of australia for the purposes of overseas travel.
spends time with  every wednesday from the conclusion of school or 4:00pm until 7:00pm, with the father to collect the children from their school or the mother, and the father to deliver the children to the mother at the end of the time, and (b) alternate sundays from 9:00am to 5:00pm, with the father to collect the children from the mother at the start of time, and the mother to collect the children from the father at the end of the time.   alternate sundays from 9:00am to 5:00pm, with the father to collect the children from the mother at the start of time, and the mother to collect the children from the father at the end of the time.   every wednesday from the conclusion of school or 4:00pm until 7:00pm, with the father to collect the children from their school or the mother, and the father to deliver the children to the mother at the end of the time, and (b) alternate saturdays and sundays (on the same weekend) from 9:00am to 5:00pm each day, with the father to collect the children from the mother at the start of time, and the mother to collect the children from the father at the end of the time.   alternate saturdays and sundays (on the same weekend) from 9:00am to 5:00pm each day, with the father to collect the children from the mother at the start of time, and the mother to collect the children from the father at the end of the time.
communication between the children and the father  with the father to initiate the call to the mother, and (b) with the mother to ensure that the device receiving the call is available and ready to receive the call.   with the mother to ensure that the device receiving the call is available and ready to receive the call.
communication between the mother and father
authority relating to school/s/treatment providers
counselling and programs  obtain a mental health care plan for each of the children, (b) obtain a referral to a clinical psychologist with experience in protective behaviours for children, (c) engage the children with that clinical psychologist for the following purposes: (i) general emotional and psychological support for the children, (ii) assistance with informing the children of the father’s offending in a child- focussed and supportive manner, and (iii) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.   obtain a referral to a clinical psychologist with experience in protective behaviours for children, (c) engage the children with that clinical psychologist for the following purposes: (i) general emotional and psychological support for the children, (ii) assistance with informing the children of the father’s offending in a child- focussed and supportive manner, and (iii) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.   engage the children with that clinical psychologist for the following purposes: (i) general emotional and psychological support for the children, (ii) assistance with informing the children of the father’s offending in a child- focussed and supportive manner, and (iii) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.   general emotional and psychological support for the children, (ii) assistance with informing the children of the father’s offending in a child- focussed and supportive manner, and (iii) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.  ) assistance with informing the children of the father’s offending in a child- focussed and supportive manner, and (iii) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.  i) work with the children on protective behaviours with a particular focus on boundaries and the risks of grooming by a trusted person given the father’s offending.   provide the mother with proof of engagement in regular targeted drug and alcohol counselling, and f (b) follow all reasonable directions and recommendations in relation to targeted drug and alcohol treatment.   follow all reasonable directions and recommendations in relation to targeted drug and alcohol treatment.
restraints  making any derogatory comments in regard to the other parent, their partners or a member of that parent’s family, in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence or hearing of another person making such comments, (b) posting or publishing any material on social media in regard to the other parent, (c) using physical chastisement as a form of discipline of the children, (d) exposing the children to family violence while the children are in their care or they are spending time with the children.   posting or publishing any material on social media in regard to the other parent, (c) using physical chastisement as a form of discipline of the children, (d) exposing the children to family violence while the children are in their care or they are spending time with the children.   using physical chastisement as a form of discipline of the children, (d) exposing the children to family violence while the children are in their care or they are spending time with the children.   exposing the children to family violence while the children are in their care or they are spending time with the children.
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
introduction
orders sought & issues  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) until 4 march 2025, the children spend unsupervised time with the father: (i) alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from 9.00am to 5.00pm on saturday and sunday. (c) from march 2025 and thereafter the children spend unsupervised time with the father: (i) alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from after school friday to 5.00pm on sunday.   until 4 march 2025, the children spend unsupervised time with the father: (i) alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from 9.00am to 5.00pm on saturday and sunday. (c) from march 2025 and thereafter the children spend unsupervised time with the father: (i) alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from after school friday to 5.00pm on sunday.   alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from 9.00am to 5.00pm on saturday and sunday.  ) alternative weekends from 9.00am to 5.00pm on saturday and sunday.   from march 2025 and thereafter the children spend unsupervised time with the father: (i) alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from after school friday to 5.00pm on sunday.   alternate wednesdays from after school to 7.00pm. (ii) alternative weekends from after school friday to 5.00pm on sunday.  ) alternative weekends from after school friday to 5.00pm on sunday.   the mother have sole parental responsibility, (b) the children spend professionally supervised time with the father for up to 4 hours each fortnight.   the children spend professionally supervised time with the father for up to 4 hours each fortnight.   the mother have sole parental responsibility, (b) the father continue therapy and undergo alcohol counselling, (c) for two years, the children spend professionally supervised time with the father for no less than four hours each fortnight, (d) the parties participate in mediation to determine time arrangements thereafter.   the father continue therapy and undergo alcohol counselling, (c) for two years, the children spend professionally supervised time with the father for no less than four hours each fortnight, (d) the parties participate in mediation to determine time arrangements thereafter.   for two years, the children spend professionally supervised time with the father for no less than four hours each fortnight, (d) the parties participate in mediation to determine time arrangements thereafter.   the parties participate in mediation to determine time arrangements thereafter.   parental responsibility – the mother and the icl seek sole parental responsibility for the mother with a requirement to consult the father prior to making relevant decisions whereas the father seeks an order for ‘co-parental’ (which i understand to be ‘equal’) shared parental responsibility, (b) the conditions and regime for time spent with the father – the father seeks as his primary position the regime as per his initiating application or more. he otherwise seems to concede that the children’s time with the father be professionally supervised for one year. the icl and the mother seek for no less than four hours once per fortnight. the father seeks once or twice a week for a minimum of four hours. thereafter, (i) the icl seeks the same regime continue for another year and the parties attend mediation to determine time thereafter, (ii) the father seeks for mediation to occur prior to the expiration of one year to determine time thereafter, (iii) the mother seeks the professionally supervised regime continue for another year but does not want mediation to determine time thereafter. she seeks that the children spend time with the father each fortnight for 3 hours in one mid-week and 6 hours on one weekend supervised by an agreed and informed person.   the conditions and regime for time spent with the father – the father seeks as his primary position the regime as per his initiating application or more. he otherwise seems to concede that the children’s time with the father be professionally supervised for one year. the icl and the mother seek for no less than four hours once per fortnight. the father seeks once or twice a week for a minimum of four hours. thereafter, (i) the icl seeks the same regime continue for another year and the parties attend mediation to determine time thereafter, (ii) the father seeks for mediation to occur prior to the expiration of one year to determine time thereafter, (iii) the mother seeks the professionally supervised regime continue for another year but does not want mediation to determine time thereafter. she seeks that the children spend time with the father each fortnight for 3 hours in one mid-week and 6 hours on one weekend supervised by an agreed and informed person.   the icl seeks the same regime continue for another year and the parties attend mediation to determine time thereafter, (ii) the father seeks for mediation to occur prior to the expiration of one year to determine time thereafter, (iii) the mother seeks the professionally supervised regime continue for another year but does not want mediation to determine time thereafter. she seeks that the children spend time with the father each fortnight for 3 hours in one mid-week and 6 hours on one weekend supervised by an agreed and informed person.  ) the father seeks for mediation to occur prior to the expiration of one year to determine time thereafter, (iii) the mother seeks the professionally supervised regime continue for another year but does not want mediation to determine time thereafter. she seeks that the children spend time with the father each fortnight for 3 hours in one mid-week and 6 hours on one weekend supervised by an agreed and informed person.  i) the mother seeks the professionally supervised regime continue for another year but does not want mediation to determine time thereafter. she seeks that the children spend time with the father each fortnight for 3 hours in one mid-week and 6 hours on one weekend supervised by an agreed and informed person.
the issues  in relation to parental responsibility: (i) whether or not there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child has engaged in family violence, and (ii) the capacity of the parents to jointly make decisions about major long-term issues. (b) in relation to the conditions and regime for time spent with the father: (i) whether or not the father presents as an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, and (ii) what measures are sufficient to ameliorate any risks.   whether or not there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child has engaged in family violence, and (ii) the capacity of the parents to jointly make decisions about major long-term issues.  ) the capacity of the parents to jointly make decisions about major long-term issues.   in relation to the conditions and regime for time spent with the father: (i) whether or not the father presents as an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, and (ii) what measures are sufficient to ameliorate any risks.   whether or not the father presents as an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, and (ii) what measures are sufficient to ameliorate any risks.  ) what measures are sufficient to ameliorate any risks.
the hearing  amended initiating application filed 29 march 2023.   case outline document filed 2 april 2023, and (b) amended response to initiating application filed 21 march 2023.   amended response to initiating application filed 21 march 2023.   case outline document filed 28 march 2023.
background
history of the proceedings
the evidence
the father’s evidence  respecting the children’s rights to see their father unfettered – without supervision. (ii) his conviction was more than three years ago which relates to offences that occurred five to six years ago and that he has no other criminal record. (iii) the veracity of claims made by the mother in the 2015 and 2019 family violence order applications, her 2021 affidavit, the 2021 family report and in her 2023 affidavits.  ) his conviction was more than three years ago which relates to offences that occurred five to six years ago and that he has no other criminal record. (iii) the veracity of claims made by the mother in the 2015 and 2019 family violence order applications, her 2021 affidavit, the 2021 family report and in her 2023 affidavits.  i) the veracity of claims made by the mother in the 2015 and 2019 family violence order applications, her 2021 affidavit, the 2021 family report and in her 2023 affidavits.   firstly, the circumstances at the time of his offending were situational. he says he was very depressed for a number of years due to emotional, financial and physical abuse and consequently he drank excessively to compensate. he says the wife was regularly away in country h, between mid-2017 through to mid-2018, on at least eight or nine occasions and he was fearful that he would be divorced again. he says it was during that time that he made bad decisions, ill-informed decisions, decisions that he would not normally make, that led to the offences. he says irrespective of the background, it was wrong of him to lose control of himself through alcohol and has expressed remorse for what occurred. (ii) secondly, because the mother has trusted him to care for the children in 2020 and 2021. he says on 35 occasions including 14 overnights. (iii) thirdly, that “there is no research to support” that internet based offences could become a physical offence.  ) secondly, because the mother has trusted him to care for the children in 2020 and 2021. he says on 35 occasions including 14 overnights. (iii) thirdly, that “there is no research to support” that internet based offences could become a physical offence.  i) thirdly, that “there is no research to support” that internet based offences could become a physical offence.
psychological assessment of [mr york] found a man with an unusual presentation and his narrative was full of rationalisations and cognitive distortions. it was difficult to get through his well practised spiel. there were elements of melodrama about his behaviour, and this was consistent with his results to psychometric testing. the focus of [mr york]’s account appears to be on his alleged experience of [mr york] being irrational and aggressive towards him. [mr york] lacks insight about his own offending and his general behaviour suggested a tendency to deflect responsibility with explanations that he was drinking heavily and stressed at the time and holding [ms york] responsible. he presented as highly defended and lacking in insight. unfortunately, [mr york]’s results to psychometric testing could not be interpreted in any meaningful way due to indications that he provided responses exaggerating problems. to a lesser extent, there were also indications of minimising problems and providing an idealised account.
i experienced [mr york] as engaging in – especially initially, quite significant minimisation and denial. i think he’s so terribly ashamed and humiliated and embarrassed by being exposed that his initial automatic response is to, sort of, get on the defensive and deny and, i – i think that his personality structure and predisposition then makes him, sort of, unlikeable, which can result in a negative reaction towards him.
the mother’s evidence   supposedly being aware of pornographic photos of young girls on the father’s computer as far back as 2004 and 2006 and that she says the father’s attitude towards her changed once they were married in 2005 and her many allegations of historical family violence, (b) that [at 84.] “it still makes me very emotional remembering how my husband and the father of my children, who (despite our issues) i loved very much, was taken away in a police car after committing despicable crimes in our family home”, (c) the several separations and reconciliations throughout the relationship and attempted reconciliations post the father’s offences, (d) the many instances of contact between the children and the father including unsupervised time and overnights post separation and since the father’s offences.   that [at 84.] “it still makes me very emotional remembering how my husband and the father of my children, who (despite our issues) i loved very much, was taken away in a police car after committing despicable crimes in our family home”, (c) the several separations and reconciliations throughout the relationship and attempted reconciliations post the father’s offences, (d) the many instances of contact between the children and the father including unsupervised time and overnights post separation and since the father’s offences.   the several separations and reconciliations throughout the relationship and attempted reconciliations post the father’s offences, (d) the many instances of contact between the children and the father including unsupervised time and overnights post separation and since the father’s offences.   the many instances of contact between the children and the father including unsupervised time and overnights post separation and since the father’s offences.
123. the children love [mr york] and want to spend time with him. i want to ensure they are safe when they are in his care. i have significant concerns about the children spending unsupervised time with [mr york], given his criminal history and the family violence that i have endured throughout the relationship. 124. i acknowledge that i have allowed the children to spend time with [mr york], without supervision and in a public place on some limited occasions since separation. [mr york] placed significant pressure on me to allow the children to spend time with him without supervision. he told me that he would not spend time with the children if i insisted on the time being supervised. 125. i reluctantly agreed for the children to spend unsupervised time with [mr york] as i was aware of how much the children, especially [x], missed their father. i did not want to do the wrong thing by them, and i want them to grow up knowing and having a relationship with their father. i continue to feel like i am letting the children down and feel torn between protecting them and allowing them to spend time with their father. 126. in addition to my concerns about [mr york]’s criminal convictions, [mr york]’s attitude towards me and the family violence i endured throughout our relationship, i also have concerns about [mr york]’s insight and decision making when caring for the children.
assessment of [ms york] found a woman who is very mistrustful of [mr york] and seems somewhat bitter. she is focused on reconceptualizing and understanding the relationship with [mr york] considering what she says is new information indicating that her suspicions about infidelity were likely correct. in many ways, [ms york] appears to be a somewhat vulnerable individual, who may not fully appreciate the risks to the children. there may be cultural issues affecting her capacity to appreciate risk. she appears shocked, almost dazed, at considering her experiences from [mr york]’s arrest. this is not unusual for an individual in her position (i.e. the sudden discovery that a partner has been accused and convicted of sexual interest in children, five house moves, problems at work, social embarrassment and being rejected by usual supports) and is consistent with her diagnosis. [mr york]’s current presentation however does suggest that her own adjustment to her thinking may have blinded her to the risks to the children (i.e. focusing on [mr york]’s alleged infidelity and deceit rather than what the cem conviction means in terms of the children.)
dr b’s evidence
a) psychological assessment of [x] found a delightful young man who is troubled by the relationship between his parents but does not understand the nature of it or their allegations against one another b) psychological assessment of [y] found a confident and outgoing young girl who is optimistic and highly social. c) the children have a trusting and affectionate relationship with their mother and love and miss their father and want to spend more time with him. d) on one level, the current care arrangements for the children are blatantly inappropriate to their needs to see and spend time with their father. there are however broader issues of risk that have not been addressed. e) there are broader risk issues in relation to the children spending time with their father that have not been able to be assessed. [mr york]’s presentation certainly raises concerns about the risks of his potential sexual interest in the children. f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
b) psychological assessment of [y] found a confident and outgoing young girl who is optimistic and highly social. c) the children have a trusting and affectionate relationship with their mother and love and miss their father and want to spend more time with him. d) on one level, the current care arrangements for the children are blatantly inappropriate to their needs to see and spend time with their father. there are however broader issues of risk that have not been addressed. e) there are broader risk issues in relation to the children spending time with their father that have not been able to be assessed. [mr york]’s presentation certainly raises concerns about the risks of his potential sexual interest in the children. f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
c) the children have a trusting and affectionate relationship with their mother and love and miss their father and want to spend more time with him. d) on one level, the current care arrangements for the children are blatantly inappropriate to their needs to see and spend time with their father. there are however broader issues of risk that have not been addressed. e) there are broader risk issues in relation to the children spending time with their father that have not been able to be assessed. [mr york]’s presentation certainly raises concerns about the risks of his potential sexual interest in the children. f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
d) on one level, the current care arrangements for the children are blatantly inappropriate to their needs to see and spend time with their father. there are however broader issues of risk that have not been addressed. e) there are broader risk issues in relation to the children spending time with their father that have not been able to be assessed. [mr york]’s presentation certainly raises concerns about the risks of his potential sexual interest in the children. f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
e) there are broader risk issues in relation to the children spending time with their father that have not been able to be assessed. [mr york]’s presentation certainly raises concerns about the risks of his potential sexual interest in the children. f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
f) l recommend that [mr york] undergo psychosexual assessment. g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
g) [mr york]’s proposals for the children cannot be assessed on the present information with the broad risk issues outstanding. certainly unsupervised time is contraindicated in the interim. h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
h) the risk issues for the children have primacy and will need to be determined by the court.
j) if the court were to find that the risks to the children are low, then they should see him regularly and frequently unsupervised. [mr york]’s proposals as above seems appropriate to their needs. k) supervised time is problematic if the risks are chronic, as they appear to be on [mr york]’s presentation at this assessment.
k) supervised time is problematic if the risks are chronic, as they appear to be on [mr york]’s presentation at this assessment.   york]’s narrative imbedding criticism of [ms york] might be an added psychological risk. his beliefs and thinking about and hostility towards [ms york] are likely to influence the way he interacts with the children and talks to them about their mother.
dr e’s evidence
148. [mr york] is somewhat diagnostically complex. it is clear that he has experienced periodic symptoms of depressed mood and anxiety, however, it is my opinion that these symptoms would not meet the threshold of a diagnosis at the present time (although there are some residual features). accordingly, it is my opinion that [mr york] does not meet criteria for a major mental illness. nonetheless, he does have an unusual personality structure. from all accounts, he appears to have always been a very sensitive individual that has had difficulty making decisions without the advice of his parents. it is my opinion that he has prominent dependent personality features (difficulty making decisions without advice, needs others to assume responsibility, fears of being unable to care for himself) that do not meet full criteria for dependent personality disorder. in addition, [mr york] has some avoidant (social inhibition, fears of criticism and rejection) and turbulent personality features. accordingly, it is my opinion that a diagnosis of mixed personality disorder (with dependent and avoidant features) is appropriate. 149. in addition to his maladaptive personality features, [mr york]’s offending, and his overall narrative, indicates that a diagnosis of paedophilic disorder (sexually attracted to females, non- exclusive type) is also appropriate. however, it must be stressed that this does not mean that he is necessarily likely to actually physically molest children. a diagnosis of paedophilic disorder simply indicates that one has a sexual attraction to children. while the scholarly literature indicates that the actual mechanisms by which deviant sexual interests develop are poorly understood, it is my opinion that [mr york] likely had a latent sexual interest in children that was fuelled and validated by the use of cem. indeed, simply viewing child pornography does not cause people to develop a sexual interest in children. however, [mr york]’s narrative indicated that he found such material interesting and arousing, despite a small number of images being detected. it is my opinion that [mr york]’s offending reflected this hitherto latent sexual interest in children. he was reportedly using adult pornography at the time, but the fact that he sought out depictions of children indicated that the adult material was likely not enough to satisfy him. 150. regarding risk of future sexual offending, a thorough consideration of risk factors indicated that [mr york] poses a low risk for engaging in future sexual offending behaviours. he has never been charged with any offending before he was apprehended with cem in the index offences. [mr york] has few of the recently identified risk factors associated with recidivism amongst those with child pornography offences. 151. in addition, it is useful to note that the official recidivism rates for child pornography offenders are low in general. indeed, a published meta-analysis (i.e. a study of studies) found that across nine studies with a 1.5-to-six year follow-up, two of the studies found no recidivism for online offenders. across all of these studies, two percent recidivated with a contact sexual offence and 3.4 percent committed further child pornography offences. this is considerably lower than the recidivism rate for contact sexual offenders. [mr york] has a minimal number of identified risk factors within that group of offenders. 152. further, a thorough consideration of risk factors for general offending indicated that [mr york] poses a low risk for engaging in general criminal behaviour. indeed, he has not engaged in any other antisocial behaviour and had never been charged with any general offending before the index offences. as such, [mr york] has few of the identified risk factors associated with future general offending. 153. regarding risk to [x] and [y], it must be stressed that outside of [mr york]’s child pornography offending, he has apparently never acted on his paedophilic desires with his own children, or other children, or tried to instil permissive boundaries in the family to facilitate future abuse. this appears to have been an isolated incident, with a relatively low number of images detected. notwithstanding this, the sexual offending is serious, particularly where [mr york] seeks unsupervised time with the children, providing an opportunity for further possible offending. such allegations must therefore be considered carefully. to this end, an empirically-based assessment of relevant considerations for both future sexual violence and general offending behaviours indicated that [mr york] has, overall, few risk factors. he has no prior documented history of violent or sexual offending, no significant markers of anti-social traits, no criminal history, and no markers of psychopathy. further, he is statistically unlikely to reoffend, and if he were to reoffend, it would be unlikely that this would entail contact sexual offences. it is therefore my opinion that with regards to the sexual abuse concerns, [mr york] does not require ongoing supervision with the children. further, [mr york] reported that he has already completed a sexual offender course in custody.
what we do know categorically is that he has finished the group sex offender program. typically when a sex offender is assessed at low risk we don’t even, sort of, recommend treatment. we certainly don’t recommend group because there’s some information that has come out saying it’s contraindicated, putting low risk offenders with medium and high risk offenders or just offenders that have engaged in more serious offending. so he has already, sort of, done more than what would be considered, kind of, necessary, and he has been engaging in ongoing therapy [and] has had some individual sessions with regards to offence specific work, so i – i think my answer at this point would be it’s not critical, but he has done certain amounts of further individual therapy, but what i’m really looking for there is how proactive is he in – and motivated in continuing to want to explore and unpack this sexual proclivity of his. you know, i appreciate that he presented with significant shame and embarrassment around it, so it’s maybe a little bit harder for him to get moving on this, but i think it’s important that he does stay engaged with some individual therapists for this very reason.   c], can you advise the court the level of recidivism risk generally for people convicted of internet based cem offences?--- yes, your honour. it’s somewhere around 2.6 per cent. but, i guess, sorry, just to qualify, that’s the level of recidivism risk for contact offending. it’s slightly higher for further child pornography offending. so it sits at around 12 per cent. is there a very high risk of crossover from internet based cem offences to physical cem offences?--- there’s a low – if – if there’s no prior sexual offences and the first offence is child pornography offending then there’s a very low statistical probability of escalating to future contact offences. ... your recommendations in para 154 include that i should undertake psychoeducation sessions with a suitably qualified forensic psychologist, which we’ve mentioned previously, and that was dr [sic] [d], to address any sexual scripts that may still exist and provide an opportunity for further targeting cognitive distortions. i know it was previously asked before but we didn’t necessarily get tied down. how many sessions do you think are important for that process to go through?--- i don’t think there is a magic number, your honour. i think that it’s very individual specific in terms of how their insight is developing in that therapeutic process which, sort of, determines what should be a suitable amount of treatment. i would think at the very least for this kind of work a six month period of weekly sessions would be a minimum. ... in the conclusion of issues that weren’t agreed [in the joint statement of experts] you wrote that my access to cem represented a very small number of images and that objectively empirical data did not support the alternative hypothesis that [it poses] a high level of risk to his children that would necessitate ongoing supervision and that the level of oversight, response and intervention needs to match the risk prescribed. ... based on the data that can be confirmed and validated at the time, you empirically assessed me as a low risk. in the case of a low risk, would it be unusual to require ongoing supervision?--- generally speaking, yes. i think if i can expand on that, your honour, i think what was, sort of, complicated about this case is the fact that i did diagnose [mr york] with paedophilic disorder and then i’ve gone on to say but i don’t think he needs supervision and that’s not something that comes up often. but in the context of the nuance of the particular offending or the particular sexual offending that he has engaged in and what we know from a growing body of literature around it, i couldn’t see any obvious risk markers that would suggest otherwise at this time. i think if other evidence was available then that might change that opinion, but from what was provided to me, yes, he was a low risk and in low risk cases we wouldn’t typically suggest supervision.
based on your point [at] paragraph 149, that [mr york] likely had a latent sexual interest in children, it doesn’t matter if his own children or whose children, but if there was an opportunity to be in a room with a child without any supervision, a child as young as six years old, do you think that would somehow make [mr york] think he can do whatever he wants with the child because of this latent sexual interest in children?--- your honour, that was not what [mr york] expressed to me. and, again, i can only use the information that’s provided to me, that [mr york] was, sort of, emphatic in his position that he would never offend against his own children, and the risk of doing so is, sort of, even lower. so whilst he might have a mixed attraction, which is – and so the non- exclusive type that is, in brackets, next to his paedophilic disorder, in that same paragraph, it notes the fact that he is able to be aroused by both adults and children. some individuals with paedophilic disorder can only be aroused by children, and so whether he becomes aroused by his own children, i could obviously not answer that conclusively. however, i think the risk of him acting out any sexual urges against his own children is low.
joint statement of experts
legal principles  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
abuse and family violence  an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   serious neglect of the child.
how the court approaches allegations of unacceptable risk   factual findings about the past and fact based enquiry about the future are two different things, (b) risk does not need to be established on the balance of probabilities in the same way that facts are proven, (c) risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   risk does not need to be established on the balance of probabilities in the same way that facts are proven, (c) risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   risks of harm are postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances, (d) in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   in assessing whether there is a risk that something may happen, ‘possibilities’ are a legitimate basis for finding that there is such a risk, as long as there is a proper basis for those ‘possibilities’, (e) allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   allegations of family violence should be cast and considered in the terms of section 4 and section 4ab of the act, (f) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.   the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and it is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interest, which entail an exercise of discretion.
determination of parental responsibility
on either parent’s account, the relationship between them had been troubled and full of conflict. they are now mistrustful of the other and hostile towards them. they have a long history of chronic conflict and inability to cooperate or meet each other’s needs. this does not look like improving with time and their separation. [ms york]’s presentation rather suggests growing awareness of problematic aspects about [mr york]’s behaviour and thinking, suggesting that she is likely to become even more mistrustful. [mr york]’s presentation is of a lack of insight and cognitive distortions that do not bode well for developing an honest and cooperative relationship with [ms york].   york]’s proposal for sole parental responsibility, if implemented, is likely to have a beneficial effect on the children. [ms york] is likely to feel less stressed by contacting communication [sic] with [mr york] that will have an immediate flow on effect for the children with a reduction in conflict.
determination of risk  referable to section 4 of the act, the father indirectly involving the children in a sexual activity or as a sexual object, and (b) referable to section 4ab of the act, the children being the subject of or exposed to sexually abusive behaviour in the unsupervised company of the father.   referable to section 4ab of the act, the children being the subject of or exposed to sexually abusive behaviour in the unsupervised company of the father.   dr c is more qualified than dr b and her report is more targeted. (b) dr b was engaged as a single expert witness for psychological assessment and completion of a family report. her report, as was requested by the parties, is wide ranging compared to the report of dr c. (c) under cross-examination by the father, dr b deposed that she was a clinical psychologist, not a forensic psychologist, and since 2005 she had only done two types of work – family law assessments and her own model of family therapy. (d) dr c was engaged specifically to conduct a psycho-sexual risk assessment. (e) in her report, dr c provides her qualifications to carry out the assessment as:   dr b was engaged as a single expert witness for psychological assessment and completion of a family report. her report, as was requested by the parties, is wide ranging compared to the report of dr c. (c) under cross-examination by the father, dr b deposed that she was a clinical psychologist, not a forensic psychologist, and since 2005 she had only done two types of work – family law assessments and her own model of family therapy. (d) dr c was engaged specifically to conduct a psycho-sexual risk assessment. (e) in her report, dr c provides her qualifications to carry out the assessment as:   under cross-examination by the father, dr b deposed that she was a clinical psychologist, not a forensic psychologist, and since 2005 she had only done two types of work – family law assessments and her own model of family therapy. (d) dr c was engaged specifically to conduct a psycho-sexual risk assessment. (e) in her report, dr c provides her qualifications to carry out the assessment as:   dr c was engaged specifically to conduct a psycho-sexual risk assessment. (e) in her report, dr c provides her qualifications to carry out the assessment as:   in her report, dr c provides her qualifications to carry out the assessment as:
i have a bachelor of arts (criminology and psychology) with honours (criminology), a post graduate diploma in psychology and a doctor of psychology (clinical and forensic). my doctoral dissertation investigated the characteristics of child pornography offenders. i am the principal psychologist at [q psychology] and currently work for government, private and not-for-profit agencies carrying out family assessments and treatment, individual psychological assessments and treatment, disability assessments and treatment, and risk assessments and treatment. i previously worked for the [r service] now known as [s service], where i assessed sexual and violent offenders. i continue to work with sexual and violent offenders as a sessional psychologist at the [t childrens’ clinic].   dr b’s report specifically states that the issue of risk was unable to be assessed. she nevertheless maintains a view that there is a risk suggestive of the need for supervision. it seems her reasoning is that her inability to assess the risk is because of mr york’s performance at interview – his omissions, lack of candidness and rationalisations. the absence of a conclusion as to risk then means that risk must be assessed as unacceptable. (g) dr c points to some of the factors that dr b relies upon in her assessment of future risk of sexual offending are speculation and there is an absence of clear data. she states that the concerns that dr b has raised do not have a scientific foundation as markers of future risk and cannot be empirically considered in the current assessment. (h) on the specific issue, dr c’s report meets the expert evidence requirements of the leading authorities such as makita (australia) pty v sprowles [2001] nswca 305, (2001) 52 nsw lr 705 and dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21, (2011) 243 clr 588 whereas dr b’s does not.   dr c points to some of the factors that dr b relies upon in her assessment of future risk of sexual offending are speculation and there is an absence of clear data. she states that the concerns that dr b has raised do not have a scientific foundation as markers of future risk and cannot be empirically considered in the current assessment. (h) on the specific issue, dr c’s report meets the expert evidence requirements of the leading authorities such as makita (australia) pty v sprowles [2001] nswca 305, (2001) 52 nsw lr 705 and dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21, (2011) 243 clr 588 whereas dr b’s does not.   on the specific issue, dr c’s report meets the expert evidence requirements of the leading authorities such as makita (australia) pty v sprowles [2001] nswca 305, (2001) 52 nsw lr 705 and dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21, (2011) 243 clr 588 whereas dr b’s does not.   the risk posed by the father is classified as a possibility and by definition, possibilities are not, and could never be, probabilities. (b) on a continuum between remotely possible and highly probable, the chance of some future event occurring does not exceed the point where the risk cannot be tolerated. (c) on the duly admitted evidence, the known historical facts and present circumstances do not support a finding that the father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to the children.   on a continuum between remotely possible and highly probable, the chance of some future event occurring does not exceed the point where the risk cannot be tolerated. (c) on the duly admitted evidence, the known historical facts and present circumstances do not support a finding that the father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to the children.   on the duly admitted evidence, the known historical facts and present circumstances do not support a finding that the father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to the children.
consideration in relation to time arrangements
currently, [mr york] is seeking to spend regular and unsupervised time with the children proposing that [x] spend time with him from after school friday until before school on monday each alternative weekend, wednesday overnight each fortnight and after school wednesday until 7:30 pm every other wednesday. he proposes that [y] spend time with him during day periods each alternative weekend and every wednesday night until 7:30 pm, mirroring the time that [x] is in his care.
additional considerations
the orders
i would strongly recommend that [mr york] undertake individual psycho- educational sessions with a suitably qualified forensic psychologist in order to target thinking errors that previously excused his viewing of cem, address any sexual scripts that may still exist, and provide an opportunity for further targeting of cognitive distortions implicated in the offending behaviours. while [mr york] poses a low risk of re-offending, targeting potentially risky attitudes will be important over time.
orders 9 – 12 as proposed by the icl are agreed by both parties. order 13 regarding notifying of serious medical conditions is agreed by the mother. the icl seeks that notification occur as soon as reasonably practicable but within 24 hours (or 2 hours if the children attend hospital). the father proposes that this must occur within an hour, which the icl submits is simply impracticable. orders 14 – 17 are agreed except that the father seeks her title be amended. as ms [d] is not in fact [dr d] the icl does not agree to this amendment. order 19 regarding the father’s drug and alcohol counselling is agreed in principle. the father seeks that it be limited for a year as he believes the order as drafted would mean he must otherwise do the counselling for the rest of his life. the icl submits this is not the effect of the order, and that if he complied with (b) and follows all reasonable directions and recommendations then this includes recommendations as to the duration of the counselling. orders 20 – 22 are agreed. order 23 poses a series of restraints. the parties agree with those proposed by the icl but each seeks to add additional restraints. the father seeks that the parties be restrained from making any social media posts about the other party. while the evidentiary basis for this is unclear, the request is not unreasonable and the icl would not oppose such a restraint. the mother seeks an addition that “if the father continue to represent a danger to the children’s well-being, these orders shall be revoked if deemed necessary to remove the father’s visitation rights.” the mother is self-represented so probably does not understand that this is not an appropriate order that the court can make.
associate: dated: 7 august 2023
dated: 7 august 2023
‘annexure a’record of exhibits