last updated: 6 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
laguna & keever [2023] fedcfamc2f 1035
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessyintroduction
10.26 when a party is in default ...   for the purposes of rule 10.27, a respondent is in default if the respondent fails to:
... (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or   prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.
10.27 orders on default ... (2) if a respondent is in default, the court may: (a) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   the court may make an order of the kind referred to in subrule (1) or (2), or any other order, or may give any directions, and specify any consequences for non-compliance with the order, that the court thinks just.
15.15 party's attendance   unless the court otherwise directs, a party and the party's lawyer (if any) must attend each court event.   subrule (1) does not apply to:   an application for consent orders, or (b) a divorce hearing that does not require a party's attendance under the family law act , or (c) a hearing in chambers in the absence of the parties.   a divorce hearing that does not require a party's attendance under the family law act , or
15.19 failure to attend a court event   if a party to a proceeding is absent from a court event (including a first court date), the court may do one or more of the following:   adjourn the court event to a specific date or generally, (b) order that there is not to be any court event, unless:  a new date for the court event is fixed, or (ii) any other steps that the court directs are taken,  if the absent party is an applicant--dismiss the application, (d) if the absent party is a party who has made an interlocutory application--dismiss the interlocutory application, (e) proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   if the absent party is a party who has made an interlocutory application--dismiss the interlocutory application, (e) proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   proceed with the hearing generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceeding.   if a party to a proceeding is absent from a court event, the court may also make an order of the kind referred to in subrule 10.27(1) or (2) (orders on default), or any other order, or may give any directions, and specify any consequences for non-compliance with the order, that the court thinks just.
at some point, we’re all hoping sooner rather than later, you will accept that i am [x]’s father and that [x] has a fundamental human right, not to mention need, to equal access. my parenting methods are different to yours and you may not like my attitude, but you’re going to have to learn to get over yourself and accept it ... your parenting style is deeply offensive to me. it is unacceptable. your parenting style would be offensive to any reasonable human being.
a child’s right to equal time with each parent is a fundamental human right. in the event that one parent feels unable to cohabit with the other, equal time becomes all the more important and it is surprising that [the mother] views the deteriorating health of a parent to be an important life event demanding of [x]’s participation. it was and is disappointing that you did not display that same view recently upon my mother’s passing ... it is most certainly not in [x]’s interests that her mother seeks or be granted further or unlimited control over her life. on considering [x]’s interest i am unable to support the proposed orders. i am unable to support the passage of any orders that support and facilitate the abuse of my daughter, [x]’s, fundamental human rights as those proposed.
i remain disappointed and saddened at the applicant’s consistent unacceptable conduct regarding our daughter [x]. the applicant’s behaviour is cruel, selfish and unacceptable to me, [x]’s father. i never imagined a concept as basic as sharing could be such a tall order. i was stupidly naïve and my children pay an intolerably high, ongoing price for that. i am stunned to realise and saddened to live in a place where a child’s relationship with their mother is viewed by the state as unalienable, yet their relationship with their father, some sort of optional nicety at the discretion of the mother and the state. ...
notwithstanding the conduct of the applicant and the eager acquiescence of the court, i remain a proud father.
60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests ... (3) additional considerations are:
... (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,
associate: dated: 15 august 2023
dated: 15 august 2023