last updated: 2 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ling & yahui [2023] fedcfamc2f 1070
orders
the court orders that:
child impact report
part 1 of the event will occur by video, using microsoft teams, on 26 october 2023 with:  the applicant to attend at 9.00am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am.   the respondent to attend at 10.30am.
microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.
part 2 of the event will occur in person at the melbourne registry on the morning of 27 october 2023. specific details regarding the attendance of the parties and the child on this date will be provided to the parties in part 1 of the event.  any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child. (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child. (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child. (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child. (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
further proceedings
watchlist order
child’s time with father  the father shall collect the child from school if a school day, or from the mother’s residence if a non-school day, (b) the father will return the child to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, (c) the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property, (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father will return the child to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, (c) the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property, (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property, (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.
communication
restraint
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy  should there be an airport watchlist order? (2) should the father spend time with x and how? (3) should there be a restriction on ms yahui removing mr ling’s property from the former matrimonial home (‘the house’)?   should the father spend time with x and how? (3) should there be a restriction on ms yahui removing mr ling’s property from the former matrimonial home (‘the house’)?   should there be a restriction on ms yahui removing mr ling’s property from the former matrimonial home (‘the house’)?
these proceedings
... i sincerely believe that it is in [x]’s best interests to remain in australia and continue to have a relationship with both of his parents. i am willing to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure his safety and well-being, including paying damages if required by the court. an application for a prohibition on [x]’s travel can be made with conditions, such as requiring both parents’ consent for any particular trip. i applied for mediation through [e counsellors] based on the final ivo’s conditions. i submitted my application on 16/01/2023, and [e counsellors] conducted an interview with me on 14/02/2023. following [e counsellors] process, they were supposed to interview [ms yahui] as well to understand both parties’ situation as soon as possible. by the end of march, i called [e counsellors] to inquire about the progress of the mediation, [e counsellors] informed me that there was a delay because [ms yahui] postponed her interview with [e counsellors]. after conducting the interview with [ms yahui], [e counsellors] confirmed the mediation date on 15/05/2023. however, on 12/05/2023, [e counsellors] suddenly notified me that the mediation needed to be postponed due to [ms yahui’s] last-minute request for an extension. finally, [e counsellors] rescheduled out mediation dated on 13/06/2023, but we did not reach any agreement. on 26/06/2023, [ms yahui] initiated mediation through the family dispute resolution service (fdrs), and i responded, agreeing to participate. however, on 26/07/2023, i received a letter from fdrs stating that the mediation will no longer proceed.
time between the child and his father
the watchlist order
the restraint and property aspects
associate: dated: 14 august 2023
dated: 14 august 2023