last updated: 2 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
channa & duhan [2023] fedcfamc2f 1066
orders
the court orders that:
other orders
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
history of proceedings
current living arrangements
competing proposals
the father
the mother
the independent children’s lawyer (icl)
family violence allegations
at approximately 11:15am [in] october 2016, police from [suburb f] attended (blanked out) in relation to a loud and violent disturbance. upon arrival, police could hear a male voice yelling inside the dwelling and as police have approached the front door, have heard the sound of a female person crying. police have then entered the dwelling and located the aggrieved sitting on the couch in the lounge room. the aggrieved was visibly upset and crying, holding her arm in pain. police sighted the respondent pacing up and down the hallway in an agitated and aggressive state yelling towards the aggrieved. police also observed a chair which had been flipped over in the lounge room.[2]
... [mr channa] has been living with me for the past 5 months as i have given him approval to do so. in the last 4 months, [mr channa] has been abusive to me on a number of occasions. recently, he has been accusing me of having an affair with another person and has been yelling abuse at me. we talk in [country b] language and his words translate to something like ‘fucking bitch’. he also says things like if you have a relationship with another person i will kill you and i will kill myself. he has also threatened to leave me and take my daughter with him to [country b] should police be contacted. this morning this happened again whilst in the bedroom and i told him that i don’t want to live with him anymore. he then grabbed me by my arms and has pushed me to the ground. i believe that i has lost consciousness as i could not recall what happened for a moment. he has then started to slap me around the face which hurt me. i said that i am going to call police. [mr channa] then grabbed both my wrists and he started to slap his own face with my hands and i could do nothing to stop him. he then started saying that i will kill myself if you call the police. he then grabbed my mobile of me and would not give it back. i tried to leave the bedroom but he grabbed at me and pulled me back on to the bed. he started saying things like give me one chance, why are you doing this to me. [mr channa] then rang some of his friends who told him to leave and go to work. [mr channa] left for work at about 12:00pm. i then left the house and went to police to advise them of what is and has been happening. i do not want [mr channa] to live at my place anymore and take back my offer for him to stay there. i spoke to [officer g] and gave him this statement.
at the nominated date and time the suspect has attended the dwelling of the aggrieved and entered the dwelling through an unlocked rear door in the kitchen. the suspect has then entered the bedroom of the aggrieved and snatched her phone out of her hand, using his right hand. the suspect has then run down the hallways and into the lounge room of the dwelling, with the aggrieved following. the aggrieved has attempted on multiple occasions to retrieve her phone from the suspect. the aggrieved then told the suspect that he could keep the phone and she has attempted to leave through the front door to alert a neighbour. the suspect has grabbed the aggrieved from behind with both his hands wrapped around both of her upper arms. the suspect has then pushed the aggrieved down into a sitting position on the bed in the lounge room and asked her to withdraw her complaint to the police against him. the suspect returned her phone after the aggrieved threatened to phone police. the aggrieved has attempted to leave the dwelling via the rear kitchen door and the suspect has again followed her. the aggrieved then ran outside into the street and phoned police. the suspect was last seen decamping via his [vehicle]
...
issues for determination  whether the father has perpetrated family violence and to what extent, (b) if so then whether the child was exposed to that family violence, (c) whether the father has insight into the child’s needs, (d) does the mother have capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the father?, (e) whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue, and (f) the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   if so then whether the child was exposed to that family violence, (c) whether the father has insight into the child’s needs, (d) does the mother have capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the father?, (e) whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue, and (f) the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   whether the father has insight into the child’s needs, (d) does the mother have capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the father?, (e) whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue, and (f) the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   does the mother have capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the father?, (e) whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue, and (f) the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue, and (f) the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father.   should the parties should have equal shared parental responsibility or should the mother should have sole parental responsibility? (b) what, if any time should the child spend with the father? (c) should the child be able to travel overseas – specifically to country b – prior to turning 16 years of age?   what, if any time should the child spend with the father? (c) should the child be able to travel overseas – specifically to country b – prior to turning 16 years of age?   should the child be able to travel overseas – specifically to country b – prior to turning 16 years of age?
the evidence and witnesses  amended initiating application filed 11 november 2022, (b) affidavit of the father filed 4 november 2022, (c) affidavit of his partner, ms d filed on 13 april 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 13 april 2023, (e) child impact report dated 11 november 2022, and (f) the family report dated 29 march 2023.   affidavit of the father filed 4 november 2022, (c) affidavit of his partner, ms d filed on 13 april 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 13 april 2023, (e) child impact report dated 11 november 2022, and (f) the family report dated 29 march 2023.   affidavit of his partner, ms d filed on 13 april 2023, and (d) outline of case document filed 13 april 2023, (e) child impact report dated 11 november 2022, and (f) the family report dated 29 march 2023.   outline of case document filed 13 april 2023, (e) child impact report dated 11 november 2022, and (f) the family report dated 29 march 2023.   child impact report dated 11 november 2022, and (f) the family report dated 29 march 2023.   the family report dated 29 march 2023.   outline of case document filed 1 may 2023, (b) amended response filed 17 november 2022, (c) affidavit of the mother filed 17 november 2022, (d) affidavit of mother filed 9 may 2019, and (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 may 2019.   amended response filed 17 november 2022, (c) affidavit of the mother filed 17 november 2022, (d) affidavit of mother filed 9 may 2019, and (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 may 2019.   affidavit of the mother filed 17 november 2022, (d) affidavit of mother filed 9 may 2019, and (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 may 2019.   affidavit of mother filed 9 may 2019, and (e) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 may 2019.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 may 2019.   case outline filed 6 april 2023, (b) the family report dated 29 march 2023, and (c) child impact report dated 11 november 2022.   the family report dated 29 march 2023, and (c) child impact report dated 11 november 2022.   child impact report dated 11 november 2022.
the father
the mother
ms d - the father’s partner
family report writer – ms h
findings
whether the father has perpetrated family violence and to what extent
if so then whether the child was exposed to that family violence
whether the father has insight into the child’s needs
does the mother have capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the father
whether each party’s background of depression and suicidal ideation remains an issue
the reasons why the child is resistant to time spending with the father,
the law
application of the law to the circumstances of the case
s 60cc(2) the primary considerations are:(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and he need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence  the supervised contact in late 2019 and early 2020 when reunification occurred were largely positive. (b) the s65l report dated 1 may 2020 gives evidence of an uncomfortable father /child interaction with the child experiencing emotional distress – “i decided to cut short the observation as the child was observed to have become increasingly anxious and distressed by the situation”.[6] (c) in the child impact report released on 14 november 2022 the child spoke negatively of her father, described him as verbally “aggressive”, “talking loudly” and “swearing”. the family report observations were of a negative relationship with the child. the child was reported to say that the father was “pretending to be kind but i never feel comfortable with him”.[7] (d) the family report released on 3 april 2023 reflected a worsening situation. the report writer described the child as “hostile and rude” to the father, the child refused to interact with him, and was extremely critical of the father. although the father was reported to be appropriate with the child, remaining calm and friendly and giving her space, the ongoing and outright rudeness of the child to the father is extraordinary.   the s65l report dated 1 may 2020 gives evidence of an uncomfortable father /child interaction with the child experiencing emotional distress – “i decided to cut short the observation as the child was observed to have become increasingly anxious and distressed by the situation”.[6] (c) in the child impact report released on 14 november 2022 the child spoke negatively of her father, described him as verbally “aggressive”, “talking loudly” and “swearing”. the family report observations were of a negative relationship with the child. the child was reported to say that the father was “pretending to be kind but i never feel comfortable with him”.[7] (d) the family report released on 3 april 2023 reflected a worsening situation. the report writer described the child as “hostile and rude” to the father, the child refused to interact with him, and was extremely critical of the father. although the father was reported to be appropriate with the child, remaining calm and friendly and giving her space, the ongoing and outright rudeness of the child to the father is extraordinary.   in the child impact report released on 14 november 2022 the child spoke negatively of her father, described him as verbally “aggressive”, “talking loudly” and “swearing”. the family report observations were of a negative relationship with the child. the child was reported to say that the father was “pretending to be kind but i never feel comfortable with him”.[7] (d) the family report released on 3 april 2023 reflected a worsening situation. the report writer described the child as “hostile and rude” to the father, the child refused to interact with him, and was extremely critical of the father. although the father was reported to be appropriate with the child, remaining calm and friendly and giving her space, the ongoing and outright rudeness of the child to the father is extraordinary.   the family report released on 3 april 2023 reflected a worsening situation. the report writer described the child as “hostile and rude” to the father, the child refused to interact with him, and was extremely critical of the father. although the father was reported to be appropriate with the child, remaining calm and friendly and giving her space, the ongoing and outright rudeness of the child to the father is extraordinary.
s 60cc(3) the additional considerations are:s 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
s 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons (including grandparents or other relative of the child)
s 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child.
s 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child.
s 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living.
s 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
s 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
s 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
s 60cc(3)(h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture) and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right.
s 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents.
s 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family and s 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order.
s 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
s 60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
determination
parental responsibility  the poor co-parenting relationship, (b) the history of family violence, including the father’s minimisation and denials of his conduct, (c) the child opposition to time and the stories that she imparts to the mother further undermine any capacity to work together, and (d) the exposure of the child to the family violence between the parties.   the history of family violence, including the father’s minimisation and denials of his conduct, (c) the child opposition to time and the stories that she imparts to the mother further undermine any capacity to work together, and (d) the exposure of the child to the family violence between the parties.   the child opposition to time and the stories that she imparts to the mother further undermine any capacity to work together, and (d) the exposure of the child to the family violence between the parties.   the exposure of the child to the family violence between the parties.
time spending
overseas travel
in conclusion
associate: dated: 24 august 2023
dated: 24 august 2023
[1] family report dated 29 march 2023, paragraphs 64-78 and 113[2] exhibit icl1, tender bundle of icl, p.41[3] mother’s affidavit filed on 17 november 2022 at d2[4] exhibit icl1, tender bundle of icl, p. 41[5] the family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cg[6] family report dated 1 may 2020 paragraphs 15 - 19[7] child impact report dated 14 november 2022, paragraphs 13 - 18