last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cripps & aragon [2023] fedcfamc2f 1253
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment(delivered ex tempore, revised from transcript)
judge blake:
the material before the court
agreed facts: the applicant/father (father) in these proceedings was born in australia [in] 1977 (46 years old). the respondent/mother (mother) in these proceedings was born in [country c] [in] 1978 (45 years old). the mother arrived in australia from [country c] on a tourist visa in 2018. in 2018 the parties commenced their relationship. [in] 2018 the parties registered their relationship with nsw births deaths and marriages. the parties have one child from the relationship, [x] born [in] 2019. [x] is currently aged 3 years. the parties have no other children from previous relationships. on 1 august 2021 the parties separated and have lived separately and apart since that date. on 31 december 2021 the father commenced these parenting proceedings seeking, inter alia, injunctions on an interim and final basis preventing the mother from travelling overseas with [x] until he reaches the age of 18 years. on 22 february 2022 the mother filed a response seeking, inter alia, orders on an interim and final basis enabling her to travel to [country c] with x. on 22 february 2022 the mother filed an urgent application in a proceeding seeking orders enabling her to travel to [country c] with [x] to visit [x]’s terminally ill maternal grandmother (mother’s urgent interim application). the father opposed the orders sought in the mother’s urgent interim application. the mother’s urgent interim application was heard on march 2022 before [a] senior judicial registrar whereupon the mother’s urgent interim application was dismissed and an interim injunction preventing the mother from travelling overseas with [x] was imposed for a period of two years (i.e until march 2024). on 17 august 2022 a child impact report was prepared by [ms b], court child expert (child impact report). paragraph 27 of the child impact report noted that the circumstances in which [x] can travel to [country c] with the mother (if at all) continued to be a matter requiring resolution. on 5 september 2022 orders were made pursuant to s 68l(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth), appointing an independent children’s lawyer for [x] (icl). on 23 november 2022 interim parenting orders were made with the consent of the parties and the icl (interim parenting orders). on 12 december 2022 orders were made pursuant to s 62g(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth), that the parties and [x] attend upon a court child expert (practicing under their appointment as a family consultant), or a family consultant appointed under regulation 7, nominated by the court children’s service (referred to as the family consultant) for the purposes of the preparation of a family report and that the family report address: a) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), c) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, d) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child. (family report orders) no orders were made in relation to the filing and service of updated affidavits in advance of the parties’ consultations with the family consultant. as at the date of the family report orders: a) the father had filed the following affidavits: 13 december 2021 8 march 2023 b) the mother had filed the following affidavits: 22 february 2022 7 march 2022 26 june 2022 21 november 2022 on 30 may 2023 [ms d], regulation 7 family consultant informed the parties of their interviews by separate email. each party was not aware of the date of the other parties’ interview with [ms d]. the father arranged his interview to take place with [ms d] on 26 june 2023. on 25 june 2023 the mother swore an affidavit comprising 65 pages. on the morning of 26 june 2023 the mother filed the affidavit sworn on 25 june 2023 via the ccp (mother’s june affidavit). the mother alleges that she at 2.04pm on 26 june 2023 the mother [sic] emailed [ms d] advising her that the mother’s solicitor had filed an update affidavit via the ccp at 5.35pm on 26 june 2023 the mother’s solicitor served the mother’s june affidavit on the father’s solicitor and icl by email. the mother’s interview with [ms d] took place on 28 june 2023. on 11 july 2023 the father filed an application in a proceeding and supporting affidavit seeking the discharge of [ms d] on the basis of procedural and a breach of rule 8.13. on 12 july 2023 [ms d]’s observations of [x] with each of the parties took place at the [suburb e] registry of the fcfcoa. on 18 july 2023 the father’s solicitor served the application in a proceeding on the mother’s solicitor and the icl. on 3 august 2023 the procedural unfairness application was heard before [a] judicial registrar whereupon orders were made discharging the appointment of [ms d], appointed under regulation 7 as the family consultant and appointed pursuant to order 1 of the orders dated 12 december 2023. on the application of the mother and by consent of the father and the icl the order was stayed on 23 august 2023 pending the hearing of the review. issues in dispute: the mother contends that the issues in dispute are did [ms d] use information in the course of her interview with the father on 26 june 2023 that caused the father to suffer procedural unfairness. if the answer to issue “a” is yes, should the appointment of [ms d], appointed under regulation 7 as the family consultant and appointed pursuant to order 1 of the orders dated 12 december 2023, be discharged. the father contends that the issues in dispute are a. are irrelevant to the court’s consideration [sic]. on 19 august 2023 the court allocated the file to a new family consultant and as such the current application appears to be nugatory. no explanation has been provided as to why there has been a disregard for the rules and procedural fairness. the “procedure” adopted by the mother was apparently undertaken to obtain an advantage in the court procedure.
a) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), c) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, d) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), c) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, d) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
c) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, d) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
d) the impact upon the child and upon his relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
a) the father had filed the following affidavits: 13 december 2021 8 march 2023 b) the mother had filed the following affidavits: 22 february 2022 7 march 2022 26 june 2022 21 november 2022
b) the mother had filed the following affidavits: 22 february 2022 7 march 2022 26 june 2022 21 november 2022
positions of the parties   the father has not deposed to the questions he was asked in the interview and the answers he gave, and there is therefore no or insufficient evidence on which the court can make an informed judgment that the father has been treated unfairly, (b) the father was asked questions by ms d about the mother’s affidavit of 26 june 2023, and he therefore has not suffered any procedural unfairness, (c) the key assertions made by the father about the risks of the mother, and the prospect that the child will be removed to country c permanently were, in any event, available to ms d, (d) there is nothing in the mother’s affidavit that she could not have told ms d during the interview she was to have, (e) even if there has been some perceived or real unfairness suffered by the father, this is able to be cured. the family consultant will have time to read the parties trial affidavit’s, and will be available for cross-examination. in that circumstance any deficiency in procedural fairness can be cured, and (f) any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   the father was asked questions by ms d about the mother’s affidavit of 26 june 2023, and he therefore has not suffered any procedural unfairness, (c) the key assertions made by the father about the risks of the mother, and the prospect that the child will be removed to country c permanently were, in any event, available to ms d, (d) there is nothing in the mother’s affidavit that she could not have told ms d during the interview she was to have, (e) even if there has been some perceived or real unfairness suffered by the father, this is able to be cured. the family consultant will have time to read the parties trial affidavit’s, and will be available for cross-examination. in that circumstance any deficiency in procedural fairness can be cured, and (f) any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   the key assertions made by the father about the risks of the mother, and the prospect that the child will be removed to country c permanently were, in any event, available to ms d, (d) there is nothing in the mother’s affidavit that she could not have told ms d during the interview she was to have, (e) even if there has been some perceived or real unfairness suffered by the father, this is able to be cured. the family consultant will have time to read the parties trial affidavit’s, and will be available for cross-examination. in that circumstance any deficiency in procedural fairness can be cured, and (f) any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   there is nothing in the mother’s affidavit that she could not have told ms d during the interview she was to have, (e) even if there has been some perceived or real unfairness suffered by the father, this is able to be cured. the family consultant will have time to read the parties trial affidavit’s, and will be available for cross-examination. in that circumstance any deficiency in procedural fairness can be cured, and (f) any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   even if there has been some perceived or real unfairness suffered by the father, this is able to be cured. the family consultant will have time to read the parties trial affidavit’s, and will be available for cross-examination. in that circumstance any deficiency in procedural fairness can be cured, and (f) any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   any views ms d expresses on the risk of the mother absconding to country c is likely to be given minimal weight at the final hearing.   the court cannot make findings of fact at interim hearings, see goode v goode (2006) 206 flr 212 at [68], and the father, by his position, is effectively asking the court to make a finding of fact that he has been subject to procedural unfairness, (b) it is not in the child’s best interest to put him through another round of observations and/or interviews, and (c) the consequences of the orders made on 3 august 2023 will mean that the progress of this matter through the courts is delayed.   it is not in the child’s best interest to put him through another round of observations and/or interviews, and (c) the consequences of the orders made on 3 august 2023 will mean that the progress of this matter through the courts is delayed.   the consequences of the orders made on 3 august 2023 will mean that the progress of this matter through the courts is delayed.
legal principles
190 overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions   the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes:  according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.  without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives: (a) the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,   the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,   the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,  the efficient disposal of the court’s overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the civil practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them (including the power to make rules of court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose. (4) the civil practice and procedure provisions are the following, so far as they apply in relation to civil proceedings: (a) the rules of court, (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).   the civil practice and procedure provisions are the following, so far as they apply in relation to civil proceedings: (a) the rules of court, (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).   the rules of court, (b) any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).   any other provision made by or under this act or any other act with respect to the practice and procedure of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2).   rule 8.13 of the rules provides that a party may file an affidavit without leave of the court only if a provision of the rules, or an order of the court allows the affidavit to be filed in that way, and (b) rule 1.04, subrule (1) of the rules, provides that the purpose of these rules is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law as quickly, inexpensively and as efficiently as possible. subrule (2) provides that the parties must conduct family law proceedings in a manner consistent with the overarching purpose.   rule 1.04, subrule (1) of the rules, provides that the purpose of these rules is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law as quickly, inexpensively and as efficiently as possible. subrule (2) provides that the parties must conduct family law proceedings in a manner consistent with the overarching purpose.
consideration  the father filing an application in a proceeding and an affidavit on around 11 july 2023, (b) an argument before a judicial registrar and orders made on 3 august 2023, (c) the mother filing the application for review on 10 august 2023, (d) the mother filing an application in a proceeding and an affidavit from her solicitor on 17 august 2023, (e) a further appearance before the judicial registrar on 22 august 2023 which resulted in the stay of the orders made on 3 august 2023, and (f) judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   an argument before a judicial registrar and orders made on 3 august 2023, (c) the mother filing the application for review on 10 august 2023, (d) the mother filing an application in a proceeding and an affidavit from her solicitor on 17 august 2023, (e) a further appearance before the judicial registrar on 22 august 2023 which resulted in the stay of the orders made on 3 august 2023, and (f) judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   the mother filing the application for review on 10 august 2023, (d) the mother filing an application in a proceeding and an affidavit from her solicitor on 17 august 2023, (e) a further appearance before the judicial registrar on 22 august 2023 which resulted in the stay of the orders made on 3 august 2023, and (f) judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   the mother filing an application in a proceeding and an affidavit from her solicitor on 17 august 2023, (e) a further appearance before the judicial registrar on 22 august 2023 which resulted in the stay of the orders made on 3 august 2023, and (f) judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   a further appearance before the judicial registrar on 22 august 2023 which resulted in the stay of the orders made on 3 august 2023, and (f) judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   judicial time now being consumed conducting this review application.   it ignores the waste that has already occurred, and has been caused by the mother, and (b) it ignores the message that such an outcome would send to other parties in the family law system.   it ignores the message that such an outcome would send to other parties in the family law system.
other matters  the affidavit is comprehensive and comprises 154 paragraphs and 68 pages. there must at least be some doubt as to whether the mother could realistically have provided all of that information in the manner in which it was provided at the interview, in the same way in which it was provided in the affidavit, (b) it may be that some of the information could have been provided in the interview. it is equally the case the mother could have sought leave of the court to file the affidavit, in which case, no issue would have arisen, and (c) the orders made for the family report were made in december 2022. the mother had six months to seek leave of the court to file that affidavit, and she did not do so.   it may be that some of the information could have been provided in the interview. it is equally the case the mother could have sought leave of the court to file the affidavit, in which case, no issue would have arisen, and (c) the orders made for the family report were made in december 2022. the mother had six months to seek leave of the court to file that affidavit, and she did not do so.   the orders made for the family report were made in december 2022. the mother had six months to seek leave of the court to file that affidavit, and she did not do so.
costs
associate: dated: 27 september 2023
dated: 27 september 2023