last updated: 18 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
belloumi & belloumi [2023] fedcfamc2f 1144
orders
the court orders that:
the court directs that:
the court orders further that:  the father will contact the mother in writing and provide her notification about any proposed long term issue that is to be determine and his proposed decision, and (b) the father shall consult with the mother with regard to any such long term issue or decision including having regard for any suggestions she might make in writing with respect to the same, and (c) the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is 14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 4(b) herein, then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.   the father shall consult with the mother with regard to any such long term issue or decision including having regard for any suggestions she might make in writing with respect to the same, and (c) the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is 14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 4(b) herein, then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.   the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is 14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 4(b) herein, then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.   if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is 14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 4(b) herein, then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.   by video call each sunday from 5.30pm until 6.00pm with the mother to initiate the call and the father to facilitate it, and (b) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 2 hours as recommended by the supervision service, or in the absence of agreement each sunday from 3.00pm until 5.00pm, for no less than 10 supervised visits, (b) such time to supervised by an agreed supervision service, in the absence of agreement b contact service, the parties to do all things and sign all documents to engage such service, (c) the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 8(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such time to supervised by an agreed supervision service, in the absence of agreement b contact service, the parties to do all things and sign all documents to engage such service, (c) the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 8(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 8(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 4 hours as agreed between the parties in the absence of agreement each sunday from 1.00pm until 5.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence , and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence , and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 8 hours as agreed between the parties in the absence of agreement each sunday from 9.00am until 5.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week from saturday 4.00pm until sunday 4.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each alternate weekend from 4.00pm friday until sunday 4.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each alternate weekend from conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until commencement of school monday (9.00am on a non-school day), (b) changeovers that do not occur at the children’s school to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers that do not occur at the children’s school to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   the children spend time with each party for half of the short and long summer school period by agreement, in the absence of agreement as follows, (i) in the short-term holidays for one week, from the conclusion of school on the last day of term until 9:00am the following saturday, and (ii) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights. (b) the children will spend mother’s day with the mother and father’s day with the father, from 5.00pm on the saturday evening immediately prior to mother’s/father’s day until 5.00pm on mothers/father’s day. (c) birthdays: (i) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (ii) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the mother: from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025, then each alternate year.   in the short-term holidays for one week, from the conclusion of school on the last day of term until 9:00am the following saturday, and (ii) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights.  ) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights.   the children will spend mother’s day with the mother and father’s day with the father, from 5.00pm on the saturday evening immediately prior to mother’s/father’s day until 5.00pm on mothers/father’s day. (c) birthdays: (i) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (ii) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the mother: from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025, then each alternate year.   birthdays: (i) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (ii) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the mother: from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025, then each alternate year.   on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (ii) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the mother: from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025, then each alternate year.  ) on each of the children’s birthdays the children will spend time with the mother: from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025, then each alternate year.   denigrating, insulting, abusing, intimidating, belittling or rebuking the other parent, or doing so in the children's presence or hearing or permitting any other person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings with the children, or in the children's presence or hearing, (c) allowing the children access to any documents filed in these proceedings /other court proceedings or used as evidence for the purposes of these proceedings, (d) requesting that the children pass messages on to the other parent or party,   discussing these proceedings with the children, or in the children's presence or hearing, (c) allowing the children access to any documents filed in these proceedings /other court proceedings or used as evidence for the purposes of these proceedings, (d) requesting that the children pass messages on to the other parent or party,   allowing the children access to any documents filed in these proceedings /other court proceedings or used as evidence for the purposes of these proceedings, (d) requesting that the children pass messages on to the other parent or party,   requesting that the children pass messages on to the other parent or party,
reasons for judgment
judge j young:
introduction  whether the children should live primarily with the mother or father, the father and the icl seeking a change in the children’s primary residence, (b) if a change of residence is made, how spend time with the mother is to occur, including whether there ought be a moratorium on the mother’s time with the children and subsequent supervision of time, prior to the introduction of unsupervised time, (c) if a change of residence is made, what supports are required in the best interests of the children, (d) what orders should be made for parental responsibility, the mother and the icl seeking shared responsibility and the father seeking sole parental responsibility.   if a change of residence is made, how spend time with the mother is to occur, including whether there ought be a moratorium on the mother’s time with the children and subsequent supervision of time, prior to the introduction of unsupervised time, (c) if a change of residence is made, what supports are required in the best interests of the children, (d) what orders should be made for parental responsibility, the mother and the icl seeking shared responsibility and the father seeking sole parental responsibility.   if a change of residence is made, what supports are required in the best interests of the children, (d) what orders should be made for parental responsibility, the mother and the icl seeking shared responsibility and the father seeking sole parental responsibility.   what orders should be made for parental responsibility, the mother and the icl seeking shared responsibility and the father seeking sole parental responsibility.
primary contentions
father’s primary contentions
mother’s primary contentions
facts
the law
preliminary observations
family violence
for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.
alleged physical and psychological abuse
january 2021 incident
mother’s evidence
father’s evidence
video recording of january incident
interim intervention order
financial abuse
conclusions as to family violence
communication and spend time with the father
communication with the father pre-separation
communication and spend time with the father post-separation
first short form report dated 8 october 2021
second short form report dated 21 december 2021
supervised changeovers – 30 january 2022-27 february 2022
orders post first supervised changeovers
spend time post supervised changeovers
spend time after 29 november 2022
it appears to me that [x] may think his mum would be sad if he had fun with his dad. neither boy appeared to me to be afraid of their father, just very loyal to mum and maybe worried about her. ... mum appears very encouraging at handovers when i am there, but her first preference i think is for the boys not to spend any time with him...”
dr u
mr t
third short form report dated 31 march 2023
typically however we would see some degree of ambivalence in children about pursuing a relationship with the allegedly abusive parent rather than speaking in absolutes of one parent being wholly good and the other wholly bad it also does not explain why the children particularly [x] demonstrated a bond with [mr belloumi] in the previous assessments which has since deteriorated or why the children s dysregulation and behaviour has escalated in the absence of an increase in the spend time. it would be more common for the children to have presented in a consistent manner over time or for their distress to have been present during these earlier observations if the source of the resistance and refusal was to be solely attributed to [mr belloumi] further it would also not account for the observations of [s contact centre] that the children appear to find it difficult to allow themselves to have fun when with [mr belloumi] and deprive themselves of such activities in order to demonstrate their disdain for him. a further consideration is that the alleged distress and behavioural dysregulation of the children is not being reported in other settings for example [ms belloumi] indicated that the children were both doing well at school and in their social development.
approach
additional considerations – section 60cc(3)
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the children’s views
the nature of the children’s relationship with each of their parents and other persons including any grandparent or other relative of the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children, and to spend time with the children and to communicate with the children
you must do everything a parenting order says. in doing so, you cannot be merely passive but must take positive action and this positive obligation includes taking all reasonable steps to ensure that the order is put into effect. you must also positively encourage your children to comply with the orders. for example where the order states your children are to spend time with another party, you must not only ensure that the children are available but must also positively encourage them to go and do so.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of their parents or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the children), with whom they have been living
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of the children’s parents and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the children) to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and of either of the children’s parents, and any other characteristics of the children that the court thinks are relevant
if the children are aboriginal children or torres strait islander children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture) and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,
the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents
any family violence involving the children or a member of the children’s family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the children or a member of the children's family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
primary considerations – section 60cc(2)
the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
parental responsibilty
conclusion
associate: dated: 4 september 2023
dated: 4 september 2023
a
final orders sought by the applicant father  the father will contact the mother in writing and provide her notification about any proposed long term issue that is to be determine and his proposed decision ,and (ii) the father shall consult with the mother with regard to any such long term issue or decision including having regard for any suggestions she might make in writing with respect to the same, and (iii) the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (iv) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 2(i) here then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.  ) the father shall consult with the mother with regard to any such long term issue or decision including having regard for any suggestions she might make in writing with respect to the same, and (iii) the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (iv) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 2(i) here then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.  i) the mother and father will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any such issue, and (iv) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 2(i) here then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.  ) if no agreement is reached between the parties by the date that is14 days from the date on which the father first sent his proposal to the mother in accordance with 2(i) here then the father shall make the final decision and advise the mother in writing of the decision about any such issue/decision.   to meet with the children and explain to the children the orders of the court, (b) facilitate such changeover of the children from the care of the mother to the father at a place and time as nominated by the icl.   facilitate such changeover of the children from the care of the mother to the father at a place and time as nominated by the icl.   by video call each sunday from 5.30pm until 6.00pm with the mother to initiate the call and the father to facilitate it, (b) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 2 hours as recommended by the supervision service, or in the absence of agreement each sunday from 3.00pm until 5.00pm, for no less than 10 supervised visits, (b) such time to supervised by an agreed supervision service, in the absence of agreement b contact services, the parties to do all things and sign all documents to engage such service, (c) the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 6(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such time to supervised by an agreed supervision service, in the absence of agreement b contact services, the parties to do all things and sign all documents to engage such service, (c) the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 6(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   the father will meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 6(a) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (d) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 4 hours as agreed between the parties in the absence of agreement each sunday from 1.00pm until 5.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence , and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence , and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week for 8 hours as agreed between the parties in the absence of agreement each sunday from 9.00am until 5.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence , and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each week from saturday 4.00pm until sunday 4.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each alternate weekend from 4.00pm friday until sunday 4.00pm for 10 visits, (b) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   each alternate weekend from conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until commencement of school monday (9.00am on a non-school day), (b) changeovers that do not occur at the children’s school to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   changeovers that do not occur at the children’s school to occur as agreed between the parties, in the absence of agreement at the father’s residence, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   the child spend time with each party for half of the short and long summer school period by agreement, in the absence of agreement as follows, (i) in the short-term holidays for one week, from the conclusion of school on the last day of term until 9:00am the following saturday, and (ii) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights. (b) the child will spend mother’s day with the mother and father’s day with the father, from 5.00pm on the saturday evening immediately prior to mother’s/father’s day until 5.00pm on mothers/father’s day. (c) birthdays: (i) on the child’s birthday the child will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (d) on the child’s birthdays the child will spend time with the mother: (i) from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then (ii) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.   in the short-term holidays for one week, from the conclusion of school on the last day of term until 9:00am the following saturday, and (ii) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights.  ) for the long summer holidays commencing december 28th for a period not more than 7 nights and from 17th of january for a period not more than 7 nights.   the child will spend mother’s day with the mother and father’s day with the father, from 5.00pm on the saturday evening immediately prior to mother’s/father’s day until 5.00pm on mothers/father’s day. (c) birthdays: (i) on the child’s birthday the child will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (d) on the child’s birthdays the child will spend time with the mother: (i) from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then (ii) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.   birthdays: (i) on the child’s birthday the child will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year. (d) on the child’s birthdays the child will spend time with the mother: (i) from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then (ii) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.   on the child’s birthday the child will spend time with the father: from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2024, then each alternate year, then from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2025, then each alternate year.   on the child’s birthdays the child will spend time with the mother: (i) from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then (ii) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.   from the conclusion of school or 4.00pm the day before the birthday until 2.00pm or commencement of school on the child’s birthday in 2024, then each alternate year, then (ii) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.  ) from 2.00pm or conclusion of school on the day of the birthday until 10.00am or commencement of school the following day in 2025 then each alternate year.
b
final orders sought by the respondent mother  commencing on 26 april, 2023: (i) each wednesday from 9.00 am until 4.00 until 4.00 pm if not a school day, and otherwise from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm. (b) commencing 3 june 2023: (i) each wednesday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm if not a school day and otherwise from the conclusion of school until 7.00 pm. (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm, and (iii) every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday, (iv) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.   each wednesday from 9.00 am until 4.00 until 4.00 pm if not a school day, and otherwise from the conclusion of school until 7.00pm (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm.  ) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm.   commencing 3 june 2023: (i) each wednesday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm if not a school day and otherwise from the conclusion of school until 7.00 pm. (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm, and (iii) every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday, (iv) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.   each wednesday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm if not a school day and otherwise from the conclusion of school until 7.00 pm. (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm, and (iii) every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday, (iv) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.  ) every second consecutive saturday and sunday from 9.00 am until 4.00 pm, and (iii) every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday, (iv) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.  i) every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday, (iv) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.  ) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologists thereafter every fourth weekend from 9.00 am saturday to 4.00 pm sunday. (v) subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.   subject to the recommendation of the children’s treating psychologist thereafter for one half of all school holiday periods including the summer long holiday period by agreement between the parties and in default of agreement for the second half.   by telephone, skype or facetime and communicate with the mother to facilitate the call and afford the children privacy during same. (b) on each of the children’s birthdays from 3.00 pm or after school until 7.00 pm if a school day for x, or from 10.00 am to 2.00 pm if a non-school day. (c) from 6.00 pm christmas eve until 4.00 pm christmas day in the year 2023 and from 4.00 pm until 6.00 pm boxing day in the year 2024 and alternating each year thereafter (d) at such other and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each of the children’s birthdays from 3.00 pm or after school until 7.00 pm if a school day for x, or from 10.00 am to 2.00 pm if a non-school day. (c) from 6.00 pm christmas eve until 4.00 pm christmas day in the year 2023 and from 4.00 pm until 6.00 pm boxing day in the year 2024 and alternating each year thereafter (d) at such other and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 6.00 pm christmas eve until 4.00 pm christmas day in the year 2023 and from 4.00 pm until 6.00 pm boxing day in the year 2024 and alternating each year thereafter (d) at such other and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   abusing rebuking belittling or otherwise denigrating each other or any member of the other parent’s household to or in the presence of the children or from permitting any person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so.
c
final orders sought by the independent children’s lawyer  commencing no earlier than 6 weeks from the date of these orders once per week for a period of no less than two hours at a date and time agreed between the parents and s family services or another suitably qualified supervision centre as nominated by the independent children’s lawyer. (b) commencing no earlier than 6 weeks from these orders by telephone and or other electronic method twice per week as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement each wednesday and saturday from 5.30pm to 6.30pm, (c) after four weeks of supervised time as provided for in order 5(a), and if the mother is prepared to pay for additional supervision or the parties agree upon a nominated supervisor, the children’s time with the mother may include a second period of no less than two hours at a date and time agreed between the parents and the supervision service or other agreed upon supervisor. (d) the parties to do all things and sign all documents to enrol with s family services or other such supervision centre and follow their reasonable directions regarding times, changeovers and availability of the service. (i) the father to meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 5(e) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties. (e) following three months of supervised time and compliance with order 6 of these orders, the children’s time with the mother may become unsupervised. (f) once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   commencing no earlier than 6 weeks from these orders by telephone and or other electronic method twice per week as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement each wednesday and saturday from 5.30pm to 6.30pm, (c) after four weeks of supervised time as provided for in order 5(a), and if the mother is prepared to pay for additional supervision or the parties agree upon a nominated supervisor, the children’s time with the mother may include a second period of no less than two hours at a date and time agreed between the parents and the supervision service or other agreed upon supervisor. (d) the parties to do all things and sign all documents to enrol with s family services or other such supervision centre and follow their reasonable directions regarding times, changeovers and availability of the service. (i) the father to meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 5(e) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties. (e) following three months of supervised time and compliance with order 6 of these orders, the children’s time with the mother may become unsupervised. (f) once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   after four weeks of supervised time as provided for in order 5(a), and if the mother is prepared to pay for additional supervision or the parties agree upon a nominated supervisor, the children’s time with the mother may include a second period of no less than two hours at a date and time agreed between the parents and the supervision service or other agreed upon supervisor. (d) the parties to do all things and sign all documents to enrol with s family services or other such supervision centre and follow their reasonable directions regarding times, changeovers and availability of the service. (i) the father to meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 5(e) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties. (e) following three months of supervised time and compliance with order 6 of these orders, the children’s time with the mother may become unsupervised. (f) once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   the parties to do all things and sign all documents to enrol with s family services or other such supervision centre and follow their reasonable directions regarding times, changeovers and availability of the service. (i) the father to meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 5(e) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties. (e) following three months of supervised time and compliance with order 6 of these orders, the children’s time with the mother may become unsupervised. (f) once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   the father to meet the cost of such supervision, with the mother to fund a report at the end of the period specified in order 5(e) and arrange for it to be provided to the father and/or his solicitors, and (ii) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.  ) such other times as may be agreed between the parties.   following three months of supervised time and compliance with order 6 of these orders, the children’s time with the mother may become unsupervised. (f) once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   once the children’s time with the mother has become unsupervised, the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to: (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence. (g) after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence.  ) each sunday from 9 am until 4 pm, (iii) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence.  i) changeovers to occur as agreed between the parties, and in the absence of agreement, at the father’s residence.   after 6 weeks of time as provided for in order 5(f), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm. (h) after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm.  ) every second consecutive saturday and sunday, from 9 am until 4 pm.   after four weeks of time as provided for in order 5(g), the children’s spend time with the mother may progress to, (i) each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.   each wednesday from 9 am until 4 pm if not a school/childcare day and from the conclusion of school or childcare or 3.30 pm until 7 pm during the school term, and (ii) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.  ) every second consecutive weekend from saturday from 9 am until sunday at 4 pm. (iii) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.  i) as otherwise agreed between the mother and father.
psychological and family therapy supports  the children’s medical treaters including any counsellor or psychologist.   any school that the children attend from time to time. (ii) any treating medical and or allied professional including counsellor and or psychologist, and (iii) any other government organisation that may require a copy of the said order for their administrative purposes.  ) any treating medical and or allied professional including counsellor and or psychologist, and (iii) any other government organisation that may require a copy of the said order for their administrative purposes.  i) any other government organisation that may require a copy of the said order for their administrative purposes.
communication
watchlist
restraints  abusing, denigrating, or insulting the other parent to or in the presence of and/or within the hearing of the children or permitting anyone else to do so; (b) making any derogatory comments about the other parent and/or his or her relatives to or in the presence of and/or within the hearing of the children or permitting anyone else to do so; (c) discussing these proceedings or any associated proceedings to and/or within the hearing of the children other than to explain the live with arrangements contained herein or permitting anyone else to do so; (d) knowingly permitting the children to have access to and/or reading any document filed or prepared in relation to these proceedings and associated proceedings; (e) publishing anything on public social media about these proceedings, the other parent, or any matter in dispute between the parents; (f) passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   making any derogatory comments about the other parent and/or his or her relatives to or in the presence of and/or within the hearing of the children or permitting anyone else to do so; (c) discussing these proceedings or any associated proceedings to and/or within the hearing of the children other than to explain the live with arrangements contained herein or permitting anyone else to do so; (d) knowingly permitting the children to have access to and/or reading any document filed or prepared in relation to these proceedings and associated proceedings; (e) publishing anything on public social media about these proceedings, the other parent, or any matter in dispute between the parents; (f) passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   discussing these proceedings or any associated proceedings to and/or within the hearing of the children other than to explain the live with arrangements contained herein or permitting anyone else to do so; (d) knowingly permitting the children to have access to and/or reading any document filed or prepared in relation to these proceedings and associated proceedings; (e) publishing anything on public social media about these proceedings, the other parent, or any matter in dispute between the parents; (f) passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   knowingly permitting the children to have access to and/or reading any document filed or prepared in relation to these proceedings and associated proceedings; (e) publishing anything on public social media about these proceedings, the other parent, or any matter in dispute between the parents; (f) passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   publishing anything on public social media about these proceedings, the other parent, or any matter in dispute between the parents; (f) passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   passing on messages or seeking to provide information to each other through the children and (g) imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.   imposing any form of physical or inappropriate discipline upon the children.