last updated: 19 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dallal & maroun [2023] fedcfamc2f 1165
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
respondent’s orders sought
a) that the applicant is directed to allow access to the respondent to the matrimonial property at [c street, town d] to enable the removal of the items belong to him that have been left at the property.
respondent father’s oral evidence
applicant mother’s oral evidence   the wife deposed to the father being in a relationship with ms plionis, his girl-friend. by letter to the husband’s lawyers, dated 17th september 2021, they were asked to ensure that she provided an affidavit regarding her circumstances, notably in relation to her assistance (or more) regarding the care of the children.[38] apparently there was no reply, and certainly there has been no affidavit filed, (b) after the purchase of the town d property, the husband sought a loan from f bank bank, using that property as security. the loan application prepared by the husband, dated 18th february 2019, declared that he had assets totalling $412,500 and no liabilities. this application was supported by a letter from his accountant confirming the husband’s intention to invest $224,000. nothing was said in this application regarding the husband’s intention to repay family loans.[39] (c) par.59 and annexure t to the wife’s trial affidavit refer to [barely legible] “statutory declarations”, dated 24th january 2018, from the husband’s brother and father (mr e and mahmoud), which purport to declare that various loans were provided to the husband, ostensibly to assist in the purchase of “the property at young”, but which are stated to be on the basis that the husband “will pay me back after 10 years.” another refers to payment in 15 years. to state the obvious, among other things, the terms are so vague as to be largely unenforceable. it is unclear when these documents were provided to the wife. questions might also arise regarding (i) whether these “loans” are essentially shams, and (b) whether they are also unenforceable because they were given, on their face, to the purchase of property. questions regarding stamp duty and registration might also arise that directly affect any other issues of enforceability. (d) the husband referred to a vacant block of land at h street in young. the mother deposed (pars.60 – 63) to it being transferred to a mr hamzeh for the sum of $95,000 on 7th may 2019. she said that $73,900.74 was to go to the husband, while $10,000 was to go to the paternal grandfather. no agent was disclosed on the front of the contract of sale. bank statements annexed to the husband’s affidavit, filed 21st january 2019, confirm the husband receiving his specified sum, but there is no record or accounting of what happened to the deposit, said to be $9500.00. further still, mr hamzeh was joined as a party to the proceeding, and although served, he took no part in the litigation. likewise, the paternal grandfather was also joined as a party. after much difficulty, he was not able to be served and he took no part in the proceeding, and filed nothing. (e) family loans involving the husband are traversed in the wife’s affidavit at pars.64 – 67. funds were stated to be provided for the purchase for mr e whebe of a bmw vehicle in april 2019 in the sum of $62,851.99. the wife deposed that bank statements annexed to the husband’s november 2019 affidavit (at annexure a) confirm that between 9th and 12th april 2019, the sum of $219,851.89 was withdrawn by the husband, part of which included the funds for the bmw just referred to. the wife commented that she was unable to reconcile the amount withdrawn and the amounts said to be owed, or paid, to members of the husband’s family.   after the purchase of the town d property, the husband sought a loan from f bank bank, using that property as security. the loan application prepared by the husband, dated 18th february 2019, declared that he had assets totalling $412,500 and no liabilities. this application was supported by a letter from his accountant confirming the husband’s intention to invest $224,000. nothing was said in this application regarding the husband’s intention to repay family loans.[39] (c) par.59 and annexure t to the wife’s trial affidavit refer to [barely legible] “statutory declarations”, dated 24th january 2018, from the husband’s brother and father (mr e and mahmoud), which purport to declare that various loans were provided to the husband, ostensibly to assist in the purchase of “the property at young”, but which are stated to be on the basis that the husband “will pay me back after 10 years.” another refers to payment in 15 years. to state the obvious, among other things, the terms are so vague as to be largely unenforceable. it is unclear when these documents were provided to the wife. questions might also arise regarding (i) whether these “loans” are essentially shams, and (b) whether they are also unenforceable because they were given, on their face, to the purchase of property. questions regarding stamp duty and registration might also arise that directly affect any other issues of enforceability. (d) the husband referred to a vacant block of land at h street in young. the mother deposed (pars.60 – 63) to it being transferred to a mr hamzeh for the sum of $95,000 on 7th may 2019. she said that $73,900.74 was to go to the husband, while $10,000 was to go to the paternal grandfather. no agent was disclosed on the front of the contract of sale. bank statements annexed to the husband’s affidavit, filed 21st january 2019, confirm the husband receiving his specified sum, but there is no record or accounting of what happened to the deposit, said to be $9500.00. further still, mr hamzeh was joined as a party to the proceeding, and although served, he took no part in the litigation. likewise, the paternal grandfather was also joined as a party. after much difficulty, he was not able to be served and he took no part in the proceeding, and filed nothing. (e) family loans involving the husband are traversed in the wife’s affidavit at pars.64 – 67. funds were stated to be provided for the purchase for mr e whebe of a bmw vehicle in april 2019 in the sum of $62,851.99. the wife deposed that bank statements annexed to the husband’s november 2019 affidavit (at annexure a) confirm that between 9th and 12th april 2019, the sum of $219,851.89 was withdrawn by the husband, part of which included the funds for the bmw just referred to. the wife commented that she was unable to reconcile the amount withdrawn and the amounts said to be owed, or paid, to members of the husband’s family.   par.59 and annexure t to the wife’s trial affidavit refer to [barely legible] “statutory declarations”, dated 24th january 2018, from the husband’s brother and father (mr e and mahmoud), which purport to declare that various loans were provided to the husband, ostensibly to assist in the purchase of “the property at young”, but which are stated to be on the basis that the husband “will pay me back after 10 years.” another refers to payment in 15 years. to state the obvious, among other things, the terms are so vague as to be largely unenforceable. it is unclear when these documents were provided to the wife. questions might also arise regarding (i) whether these “loans” are essentially shams, and (b) whether they are also unenforceable because they were given, on their face, to the purchase of property. questions regarding stamp duty and registration might also arise that directly affect any other issues of enforceability. (d) the husband referred to a vacant block of land at h street in young. the mother deposed (pars.60 – 63) to it being transferred to a mr hamzeh for the sum of $95,000 on 7th may 2019. she said that $73,900.74 was to go to the husband, while $10,000 was to go to the paternal grandfather. no agent was disclosed on the front of the contract of sale. bank statements annexed to the husband’s affidavit, filed 21st january 2019, confirm the husband receiving his specified sum, but there is no record or accounting of what happened to the deposit, said to be $9500.00. further still, mr hamzeh was joined as a party to the proceeding, and although served, he took no part in the litigation. likewise, the paternal grandfather was also joined as a party. after much difficulty, he was not able to be served and he took no part in the proceeding, and filed nothing. (e) family loans involving the husband are traversed in the wife’s affidavit at pars.64 – 67. funds were stated to be provided for the purchase for mr e whebe of a bmw vehicle in april 2019 in the sum of $62,851.99. the wife deposed that bank statements annexed to the husband’s november 2019 affidavit (at annexure a) confirm that between 9th and 12th april 2019, the sum of $219,851.89 was withdrawn by the husband, part of which included the funds for the bmw just referred to. the wife commented that she was unable to reconcile the amount withdrawn and the amounts said to be owed, or paid, to members of the husband’s family.   the husband referred to a vacant block of land at h street in young. the mother deposed (pars.60 – 63) to it being transferred to a mr hamzeh for the sum of $95,000 on 7th may 2019. she said that $73,900.74 was to go to the husband, while $10,000 was to go to the paternal grandfather. no agent was disclosed on the front of the contract of sale. bank statements annexed to the husband’s affidavit, filed 21st january 2019, confirm the husband receiving his specified sum, but there is no record or accounting of what happened to the deposit, said to be $9500.00. further still, mr hamzeh was joined as a party to the proceeding, and although served, he took no part in the litigation. likewise, the paternal grandfather was also joined as a party. after much difficulty, he was not able to be served and he took no part in the proceeding, and filed nothing. (e) family loans involving the husband are traversed in the wife’s affidavit at pars.64 – 67. funds were stated to be provided for the purchase for mr e whebe of a bmw vehicle in april 2019 in the sum of $62,851.99. the wife deposed that bank statements annexed to the husband’s november 2019 affidavit (at annexure a) confirm that between 9th and 12th april 2019, the sum of $219,851.89 was withdrawn by the husband, part of which included the funds for the bmw just referred to. the wife commented that she was unable to reconcile the amount withdrawn and the amounts said to be owed, or paid, to members of the husband’s family.   family loans involving the husband are traversed in the wife’s affidavit at pars.64 – 67. funds were stated to be provided for the purchase for mr e whebe of a bmw vehicle in april 2019 in the sum of $62,851.99. the wife deposed that bank statements annexed to the husband’s november 2019 affidavit (at annexure a) confirm that between 9th and 12th april 2019, the sum of $219,851.89 was withdrawn by the husband, part of which included the funds for the bmw just referred to. the wife commented that she was unable to reconcile the amount withdrawn and the amounts said to be owed, or paid, to members of the husband’s family.
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
method of proceeding on 3 april 2023, at the commencement of the final hearing listed in this matter, the applicant made an application for adjournment or other relief in response to late and inadequate financial disclosure by the first respondent. your honour ordered that the property matter was to be run on a ‘show cause’ basis. your honour referred to the full court’s decision in chang v su [2002] famca 156, flc 93–117. it is submitted that the relevant principles of that case, and the line of cases which follow it, that are applicable to this matter are: in circumstances where there has not been full and frank disclosure of financial circumstances by a party, it is open to a court to find that an indeterminate undisclosed amount is held by one of the parties and to make property orders without reference to an overall pool on the basis of the ‘just and equitable’ imperative: chang v su at [71]-[72]. a judge is entitled to take a robust view in relation to findings regarding a party’s financial position, including a party’s capacity to meet any proposed order, where that party has failed to make full and frank disclosure of their financial position: chang v su at [72] and graf-salzmann & graf [2015] fcwa 68 at [287] per walters j. while a deliberate and blatant pattern of conduct in not complying with disclosure obligations would make the court’s task more difficult, it also entitles the court to more easily draw inferences that such evidence would not.have assisted the defaulting party’s case: chang v su at [70], approving weir v weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338, 16 fam lr 154 at 79,593. where the non-disclosure has been deliberate, the court should not be ‘unduly cautious’ about making findings in favour of the innocent party: chang v su at [70]. in circumstances where a party has improperly failed to fully disclose their financial affairs, property settlement orders may make more generous provision for the other party: kingston & field (no 2) [2020] famcafc 235 at 106. coleman j further clarified in the case of sand and sand [2012] famcafc 179, flc 93–519 that it would be incorrect to create a pool of assets which included notional assets and add-backs and then proceed to distribute that pool where the property did not in fact exist. in light of the above, the applicant understands and submits that: in determining these proceedings the court will take a robust view in relation to the evidence and potential findings, and will not be unduly cautions about making findings in favour of the applicant, and it will be a matter for the first respondent to evidence his contributions and explain his withdrawals from the joint property pool which the applicant says was available and/or wasted by the first respondent,
and makes the submissions that follow accordingly.
lack of disclosure there are long-standing authorities regarding the duty of complete and ongoing financial disclosure in family matters: see black & kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) 15 fam lr 343, among others. the case law supplements rules of court such as rules 6.01 and 6.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. the duty to disclose is absolute: weir & weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338 at 79,593, chang v su [2002] famca 156, (2002) flc 93-117 at [70]. such principles apply whether the omissions of disclosure were negligent and/or unintentional, or were wilful and/or deliberate: see for example leclair & abel [2018] fcca 2068 at [46(b)] per neville j. the applicant submits that the first respondent has failed to provide appropriate financial disclosure throughout these proceedings. it is further submitted that these failures were intentional, made after consideration, and the product of specific decisions to withhold information notwithstanding the absolute duty of disclosure. the applicant relies upon the lengthy history of requests for disclosure as evidenced in its tender bundle, as well as specific admissions by the first respondent in his oral evidence at transcript p35 l45-46, p36 l5-7, p38 l16 and l37-38. loans from the applicant’s parents insofar as the first respondent might maintain its disclosure argument and objection to the admission into evidence of the statutory declarations of the applicant’s parents at pages 20 to 23 of the applicant’s tender bundle, these documents have been removed from the agreed tender bundle. however, these documents are still relied upon by the applicant to prove the existence of these loans and their admission into evidence is sought. insofar as it might be argued that the documents should not be admitted into evidence because of a failure by the applicant to disclose the material, or to put the documents to the first respondent in cross-examination, the applicant submits: the matter was being run on a ‘show cause’ basis with respect to the first respondent, as your honour noted on day 2 (see transcript p6 line 5), the documents speak for themselves, the existence and content of the documents was known to the first respondent, given the applicant’s evidence was that the documents were prepared to evidence the loans for centrelink purposes and were so lodged by the first respondent, (see transcript p71 l1-p72 l8), corroborated by the statutory declarations similarly prepared for and lodged by the first respondent in respect of the loans from his family (see transcript p49 l11-17), the first respondent made unambiguous denials in cross-examination about the fact of the loans (see for example transcript p43 line 28-44 & p46 line 8-17), and (at transcript 43 line 36-38) invited the applicant to produce any documentation she had about the loans, which was promptly done, the applicant’s proposed tender bundle including these documents was sent to representatives for the first respondent prior to the start of court on day 3 of the hearing (5 april), and they could have:
sought a short break after cross-examination of the first respondent completed that morning and sought instructions on the documents, at a time where the interpreter was still available, and/or raised any objections to the intended tender in open court at the time of the hearing, but they did not.
the property pool as was effectively conceded by his counsel during hearing, there are parts of the first respondent’s financial statement which do not correctly reflect his circumstances – for example, the document does not indicate that the first respondent pays rent for his current accommodation when he does: see for example transcript p77 l18-20. further, the first respondent’s position appears to be that while he was on multiple occasions in receipt of considerable money – such as when he obtained the mortgage over the matrimonial property at 61 town d st – that money has been entirely dissipated by, among other things:
a. repayment of family loans, b. costs of renovations to the matrimonial home, and c. ordinary living expenses. the first respondent has led no evidence on affidavit from his family members or partner in support of the assertions he makes as to financial matters. further, he has led no detailed evidence as to the supposed renovations nor living expenses such that your honour can be satisfied that moneys were indeed expended on such items. the applicant suggests that jones v dunkel inferences are available and submits they should be made in respect of these matters. the applicant has collated in an annexure to these submissions the evidence going to both parties’ assets and liabilities. from this the applicant submits that the court should infer that there may have been a property pool available in these proceedings at a minimum of $403k, and possibly as high as $539k. the annexure causes the applicant’s submissions to exceed the page limit for this document, and accordingly the applicant formally and respectfully seeks leave for this document to exceed the specified page limit on the basis that: counsel for the first respondent was advised of the above in advance of filing and indicated she would not object to the submissions on this basis, the applicant would have included the information contained in the annexure in her financial statement to be filed prior to the commencement of the hearing had proper pre-trial disclosure been made by the first respondent, and the annexure includes information which was disclosed only for the first time in the applicant’s oral evidence at hearing. it is the applicant’s submission that: the first respondent’s supposed family loans were sham arrangements, the renovations supposedly undertaken on the matrimonial home do not support the amounts allegedly spent on that work, and the amounts of money which otherwise appears to have been dissipated or wasted does not support a conclusion that the money was properly used on ordinarily living expenses. the first respondent suggests that an amount of $130k was expended on renovations: applicant’s tender bundle, p60, first respondent’s oral evidence at transcript p58 l20-34. however, the amounts listed as being expended to that purpose in the first respondent’s trial affidavit at [162]-[168] only add up to $90k. while the applicant accepts that some renovations were undertaken by the first respondent, the applicant relies upon the valuation of the property post-separation by ms egerton (at applicant’s tender bundle, p19) as to the true state of the property and submits that on no fair estimate can the work said to have been completed equate to a value of $90k, let alone $130k. this is supported by the first respondent’s annexure n to his trial affidavit and page 3 of the f bank bank statement which indicates that $12.5k worth of repairs and maintenance had to be made to the property in january 2023 before it could be sold, as well as the applicant’s trial affidavit at [58] and annexure s setting out and depicting the condition of the property before her departure. the evidence is clear that the supposed family loans in the statutory declarations in january 2018 were in the first instance sham arrangements intended to present a misleading picture to centrelink: see the first respondent’s evidence at transcript p49 l11-17, as well as the documents’ inconsistencies and lack of veracity. the first respondent’s evidence in relation to the statutory declarations purportedly evidencing the loans (annexure t of the applicant’s trial affidavit) contradicts the material put forward by the first respondent in his trial affidavit and his annexures (specifically annexure r). in that what the statutory declarations purport to formalise and evidence: the first respondent’s supposed family loans were sham arrangements, the renovations supposedly undertaken on the matrimonial home do not support the amounts allegedly spent on that work, and the amounts of money which otherwise appears to have been dissipated or wasted does not support a conclusion that the money was properly used on ordinarily living expenses. further, the applicant notes that there were other family loans made at or before the making of the declarations which could have been included or referenced in the documents and which are not (such as two separate loans of $15,000 allegedly from the first respondent’s father, one to buy a work vehicle and another to fund renovations, one of which allegedly still remains outstanding). in submitting that the supposed family loans and/or repayments of these loans were sham arrangements intended to defeat the applicant’s claim, or at least reckless to this being a potential outcome, the applicant relies upon the following: her uncontroverted evidence that this is precisely what the first respondent’s brother mr e said (at transcript p76 l44-47), both properties were purchased post-marriage and therefore could reasonably have been expected to be split between the parties upon separation, the alleged loans to purchase the properties and for other purposes were made on long-term bases and there were no impending or crystallised deadlines for repayment – see [59] and annexure t of the applicant’s trial affidavit, the mortgage over 61 town d st was settled after the separation of the parties, save for one small loan (referred to in the first respondent’s trial affidavit at [151a]) the family loans were repaid after the separation of the parties, the transfer of the toyota landcruiser to the first respondent’s father, supposedly to repay a loan, was also done immediately after the separation of the parties, and the first respondent’s evidence was somewhat contradictory about whether the amounts of money mr e gives him post-separation were gifts or loans to be repaid, but it seems fairly clear that the sums of money being given post separation are not being recorded and there is no expectation by mr e of payment– see generally transcript p64 – thus supporting an inference that the first respondent has ‘banked’ funds with his family outside of the immediate reach of this court and draws down on them as he needs. that the first respondent has access to more money that he otherwise suggests is evident from the previous offers he gave evidence about putting to the applicant post-separation for maintenance and property settlement, including but not limited to his statements at transcript p17 l36, p23 l21-23, p24 l21-43, p25 l1-3 and l12-14.
the first respondent’s work further, the applicant submits that your honour will find, notwithstanding the first respondent’s denials (see for example his trial affidavit at [11]), that the first respondent has engaged in paid employment post-separation, and he continues to earn income from employment, as a tiler from time to time, even if the extent of the work done or income earned is unclear. the applicant relies upon the following evidence in support of the proposition that the first respondent has worked post-separation and continues to work: the first respondent completed his financial statement for the court in which he stated that he was self-employed for alextyle, the first respondent completed his financial statement for the court in which he said that he had $10k of tools and building material on hand– the applicant submits that these are supplies for future jobs, and such a significant amount of tools and materials being on hand is inconsistent with his alleged cessation of work in march 2019 (see [39] of the first respondent’s trial affidavit), the first respondent renewed his licence as a wall and floor tiler, issued in his personal name and to his address, on 7 june 2022 for a further period of 3 years: see [54] and annexure o of the applicant’s trial affidavit, the first respondent complains in his trial affidavit at [166] of post-separation not being able to access his tools and materials at the matrimonial home “which i mean i have not been able to work”, but the separation occurred in april 2019 after the alleged cessation of work in march 2019 (compare [39] of the first respondent’s trial affidavit), the first respondent further suggests in his trial affidavit at [168] that his application to f bank bank for financial hardship relief in respect of the mortgage was also founded in part due to lack of access to his tools and materials, which is suggestive of his use of those in employment, the hipages printouts (applicant’s tender bundle p1-7) show a constant pattern of reviews for completed work throughout the period that the first respondent was allegedly unable to work – the applicant submits that it would be complete nonsense that people are leaving reviews for the first respondent this month for work he did before he was injured in march 2019. the first respondent’s responses under cross-examination were unconvincing and inconsistent. his evidence changed over time to suit the evidence that was put to him: he said initially that he was unemployed (transcript p10 l25-29) and that he didn’t have a business (transcript p31 l28). then when shown his financial statement and his admission of self-employment his evidence was “i do have a business, but i’m not working with it and not using it. sorry. again. it’s ongoing, but i’m not working with it.” (at transcript p32 l39-41).\ then after being shown the hipages document (applicant’s tender bundle tender bundle p1-7) his evidence was “this business now for my cousin. my cousin doesn’t have a licence, and that’s why he’s running his business under my licence, and he’s using my business to work.” (at transcript p33 l13-15). then after being asked why the hipages referred to ‘alex’ in the context of his cousin’s name being abdul, his evidence was “he’s using my name because the business name alex tile (sic).” (transcript p33 l30). it is submitted, with respect, that the first respondent’s answers are inherently incredible and the product of invention in the witness box to suit the evidence put before him. it is noted that there is no evidence on affidavit from the first respondent to the effect that his business continues on without him working in it. proposed order 1 – lump sum payment of $300,000 the amended response filed by the first respondent on 15 march 2023 puts forward only a proposal in respect of property which is predicated upon the matrimonial property being available in the proceedings – which it is not any longer. the first respondent would have agreed to a 60:40 split of the property pool but says the property pool is negligible. otherwise the first respondent puts forward no formal position as to how he will provide for his children or the applicant. it is submitted that the applicant is in need of maintenance and/or a significant property settlement by virtue of her own personal circumstances and having the care and control of minor children of the marriage. in light of the case law outlined above, and having regard to the annexure and the submissions above, the applicant submits that there is an indeterminate and undisclosed amount of money, but certainly some hundreds of thousands of dollars, which is held by the first respondent’s family effectively on trust for him and which the first respondent ‘draws down on’ as he needs. it is on that basis that the applicant seeks a lump sum payment having regard to the previously known asset pool and lack of good explanation for its dissipation. in terms of the s 75(2) and s 79(4) factors, the applicant submits: prior to the marriage, the applicant was part way through a degree course in country b, which she ceased due to the first respondent’s promises that she would be able to complete after the marriage and when in australia – this promise was never kept. during the marriage the first respondent worked and received an income from employment. during the marriage the applicant stayed at home caring for the children of the marriage and maintaining as best she could the matrimonial home. she did not undertake any paid employment. throughout the marriage the first respondent exercised control over the applicant’s daily living. even the money the applicant received from centrelink was taken by the first respondent, through use of an app and possession of the applicant’s bank card. (many of the offers of settlement put forward by the first respondent, such as his living in the garage, are properly characterized as efforts to regain and maintain control over the applicant.) both parties have from time to time received loans and gifts of money from their families. while the first respondent has allegedly paid back the majority of the money owing to his family members, the money lent by the applicant’s parents remains outstanding. this money was likely used by the first respondent as seed money to support the purchase of property. the applicant and the children reside in young because this is where the first respondent moved the family to from sydney. the reason the first respondent gave for the move was to align with his family supports and employment prospects. while the first respondent indicated an intention to renovate the matrimonial home, and some renovation did occur, actually by the point of separation the matrimonial home was significantly damaged and in need of repair. to the extent that the first respondent alleges that property and other expenses were paid for out of savings, the first respondent was only able to make those savings by virtue of the applicant’s care of the children and maintenance of the home. post-separation the first respondent has moved back to sydney and the applicant has no family or other supports in young. in leaving the formal matrimonial home and failing to pay the mortgage such that the property was repossessed, the first respondent's actions has directly led to the homelessness of his children. the first respondent also took steps to repossess the family car (the toyota landcruiser) post-separation. the applicant initially had to obtain interim orders to regain use of the vehicle, and once that car stopped working, she had to go into personal debt and utilise personal savings to obtain a vehicle to assist in the children’s activities and schooling. at present, the first respondent refuses to meaningfully financially support his children. it is accepted that the first respondent did suffer an injury in april 2019 which caused him to have difficulty working for a period of time. however, as per above, it is submitted that the first respondent has worked post-separation and continues to engage in paid employment, the extent of which is unknown and unascertainable by virtue of the first respondent’s disclosure failings. the applicant does not presently work and has no qualifications which might lead her to obtain meaningful work in the future. the applicant’s future employment prospects in young in her field are minimal. the applicant and children presently reside in crisis accommodation in young. the applicant would like in future to relocate back to sydney to align with her extended family and friend support network, but such a course is impossible at present given the first respondent's refusal to meaningfully financially support his children. for all of the above reasons, the applicant submits that: her contributions during the marriage, while not always directly financial (although the first respondent did directly access her centrelink payments), were such that it would have been appropriate to commence at an equal distribution of property, leaving aside issues of non-disclosure, on a pure assessment of contributions and the statutory factors outlined above, in terms of splitting of a fulsome property pool the applicant would have sought adjustments of: at least an additional 10% for post separation factors, and at least an additional 10% for statutory factors, however, the making of a property order in the conventional way is not possible in this case given the first respondent’s conduct and the court’s inability to identify a determinate property pool, and the making of the order for a lump sum payment in the amount of $300,000 is, in all the circumstances of this case, just and equitable, particularly in light of the first respondent’s very significant and deliberate non-disclosure in these proceedings. the applicant notes that the making of an order in this amount would represent, having regard to the annexure and depending on the figures used, an allocation to the applicant of between 55% and 74% of the apparent property pool. given the first respondent’s apparent impecuniosity and the circumstances listed above, while a regular maintenance payment might well be more beneficial for the applicant, the applicant considers that a lump sum payment might well be more convenient for the first respondent. further, a lump sum payment would remove any risk of a future cessation of support by the first respondent, as well as removing a potential source of ongoing conflict for the parties or coercive control. proposed order 2 – restraint on the first respondent leaving australia the full court acknowledged in the case of brown & brown [2007] famca 151, (2007) flc 93-316, and confirmed in the case of rahman & rahman [2013] famcafc 162 (see [54]), that section 114 of the family law act provides a source of power for an order that restrains freedom of movement of a party in a financial case in order to ensure compliance. the relevant principles were summarised by bennett j in fowles and fowles (no 2) [2019] famca 1027 at [13]- [14] and endorsed on appeal by williams j in fowles and fowles (no 2) [2021] fedcfamc1f 209 at [51]. the case of castles and pesic [2008] famca 1003 is a particularly relevant example of a matter where an injunction was made against a party who was found to have significant undisclosed assets and a history of failing to pay moneys to the other party. there is ample evidence before the court that the first respondent, despite his apparent impecuniousness, travels frequently to country b, and has family there. the applicant holds concerns, in the light of statements made by the first respondent to her during the marriage (see for example the applicant’s trial affidavit at [38]), that the first respondent may attempt to depart from australia as a way of avoiding enforcement of any money order. further, while the first respondent denied it (see transcript p58 l4-18), the applicant gave evidence (see transcript p74), supported by a contemporaneous file note made by the applicant’s lawyer (see applicant’s tender bundle p16), that the first respondent had said words to the effect to her that: he does not like being told what to do, and if the court makes orders he does not like, he will ignore them. it is submitted that, in a ‘show cause’ situation arising from the first respondent’s lack of frankness in these proceedings, as well as the first respondent’s efforts to hide or dissipate assets that would otherwise be available to satisfy a court order, the court should find that there is a real and not insignificant risk that the first respondent will take steps up to and including leaving australia to avoid having to meet a property order. the applicant accepts that it is no small thing for an order to be made restricting the first respondent’s travel. nevertheless the applicant submits that considerations in relation to the impact upon the first respondent’s liberty must be balanced against a competing principle relating to the likelihood that the applicant will be denied a remedy if the first respondent’s freedom to leave the jurisdiction is not restrained. the applicant submits that the making of the injunction against the first respondent until full payment of any moneys ordered by way of property settlement is, in all the circumstances of this case, just and convenient. proposed order 3 – indemnification of the applicant given the significant financial non-disclosure by the first respondent in this case, the applicant seeks the protection of an indemnification order to ensure that: no further claims can be made against her in respect of her former marriage to the respondent, and to the extent that the respondent has other, non-disclosed, liabilities unknown to the applicant, those will be matters solely for the respondent to deal with. insofar as the first respondent allegedly owes his father $15,000 for the toyota landcruiser, it is submitted that it is appropriate that the applicant be indemnified in respect of this alleged loan given the original purpose of the loan was to buy tools and insurance for the first respondent’s business, further, it is not listed in the first respondent’s financial statement as a current liability. annexure current assets (as per financial statements)
post separation assets
current liabilities
note 1 – husband’s car evidence about whether the husband currently owned a car was contradictory - he said initially when asked what car he used to travel to young: “sometimes i used to borrow my mother, my father, my brother, my sister car, anyone of them, but at the end of the last time, i was driving my brother’s car which belonged to his work, which is used hilux.” at transcript p31 l1-3 - he later gave about mr e ‘s assistance to him as follows: “sometimes when i go, you know, to young from sydney, he fills ..... my car with petrol and – without my asking.” at transcript p63 l23-34, and at transcript p64 l5 “as i said, when he put petrol in my car” note 2 – husband’s money held on trust husband has access to what appears to be unlimited funds from his family and specifically his brother mr e - admits in his financial statement to mr e having paid $3000 for hydrotherapy (although never discussed in trial affidavit) - admits in his financial statement to mr e having paid $3000 for overseas travel in april-may 2022 (although never discussed in trial affidavit) – see also transcript p35 l37-40 - gives oral evidence that mr e also paid for other overseas travel (specifically in february 2023 – see 4.4.23 p35 l42-46 – although there was also a trip in september-october 2019) although this is never discussed in the husband’s trial affidavit nor his financial statement - gives oral evidence that he calls mr e and mr e will give him cash note 3 – husband’s compensation payment husband injured himself in 2015 in a car accident and allegedly ceased work thereafter - received a compensation payment of $90k in 2018 for that car accident – allegedly expended according to his lawyer’s letter of 22/1/21 (applicant’s tender bundle, doc 26, p43-44): - $55k in legal fees - $6k to centrelink - $30k to the husband - he says “that’s why i decided at that time to make a reservation for the house” at transcript p46 l38-39 which, given the timing, could not have been the purchases of either 61 town d st or 7 henry pl note 4 – 61 town d bought by husband in his name in february 2016 for $205,000 – paid in cash - allegedly $91k in savings probably includes the jan 2016 refund of $62k ($45k into the bank and $17k in cash) originally accumulated to buy a unit through allnour mosque - see [152d] of husband’s trial affidavit additional $29k in cash already on hand - allegedly $114k in family loans father $22k on 22/1/16 - repaid in may 2016 in cash $10k on 20/9/16 (after the house purchase) - repaid in april 2019 from mortgage settlement total $32k - but this doesn’t match the amount of $30k in the statutory declaration of mahmoud wehbe dated 24 january 2018 – see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and father’s oral evidence at transcript p49 generally plus at the time of signing the statutory declaration, most ($22k) of this money had in fact been repaid mr e $32k on 22/1/16 bank transfer $20k from business on 3/12/15 $10k on 11/12/15 total $52k - but this doesn’t match the amount of $60k in the statutory declaration of 24 january 2018 signed by mr e wehbe dated 24 january 2018 – see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and father’s oral evidence at transcript p48 l40-41 it also doesn’t match the bmw payment made on mr e’s behalf of $63k on 11/4/2023 – about $11k more than was said to be owed amran - $30k in cash in december 2015 – repaid in april 2019 after the mortgage settlement prior to relocation of family to young, the property was rented out husband applies for a mortgage over property in november 2018, allegedly to repay family loans - mortgage settles in april 2019 for $224k at a time when - mere days before formal-separation, although the parties were already in dispute by this time - post husband’s injury that (he says) means he can no longer work - allegedly loans paid back to family 61 town d st sold march 2023 as mortgagee in default for $310k note 5 – 7 h street bought by husband in his name in september 2017 for $83k – paid in cash - evidence is unclear but perhaps the $13k was a deposit to get into the auction and was at least partially borrowed from the husband’s father – see transcript p46 and transcript p66-67 generally - allegedly $70k in family loans mr e $30k on 22-23/8/17 bank transfer $10k on 30/8/17 bank transfer $2k cash around this time $8k on 11/9/17 bank transfer total $50k - but this doesn’t match either of the amount of $40k or $48k in the statutory declarations of 24 january 2018 signed by mr e wehbe dated 24 january 2018 and said by the husband to be in respect of the purchase of the land–see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and husband’s oral evidence at transcript p48 l40-41 and p49 l44-p50 l3 and if the husband’s oral evidence is correct that both of these statutory declarations relate to the purchase of the land, then that would be a loan of $88k which also does not match annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit attaches a note from mr e dated 17 june 2019 stating he loaned the husband $50k but this doesn’t match up with the statutory declarations, nor does the note (when it says the money was transferred in $5k and $10k increments) match up with the actual transfers of money made to the husband repaid on 10/5/19– see husband’s re-examination at transcript p66 l22-26 and annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit cousin najla el badawi - $20k on 15/9/17 -repaid on 10/5/19:see husband’s re-examination at transcript p66 l22-26 and annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit sold by husband post-separation 7/5/19 for $95k - $10k to husband’s father, perhaps a repayment of the deposit – see transcript p46 and transcript p66-67 generally - $74k paid directly to husband the purchaser’s $9.5k deposit paid to the husband (see husband’s trial affidavit, annexure s, p2 ‘settlement statement’) has never been accounted for by the husband note 6 – the 2018 motor vehicle 1 husband says he bought the toyota landcruiser in 2018 and paid $25k cash and traded in a 2002 honda crv purchased in 2012 for $9000 – see [179], [143] of husband’s trial affidavit - husband transfers registration to his father in april 2019, post-separation, allegedly as part payment for money owed to father wife had to go to court to get court orders to let her keep using the car - notwithstanding suggestions by his counsel about the car being written off and sold for a nominal sum, [182] of the husband’s trial affidavit makes it clear it was transferred to his father for value - the car is not “written off” until after the transfer takes place necessitates wife borrowing money to obtain alternative transport
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
a. background and nature of the proceedings the proceedings were originally listed for final hearing before his honour judge neville on monday 3 april to wednesday 5 april 2023 in respect of parenting and property matters. on monday 3 april 2023 the parents and the independent children’s lawyer were able to resolve the majority of the parenting issues by consent with limited aspects proceeding on a contested basis by way of oral submissions. the independent children’s lawyer was then discharged and property aspects between the applicant wife and respondent husband proceeded to hearing on tuesday 4 april and wednesday 5 april 2023. the applicant wife seeks that the husband pay her the sum of $300 000. the husband’s case is that he has provided adequate disclosure in respect of financial matters between the parties including by way of disclosure between the parties’ solicitors. the husband’s case is that there is only outstanding debt between the parties and that he is not in a position to pay the wife any sum of money. the husband is prepared to individually assume liability for outstanding debts, to allow the wife to remain debt free. relevant to the husband’s case is the fact that the property at 61 town d young (town d property) was repossessed by f bank bank in november 2022. the advice from f bank bank that on settlement of the recent sale of the town d property on or about the easter long weekend on 6 april 2023 or 11 april 2023, it is expected that there will be a shortfall, entails that there is only outstanding debt between the parties. cross examination of the husband took place with the assistance of an arabic interpreter who attended via microsoft teams on tuesday 4 april 2023 and the morning of wednesday 5 april 2023. cross examination of the wife took place on wednesday 5 april 2023 and commenced immediately following cross examination of the husband. a proposed tender bundle on behalf of the wife was received by email at 9:43am on the morning of wednesday 5 april 2023 while the husband was still under cross examination, with the hearing and cross examination of the husband continuing at 10:00am on wednesday 5 april 2023. some documents intended to be included in the proposed tender bundle of the wife were emailed by the counsel for the wife to the counsel and solicitor for the husband at 9:24pm on the night of tuesday 4 april 2023 while the husband was under cross examination. included in the proposed tender bundle for the wife emailed at 9:43am on the morning of wednesday 5 april 2023 but not included in the documents emailed at 9:24pm on the night of tuesday 4 april 2023, were copies of two statements dated tuesday 16 january 2018 which purport to be signed by the wife’s parents zakaria abdulrazzak al massri and noha mohamad kheir al dine al massri. the statements had not previously been disclosed by the wife to the husband and were effectively disclosed to the husband for the first time during examination in chief of the wife on wednesday 5 april 2023 under circumstances where the husband did not have access to an interpreter in court given the interpreter was at the time allocated to support and assist the wife via microsoft teams. the original statements appear to be in arabic and obtained in country b. while copies of statutory declarations of the husband’s father mahmoud wehbe and brother mr e wehbe dated 24 january 2018 which had been prepared for provision to centrelink were annexed at annexure t to the wife’s trial affidavit sworn 13 march 2023, the statements of the wife’s parents were not annexed to this affidavit. at the close of evidence on wednesday 5 april 2023, judge neville directed that the parties agree on a joint tender bundle of documents and that this be filed with the court. the wife subsequently pressed for the statements of her parents dated 16 january 2018 to be included in the joint tender bundle. the husband objects to the statements from the wife’s parents being received as evidence. on monday 17 april 2023, after conferring with the solicitors for the wife, the solicitors for the husband requested by email to judge neville’s associate that the matter be urgently relisted before his honour to allow the husband’s objection in respect of the statements from the wife’s parents dated 16 january 2018 to be dealt with. on tuesday 18 april 2023, judge neville’s associate emailed the solicitors and counsel for the parties, noting the advice from his honour that the parties prepare an agreed tender bundle by consent and limited individual tender bundles which were to include any documents that are not agreed. his honour advised that any issues arising from documents provided and how much weight is to be given to these documents may be addressed in written submissions. these submissions on behalf of the husband are further to the case outline of the husband filed on 27 march 2023. the husband continues to rely on the written submissions provided in the case outline dated 27 march 2023 in relation to relevant factors under section 79(4) and section 75(2) of the family act 1975 (cth) in respect of contributions and future needs. b. statements of the wife’s parents dated 16 january 2018 the statements of the wife’s parents were not put to the husband in cross examination of the husband. there was clearly opportunity for this to occur given the proposed tender bundle of the wife was emailed at 9:43am on the morning of wednesday 5 april 2023 and cross examination of the husband continued shortly after this on the morning of wednesday 5 april 2023 at 10:00am. the hearing that proceeded on 4 and 5 april 2023 was in respect of property aspects only, and accordingly the rules of evidence and provisions of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (evidence act) apply. it is submitted that the court should exercise its discretion under section 135(a) and (b) of the evidence act to exclude the statements from the wife’s parents from being admitted into evidence. in the circumstances of the present proceedings, the probative value of the statements of the wife’s parents is substantially outweighed by the danger that the statements would be unfairly prejudicial to the husband. the probative value of the statements from the wife’s parents is additionally substantially outweighed by the danger that the statements might be misleading or confusing. the statements raise a considerable issue as to the credibility of the wife’s evidence. admission of the statements into evidence would require the husband to account for a total of $70 000 on the basis of documents which the husband was never cross examined about. the husband’s evidence has always been that the wife has not adequately disclosed about the alleged loans from her parents. accordingly, at paragraphs 146-147 of the husband’s trial affidavit affirmed 24 march 2023, the husband states: i understand the applicant is alleging that her father gave me a loan of $40,000. i deny this. in any event, the applicant has not substantiated such alleged loan given to me by her father. i understand the applicant is alleging that she obtained a loan of $30,0000 from her mother. i deny receiving any money from her mother at the commencement or during the relationship. an objection had also been made on the husband’s behalf on tuesday 4 april 2023 about the alleged loans from the wife’s parents not being supported by evidence. in examination in chief of the wife by her counsel, it was the wife’s evidence that the statements of the wife’s parents dated 16 january 2018 were prepared for submission to centrelink along with the statutory declarations of the husband’s father and brother dated 24 january 2018. no where is this mentioned in the wife’s affidavit evidence. no where was it mentioned through the course of documentary disclosure and correspondence between the husband’s solicitors and the wife’s solicitors. it was additionally the wife’s evidence in examination in chief that the wife had no knowledge of either of the loans during the relationship between the husband and the wife, as the loans were discussed between the wife’s parents and the husband only, and only the husband received any money from the wife’s parents. this contradicts the notion of the alleged loan of $30 000 from the wife’s mother being “obtained” by the wife from her mother. it also contradicts the wording of the statement from the wife’s father translated as “i sent batches of money with my relatives and friends to my daughter resident in australia.” the husband’s objection needs to be considered in the context of the significance of credibility issues in respect of the husband and wife in the proceedings. relevant to this is the “show cause” procedure under which it is proposed issues in contest in the property proceedings be dealt with. in particular, central to the proceedings are issues of financial disclosure and credibility of the husband in respect of matters for which he says he has made adequate disclosure. further, the court is clearly concerned about providing financially for the four children of the marriage for who the wife will be the primary carer and in circumstances where the wife and children are living in emergency housing and reliant on centrelink for financial support. admissibility of the statements of the wife’s parents into evidence would lead to a considerable danger that significance will be given to the alleged loans from the wife’s parents in the context of the relevant issues in the proceedings. within the scope of possible outcomes arising from admission of the statements of the wife’s parents into evidence would be a finding by the court that the husband should not be believed about the alleged loans from the wife’s parents. c. show cause approach and disclosure by the husband the husband objects to the proceedings being dealt with by way of a “show cause approach” requiring the husband to address why the orders sought by the wife should not be made.9 it is understood that this approach was raised by the court on the grounds of the line of decisions in chang v su [2002] famca 156, mezzacappa v mezzacappa [1987] famca 20, (1987) 11 fam lr 957, stein v stein [1986] famca 27, (1986) 11 fam lr 353 and weir v weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) 16 fam lr 154. the husband’s position is that both this line of authority and a “show cause” approach does not apply given his case is that he has made full and frank disclosure, and that the relevant facts and circumstances in the present proceedings are accordingly not the kind of facts and circumstances for which the principles in chang v su and other cases were intended to apply. the wife’s evidence under cross examination was that the justification for the $300 000 payment she seeks from the husband is the value of the town d property. as the town d property is the primary asset in the asset pool, even if the significant outstanding mortgage to f bank bank in the amount of $283 899.74 at 3 march 2023 is ignored, this would in effect amount to the wife being allocated nearly the entire value of the asset pool, which could not amount to a fair and equitable split of the pool of assets. the husband’s evidence and financial disclosure in relation to the town d property is as summarised in the chronology below.
d. conclusion the statements of the wife’s parents dated 16 january 2018 should not be admitted into evidence as admission into evidence would be contrary to section 135(a) and (b) of the evidence act, and would amount to an outcome that is unfairly prejudicial to the husband. it is not appropriate for a “show cause” approach to be applied. the following of such approach would amount to an error of law, especially to the extent that any application of such an approach seeks to provide financially for the children and the wife in circumstances where the children and wife have been residing in emergency accommodation and relying on centrelink for financial support. it is not open for the court to conclude that the husband retains sufficient wealth of the parties such that any sum could be paid by the husband to the wife, leaving the husband in a position that he still has adequate assets for the outcome in the proceedings to be just and equitable.
outline of principle ] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).  ] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed.  8] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  ] any and all such contributions, whether or not they sound in, or are directly linked to, the property available for distribution, should be considered and assessed together with the nature, form and extent of all other contributions of all types contemplated otherwise by s 79(4). [19] that is true of assets or income generated within the relationship and it is equally true of assets or income coming from outside of the relationship (for example, as here, in the form of inheritances). in the same way, s 79(4) specifically requires the court to take into account contributions made to the welfare of the family (and substantively and “...not in any merely token way...”, see, mallett v mallett [1984] hca 21, (1984) 156 clr 605 at 636 per wilson j) notwithstanding that those contributions may not be, or cannot be seen to be, directly linked to the available property at trial, or any increase or decrease in the value of the property. [20] put another way, consistent with authority, the s 79 discretion involves as a necessary requirement that “... trial judges weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such an assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.” (in the marriage of aleksovski [1996] famcafc 111, (1996) 20 fam lr 894 at 903). in aleksovski, kay j outlined the well-known “gold bar” analogy and said “[w]hat is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship” (at 83,443). [21] those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79. that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at 640-641 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives? [22] the analysis just referred to might, obviously enough, also involve an examination of when contributions were made and the use made of contributions. but that is quite different to attributing to, or searching for, a necessary causal connection between contributions and the available property as a requirement for a particular contribution having significance in the overall assessment of what is just and equitable.  ] we wish also to refer to the approach of the federal magistrate in attributing percentages to differing periods within the relationship, or types of contribution made. there is in our view little to be gained, and much to be said against, approaching the task of assessing contributions by attaching percentages to components of it. (the same, it might be said, applies to attributing a percentage to each of the relevant s 75(2) factors). [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. [25] doing so is also consistent with the demands of authority that the ultimate assessment of contributions should be made without “...giving over-zealous attention to the ascertainment of the parties’ contributions...” (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 524) and the well-established recognition in the authorities (acknowledged specifically by her honour in this case) that the process required of the court by s 79 is the exercise of a wide discretion, not the performance of a mathematical or accounting exercise. [26] the necessarily imprecise “wide discretion” inherent in what is required by the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage figures to arbitrary time frames or categorisations of contributions within the relationship. indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be avoided.
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.
the reference to "financial resources" in the context of s.75(2)(b) has long been correctly interpreted by the family court to refer to "a source of financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him or her to supply a financial need or deficiency". the requirement that the financial resource be that "of" a party no doubt implies that the source of financial support be one on which the party is capable of drawing. it must involve something more than an expectation of benevolence on the part of another. but it goes too far to suggest that the party must control the source of financial support...
section 75(2)(o) plainly extends to any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account as showing that a party to the marriage is or is not able to pay spousal maintenance or is or is not able to support himself or herself. the paragraph has accordingly long been correctly interpreted by the family court as permitting consideration by a court of "all of the financial matters which are relevant to [a] particular case". nothing in the language or structure of s.75 prevents a fact or circumstance which falls within s.75(2)(o) being also a fact or circumstance which gives rise to a matter under another paragraph of s.75(2), including s.75(2)(b).
... once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure ... then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.
in circumstances where there has not been full and frank disclosure of financial circumstances by a party, it is open to a court to find that an indeterminate undisclosed amount is held by one of the parties and to make property orders without reference to an overall pool.
... however if, as here, one party fails to fulfil that obligation, is it open to that party then to rely on the absence of satisfactory evidence to prevent the making of an order against him or her which otherwise justice and equity would require? it would be simple, if that were the case, to evade the jurisdiction of this court, not by outright refusal which would attract sanctions but by obfuscation and evasion.’ it seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure, which follows from his honour's findings in this case, then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.
consideration and disposition
property interests, superannuation and financial resources
description
ownership
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
1.
61 town d, young
h
$
$310,000
2.
2006 toyota tarago station wagon bto65w
w
$e8,000
3.
commonwealth bank 062630 10241304
$e500
4.
commonwealth bank 01533683 01533683
$500
5.
commonwealth bank 10608235
$65
6.
furniture and contents (including husband work tools)
j
$e5,000
7.
building materials
$e10,000
8.
tools
$5,000
assets subtotal
$339,065
liabilities
9.
f bank bank
$e283,899.74 as of 3 march 2023
10.
westpac 732 070 564 630
$1,105
11.
legal aid nsw charge
$18,927.08
12.
loan from husband’s father
$15,000
13.
counsel rates
liabilities subtotal
$328,931.82
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
superannuation subtotal
total (assets – liabilities)
$10,133.18
total (assets-liabilities + superannuation)
current assets (as per financial statements)
wife/ applicant
husband/ first respondent
nature
cba account – separately held
cba account
$e8000
car – self-funded the acquisition of the car post-separation with loan
$e1000
$e15,000
contents – separate houses
$e7000
jewellery
$-1,105
westpac account
tools of trade
??
husband’s car – see note 1
husband’s money held on trust by mr e – see note 2
post-separation assets
date
2015/2016
$40k
loan from wife’s father
february 2017
$30k
loan from wife’s mother
2018
remainder of compensation payment – see note 3
february 2016 march 2023
$205k (purchase) $310k (sale)
$310k (sale)
61 town d paid for in cash – see note 4
september 2017 7/5/19
$83k (purchase) $95k (sale)
$95k (sale)
7 h street paid for in cash – see note 5
2018 april 2019
april 2019
$34k (purchase) $15k (transfer)
$15k (transfer)
toyota landcruiser – see note 6
date of event
$36
afterpay
$800
loan from salwa dunia to buy car
note 1 – husband’s car evidence about whether the husband currently owned a car was contradictory - he said initially when asked what car he used to travel to young: “sometimes i used to borrow my mother, my father, my brother, my sister car, anyone of them, but at the end of the last time, i was driving my brother’s car which belonged to his work, which is used hilux.” at transcript p31 l1-3 - he later gave about mr e‘s assistance to him as follows: “sometimes when i go, you know, to young from sydney, he fills ..... my car with petrol and – without my asking.” at transcript p63 l23-34, and at transcript p64 l5 “as i said, when he put petrol in my car” note 2 – husband’s money held on trust husband has access to what appears to be unlimited funds from his family and specifically his brother mr e - admits in his financial statement to mr e having paid $3000 for hydrotherapy (although never discussed in trial affidavit) - admits in his financial statement to mr e having paid $3000 for overseas travel in april-may 2022 (although never discussed in trial affidavit) – see also transcript p35 l37-40 - gives oral evidence that mr e also paid for other overseas travel (specifically in february 2023 – see 4.4.23 p35 l42-46 – although there was also a trip in september-october 2019) although this is never discussed in the husband’s trial affidavit nor his financial statement - gives oral evidence that he calls mr e and mr e will give him cash - note 3 – husband’s compensation payment husband injured himself in 2015 in a car accident and allegedly ceased work thereafter - received a compensation payment of $90k in 2018 for that car accident – allegedly expended according to his lawyer’s letter of 22/1/21 (applicant’s tender bundle, doc 26, p43-44): - $55k in legal fees - $6k to centrelink - $30k to the husband - he says “that’s why i decided at that time to make a reservation for the house” at transcript p46 l38-39 which, given the timing, could not have been the purchases of either 61 town d st or 7 henry pl note 4 – 61 town d bough by husband in his name in february 2016 for $205,000 – paid in cash - allegedly $91k in savings probably includes the jan 2016 refund of $62k ($45k into the bank and $17k in cash) originally accumulated to buy a unit through allnour mosque - see [152d] of husband’s trial affidavit additional $29k in cash already on hand - allegedly $114k in family loans father $22k on 22/1/16 – repaid in may 2016 in cash $10k on 20/9/16 (after the house purchase) – repaid in april 2019 from mortgage settlement total $32k – but this doesn’t match the amount of $30k in the statutory declaration of mahmoud wehbe dated 24 january 2018 – see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and father’s oral evidence at transcript p49 generally plus at the time of signing the statutory declaration, most ($22k) of this money had in fact been repaid mr e $32k on 22/1/16 bank transfer $20k from business on 3/12/15 $10k on 11/12/15 total $52k – but this doesn’t match the amount of $60k in the statutory declaration of 24 january 2018 signed by mr e wehbe dated 24 january 2018 – see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and father’s oral evidence at transcript p48 l40-41 it also doesn’t match the bmw payment made on mr e’s behalf of $63k on 11/4/2023 – about $11k more than was said to be owed amran - $30k in cash in december 2015 – repaid in april 2019 after the mortgage settlement prior to relocation of family to young, the property was rented out husband applies for a mortgage over property in november 2018, allegedly to repay family loans – mortgage settles in april 2019 for $224k at a time when - mere days before formal-separation, although the parties were already in dispute by this time - post husband’s injury that (he says) means he can no longer work - allegedly loans paid back to family 61 town d st sold march 2023 as mortgage in default for $310k note 5 – 7 h street bought by husband in his name in september 2017 for $83k – paid in cash - evidence is unclear but perhaps the $13k was a deposit to get into the auction and was at least partially borrowed from the husband’s father – see transcript p46 and transcript p66 -67 generally - allegedly $70k in family loans mr e $30k on 22-23/8/17 bank transfer $10k on 30/8/17 bank transfer $2k cash around this time $8k on 11/9/17 bank transfer total $50k - but this doesn’t match either of the amount of $40k or $48k in the statutory declarations of 24 january 2018 signed by mr e wehbe dated 24 january 2018 and said by the husband to be in respect of the purchase of the land–see wife’s trial affidavit, annexure t and husband’s oral evidence at transcript p48 l40-41 and p49 l44-p50 l3 and if the husband’s oral evidence is correct that both of these statutory declarations relate to the purchase of the land, then that would be a loan of $88k which also does not match annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit attaches a note from mr e dated 17 june 2019 stating he loaned the husband $50k but this doesn’t match up with the statutory declarations, nor does the note (when it says the money was transferred in $5k and $10k increments) match up with the actual transfers of money made to the husband repaid on 10/5/19– see husband’s re-examination at transcript p66 l22-26 and annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit - cousin najla el badawi - $20k on 15/9/17 -repaid on 10/5/19:see husband’s re-examination at transcript p66 l22-26 and annexure r of the husband’s trial affidavit sold by husband post-separation 7/5/19 for $95k - $10k to husband’s father, perhaps a repayment of the deposit – see transcript p46 and transcript p66-67 generally - $74k paid directly to husband the purchaser’s $9.5k deposit paid to the husband (see husband’s trial affidavit, annexure s, p2 ‘settlement statement’) has never been accounted for by the husband note 6 – the 2018 motor vehicle 1 husband says he bought the toyota landcruiser in 2018 and paid $25k cash and traded in a 2002 honda crv purchased in 2012 for $9000 – see [179], [143] of husband’s trial affidavit - husband transfers registration to his father in april 2019, post-separation, allegedly as part payment for money owed to father wife had to go to court to get court orders to let her keep using the car - notwithstanding suggestions by his counsel about the car being written off and sold for a nominal sum, [182] of the husband’s trial affidavit makes it clear it was transferred to his father for value - the car is not “written off” until after the transfer takes place necessitates wife borrowing money to obtain alternative transport
associate: dated: 8 september 2023
dated: 8 september 2023
[1] t 48. [2] t 49. [3] t 49 – 50. [4] according to his trial affidavit, at pars.150 – 176, the husband purchased this property in 2016. in late 2022, he said that it was “repossessed” by f bank. other details, in a manner of speaking, concerning this property are set out in the body of these reasons.[5] t 51 – 52. [6] t54 – 55. [7] t 58 – 60. [8] t 60. [9] t 62. [10] t 64 – 66. [11] town d to sydney is a distance of approximately 500 kms, a drive of some 5 hours or thereabouts.[12] t 67 – 68. [13] t 69 – 70. [14] t 72 – 74.[15] t 75. [16] t 82. [17] t 82. [18] t83 – 85. [19] t 95. [20] t 97.[21] t 97.[22] t 98.[23] t 100.[24] t 101 – 102.[25] t 104.[26] t 109.[27] t 110.[28] t 111.[29] t 113.[30] t 114.[31] t 114.[32] t 115.[33] t 117.[34] t 120[35] t 124.[36] t 125[37] t 131.[38] see par.48 and annexure g to the wife’s trial affidavit.[39] see par.57 and annexure r to the wife’s trial affidavit.[40] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298.[41] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[42] omacini v omacini (2005) 33 fam lr 439.[43] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[44] dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154; (2014) 50 fam lr 244.[45] hall v hall [2016] hca 23; (2016) 257 clr 490.[46] chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244; (2002) 29 fam lr 406.[47] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4(1)(a). [48] chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244.[49] both of these quotes are, as noted earlier, from chang v su, at 407 (headnote) and at [70].[50] i deal with the “contributions”, being funds provided by the wife’s parents, in the next section.