last updated: 10 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
derren & schuyler [2023] fedcfamc2f 1255
orders
the court orders that:  each alternate weekend from after school friday to before school on wednesday, commencing the first week of term 4, 2023 and continuing the first week of each term thereafter. (b) during school holidays: (i) at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 half school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school and concluding at 12.00 midday on the second saturday. (ii) at the end of term 4 in alternate weeks with changeover to occur at 10.00am saturday, commencing on the second saturday of the term 4 holidays in odd numbered years and on the first saturday of term 4 holidays in even numbered years, subject to the christmas orders noted below.   during school holidays: (i) at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 half school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school and concluding at 12.00 midday on the second saturday. (ii) at the end of term 4 in alternate weeks with changeover to occur at 10.00am saturday, commencing on the second saturday of the term 4 holidays in odd numbered years and on the first saturday of term 4 holidays in even numbered years, subject to the christmas orders noted below.   at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 half school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school and concluding at 12.00 midday on the second saturday. (ii) at the end of term 4 in alternate weeks with changeover to occur at 10.00am saturday, commencing on the second saturday of the term 4 holidays in odd numbered years and on the first saturday of term 4 holidays in even numbered years, subject to the christmas orders noted below.  ) at the end of term 4 in alternate weeks with changeover to occur at 10.00am saturday, commencing on the second saturday of the term 4 holidays in odd numbered years and on the first saturday of term 4 holidays in even numbered years, subject to the christmas orders noted below.   at christmas: (i) in odd-numbered years – from 2.00pm on christmas eve to 2.00pm on christmas day with the mother and from 2.00pm on christmas day to 2.00pm on boxing day with the father, and (ii) in even-numbered years – from 2.00pm on christmas eve to 2.00pm on christmas day with the father and from 2.00pm on christmas day to 2.00pm boxing day with the mother in even numbered years. (b) on father’s and mother’s day (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the father, x shall spend time with the father as agreed between the parties but failing agreement at 5.00pm on the saturday before father’s day to return to school monday, (ii) if mother’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the mother, x shall spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties but failing agreement from 5.00pm on the saturday before mother’s day to return to school monday.   in odd-numbered years – from 2.00pm on christmas eve to 2.00pm on christmas day with the mother and from 2.00pm on christmas day to 2.00pm on boxing day with the father, and (ii) in even-numbered years – from 2.00pm on christmas eve to 2.00pm on christmas day with the father and from 2.00pm on christmas day to 2.00pm boxing day with the mother in even numbered years.  ) in even-numbered years – from 2.00pm on christmas eve to 2.00pm on christmas day with the father and from 2.00pm on christmas day to 2.00pm boxing day with the mother in even numbered years.   on father’s and mother’s day (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the father, x shall spend time with the father as agreed between the parties but failing agreement at 5.00pm on the saturday before father’s day to return to school monday, (ii) if mother’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the mother, x shall spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties but failing agreement from 5.00pm on the saturday before mother’s day to return to school monday.   if father’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the father, x shall spend time with the father as agreed between the parties but failing agreement at 5.00pm on the saturday before father’s day to return to school monday, (ii) if mother’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the mother, x shall spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties but failing agreement from 5.00pm on the saturday before mother’s day to return to school monday.  ) if mother’s day falls on a weekend when x is not already spending time with the mother, x shall spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties but failing agreement from 5.00pm on the saturday before mother’s day to return to school monday.   to receive such notices, newsletters, invitations, photographs, reports and other documents or information normally provided to parents from any school which the child may attend from time to time. (b) to receive such medical reports, test results, medical notes and other similar documents normally provided to parents from any medical practitioner which the child may attend from time to time.   to receive such medical reports, test results, medical notes and other similar documents normally provided to parents from any medical practitioner which the child may attend from time to time.   the child becoming hospitalised, (b) the child being involved in an accident that requires professional medical treatment.   the child being involved in an accident that requires professional medical treatment.   on any wednesday that a parent is not seeing the child, the child have phone or video call communication with that parent, between 5.00pm and 5.30pm with the parent having communication to initiate the call. (b) that the child be permitted to have phone or video communication with each parent at any reasonable time the child requests to do so and the parent with whom the child is spending time shall facilitate any such reasonable request.   that the child be permitted to have phone or video communication with each parent at any reasonable time the child requests to do so and the parent with whom the child is spending time shall facilitate any such reasonable request.
notations:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
background
the hearing
chronology
he actually seems quite placid in terms of trying to go along with a lot of the mother’s requests of him.
... what may imperil the meaningful relationship between the child and the father is if the mother is unable to let go of the child and be less possessive of the child. the family report writer was concerned about some of the mother’s actions and statements. she mentioned the fact that the mother was unable to bring herself to refer to the father as “daddy” and went on to say this: the mother was asked if she believed it was in the child’s best interests to have two parents in her life, and the mother reported that she believes that children cope fine with only one parent. the mother then stated “she doesn’t need them”, referring to the child and the paternal family. in some respects, the mother has moved off that a little bit in that she has consented to orders for unsupervised time, she has been complying with those orders and she is certainly not asking me to take a backwards step in terms of the child spending time with the father. however whether that indicates a quantum shift in the mother’s thinking or whether she is simply doing it because she knows the court is not going to countenance a situation where the child is not permitted to have a relationship with her father, i cannot be sure. and unless the mother’s attitude has actually shifted, i have some concerns about what the future may hold for this child and for this matter staying out of the court system. the report writer felt that some of the difficulties may arise from the mother having a relatively inflexible cognitive style. she went on to say: the mother may decide to reflect on this in the hope of developing some self-awareness, noting that a flexible approach to negotiations is central if she and the father are going to prioritise the child’s needs and coparent effectively. people can change. perhaps the mother’s agreement to the unsupervised time indicates some shift in her thinking, i hope it does. but if there is no shift in her thinking, if her underlying belief continues to be that a child only needs one of her parents, then the parties are headed for some choppy waters in terms of coparenting this child and giving her a good life from this day once again and staying out of the court system.
the report writer recommended various testing be carried out.   schuyler]’s main concern regarding [x]’s communication is the regression in her speech. [ms schuyler] reported that [x] mainly screams and wants others to figure out what she wants, reporting that it becomes worse after access visits with the father. [x] currently sees her father of a weekend for a few hours a day, with [ms schuyler] also reporting that these visits with her father have regressed her speech, sleep routine and behaviours.
dad left alone? - yes, on tuesday. where did he go? - to [g]’s house.  is would be a reference to g.)
leave you in the day? - yes. who at home? - no-one. clarified: dad left you at home by self? - no. mum said you told her about being scared that dad was going to hurt you. - no. he doesn’t let [g] hurt me. he puts her in her room. reframed the question. - no, he never said that.
so, again, the child denying that the father had hurt her in some way or that he had behaved in some other abusive manner towards her. the psychologist then asked x:
why did you tell mum that? - because mum she would be mad at daddy. why do you want mum to be mad at daddy? - i don’t know.   attended therapy session with mother [ms schuyler] and grandmother [ms m]–   m being the maternal grandmother)
at their family home in [suburb l]. [x] greeted clinician at front door. [x] was noted to say that she misses her dad. but mother, [ms schuyler], said that she was just saying that to be spiteful as, when it comes to going to her dad’s, she won’t get ready.   had a visit with her dad over the weekend. it was noted that he feeds [x] a lot of salty food and [ms schuyler] has addressed this with him and asked him to reduce [x]’s salt intake as her diet and nutrition is poor at his house.
i would appreciate a response in how you would like to proceed with this weekend. [x] is also saying she doesn’t want to come as she’s in pain with the [medical condition] and just wants to stay home.
unfortunately, without the prescribed creams, you will not be able to provide [x] with the medical treatments required while in your care. therefore [x] will not be able to attend on medical grounds.
dear [dr p], thank you very much for your referral of [x] to [q company] for concerns with regards to challenging behaviours, including defiance, aggression and anxiety. [x] has now used six sessions from her current mental health plan. in order to more fully understand [x]’s difficulties, some psychometric assessments have been administered. these have included the teacher and parent version and also a parent adaptive behaviour measure [...]. the teacher, found the autism spectrum problems and attention deficit hyperactivity problem scales to be borderline clinical on the dsm oriented scales. the parent form found most scales to be in the clinical range.   emphasis)   derren], under the advice of the principal as well as the actual court orders, points 1 and 2 with respect to the school's information and [x]’s first day of kindergarten will not be given. as [x] is already anxious about starting school when asked, [x] indicated she doesn't want you present on her first day.
yes, because he touched me on my private parts.   told me that the avo against dad has stopped and she is scared because her dad is mean to her and has said he will be having her this weekend, but she did not want to go. [x] also mentioned she is scared that dad will kill her. i told [x] to try not to worry when she is at school, as we have nice big fences and we will do our best to protect her. this made her happy and she went back to class.
hi, [ms s]. i have attached notes taken from a meeting in july with the independent children’s lawyer assigned to [x]. i spoke with [ms schuyler] yesterday afternoon.
avo against dad ([mr derren]) was dismissed on wednesday due to lack of evidence. [ms schuyler] said that [x] would not talk, so the evidence could not be provided. weekend visits start again today. apparently, [x] is “terrified” and mum feels she has to force her to go. last visit with dad was 14 march. mum made dcj report that dad had “held [x] at knifepoint and told her not to tell anyone, if she did he would kill her”.
i said that if the father couldn't step up and be the parent that [x] needed, then there should be no contact.
the law
best interests
why do you say the mother doesn’t facilitate a relationship with you? - the little things, resistance at handover. the mother says to the child, “it’s not up to me”.
you must do everything a parenting order says. in doing so, you cannot be merely passive but must take positive action and this positive obligation includes taking all reasonable steps to ensure that the order is put into effect. you must also positively encourage your children to comply with the orders. for example, where the order states your children are to spend time with another party, you must not only ensure that the children are available, but must also positively encourage them to go and do so.
i hate my dad, family. i hate it so much.
i want to punish.
ongoing issues with anxiety and behaviour as per mum, more so after she comes back from her father’s house. has been losing weight of late and she is not eating well for a few days before she goes to her dad’s house once a fortnight and for a few days after coming from there as per mother. recent ed presentation with concerns of poor appetite and weight loss in context of her visit to her father. doing better now as she is back to her mum’s house now. feels anxious and apprehensive before she has to go to her father’s house and does not eat well for a few days. some bullying at school as well of late. denies any suicidal plans – ideas or plans for now. previous seen by psychologist, considered diagnosis of avoid restrictive food intake disorder. however, father discontinued appointments? dcj involvement previously. father and mother currently in proceedings relating to custody, arrangement for [x].
the child loves school, is very happy, wishes she could have naps. she sleeps until 7am. often has breakfast: weetbix, changes every day. definitely has breakfast every day. asked how her world was. all good. bright/chirpy. she hugged me on the way out.
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 september 2023
dated: 14 september 2023
[1] tender bundle, pp.120 - 121[2] tender bundle, pp.128 - 132[3] tender bundle, pp. 142 - 143[4] there is a typographical error in the notes but this is clearly what was meant