last updated: 10 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bellanger & wemble [2023] fedcfamc2f 1246
orders
the court orders that:amended pursuant to rule 10.13(1) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 25 september 2023  to find and recover the children x born in 2011 and y born in 2013 (“the children”) and to deliver the children to the applicant mother at such place as the mother and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (b) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child/ren may be found.   to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child/ren may be found.   city b court in c state in country d, and (b) the district court in c state in country d, and (c) the county court in c state in country d, and (d) the supreme court in c state in country d, and (e) the commissioner of police in c state in country d, and (f) the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   the district court in c state in country d, and (c) the county court in c state in country d, and (d) the supreme court in c state in country d, and (e) the commissioner of police in c state in country d, and (f) the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   the county court in c state in country d, and (d) the supreme court in c state in country d, and (e) the commissioner of police in c state in country d, and (f) the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   the supreme court in c state in country d, and (e) the commissioner of police in c state in country d, and (f) the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   the commissioner of police in c state in country d, and (f) the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   the officers of the department of foreign affairs in country d. (g) (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)   (a-f) above are referred to as (“the country d authorities”)
lend their assistance, if they or any of them can assist consistently with the law of country d, with the enforcement of this recovery order (order 1 herein), and the reunification of the mother with the children pursuant to the orders made in this court on 16 july 2022 august 2021.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
whether to proceed in the absence of the first and second respondents
the new claim from my ex‑wife that i have abducted our children and the below video matched???
dear my relatives, friends & acquaintances, my ex‑wife opened new case against me in australia that i have abducted our children!
dear [mr wemble], please ensure that you and your mother attend upon the link below. i know your mother is in [city b] currently. we will be seeking orders to give the children to your mother to return them to [city f] to the applicant mother, [ms bellanger]. your mother can also return the children to australia at her own costs. if she does not have the money, please give the children to mother to book them to bring them back to australia.
we will seek recovery or section 67j family law act orders.
recovery orders allow the parents to apply if they want a child returned to them. recovery orders have the authority to instruct police officers to find the child and return them to the seeking parent. given you have relocated overseas for a while now, your mother and siblings must comply with the law and the court order to return the children. your mother is there on holidays now, and so are your sisters. these means they have the knowledge and the whereabouts of the children. we will need that immediate return of the children to their mother to book them to return to australia at our costs or you can book them to be returned to australia with your mother and your sisters at your costs. ... we will not seek contravention of the previous court orders if you comply. i note you are publishing court events on facebook, and this is an offence under the law. i have filed your facebook publication with the court as it was sent to me.
dear [mr h] the court dates you’ve drafted is too near and need to be adjourned for another 14 days so that i can prepared myself. the day will [mid] 2023. thank [mr wemble]
... there’s is no connection of my mother in this case. ...
there is a connection. your mother was there when the children were abducted, and current existing court order contravened or breached. this is a contempt of court. your mother aided in the contravention of the orders ... we will seek that your mother is compelled to bring the children back to australia and if she does not obey the court order, the court will deal with the contravention application we will make. the court has a wide ranging powers including jail term for such offences. it will be up to the court. you cannot abduct the children and think you will not be compelled by the law through your mother and other family members to comply with the law. your mother has the knowledge of the children’s whereabouts. she knows the court orders and she should have told you when you took the children that it was in breach of the court orders. i cannot warn how serious this is. i suggest you and your mother obtain a legal advice. you better get a lawyer not stating simply remove my mother. it is not like that. ...
thanks, [mid] 2023 i’ve documented.
dear [mr h] since you don’t want to compice [sic] with views, you can do whatever is necessary for your client, [mr h]. but my facts remain truthful to me and the are like 1. i have not secure a lawyer yet. 2. you’ve scheduled the date without my consent 3. you’ve drafted these doc before april but you failed to notify me early. 4. i’m at different geographical zone. kind regards, [mr wemble].
i have no issue for you to seek an adjournment. it is a normal thing to request. but i am telling you, come and ask the court yourself. you are right, this should have been put in court about 1 year ago. but i was told the traditional mediation may work and you hand back the children to come back to australia. this is why i did not open the court case immediately. you need to appear and ask the court to adjourn. ...
dear [mr h], thanks you for your replied [sic]. from now on, you can talk to me through my lawyer and his contact details are: 1. lawyer [mr j] [contact details]
secondly, the divorce of [ms bellanger] was done by:
1. [mr k],
2. confirmed by [city b] court, judge, [mr l] [in] 2019
3. handover of the children was done [in early] 2022 by [city b] court judge.
thirdly, you can either come to [country d] yourself to represent your doubting client, or write to me through the judiciary of [country d] whereby they will forward your summon to me.
eventually, i will not attend any hearing in australia because it’s a done case. you may come to [country d] yourself and appeal or open another case against me.
australia and [country d] are independent countries but have different judiciary systems and customary laws. any legal system vary from country to country.
kind regards,   wemble].
you are acting in contempt of the court orders, and i will notify the court as well.
significant events
... i became concerned about [ms bellanger]’s behaviour and her motives for obtaining passports for the children and i withdrew my consent for the children to obtain passports. [ms bellanger] has not allowed the children to communicate with me since then. ... [ms bellanger] has not consulted me regarding the children’s education. i do not know where the children go to school or how their learning is progressing. the only updates i receive about the children is what i hear through community members via my family.
the court orders by consent that: parental responsibility the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for all long term decisions in relation to the children [x] born [in] 2011 and [y] born [in] 2013 (“the children”). the mother have sole parental responsibility for the day to day decision making of the children. living arrangements and communication the children live with the mother. the mother shall facilitate contact between the children and the father by video or voice call on two occasions per week on days and time as may be agreed between the parties and failing agreement, with the father to place the call to the mother’s phone, as follows: (a) each wednesday between 7.30pm and 8.00pm australian eastern standard time (“aest”), and (b) each saturday between 5.00pm and 6.00pm aest. the father be permitted to send gifts, cards, letters and emails to the children and the mother shall provide them to the children. when the father travels to australia, he spend time with the children as follows: (a) as agreed between the parties in writing, and for no less than two occasions of five hours per week, and (b) that the father provide the mother with at least 14 days’ notice of the dates he will be present in australia, and (c) that the father be permitted to take the children to visit the paternal grandmother, paternal aunts and paternal uncle when the children are in his care. each parent shall advise the other of any change to their telephone number, residential address or email address within 7 days of such change. in the event members of the extended paternal family request to spend time with the children, the mother shall facilitate such spend time arrangements as may be agreed between the mother and the extended paternal family. each party immediately inform the other of any serious illness or medical emergency that the children may suffer and authorise the other parent to immediately speak to any treating health practitioners. both parties communicate directly by text message or email (or in urgent circumstances by telephone) in relation to any issues relating to the care, welfare and development of the children. by 2021, the mother cause the father’s original australian citizenship certificate and change of name documentation to be returned to the paternal grandmother’s address at [m street, suburb g], in the state of victoria. travel and passports pursuant to s11(b)(i) australian passports act 2005 (cth), the mother is permitted to do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to herself obtain and maintain passports for the children [x] born [in] 2011 and [y] born [in] 2013, at her sole expense, and without requiring the father’s signature notwithstanding order 1 herein. 13. the mother is permitted to travel overseas with the children as follows: (a) the mother provide the father with 30 days’ written notice of her intention to travel, including proposed destination, copies of return flight itineraries when available and details of where the children will be staying during the proposed trip, and (b) the mother continue to facilitate the children communicating with the father via video or voice call on two occasions per week at times to be agreed during her period of travel, and (c) the mother provide the father with written confirmation of landing at each destination (including upon the children’s return home). [notations omitted]   each wednesday between 7.30pm and 8.00pm australian eastern standard time (“aest”), and (b) each saturday between 5.00pm and 6.00pm aest.   each saturday between 5.00pm and 6.00pm aest.   as agreed between the parties in writing, and for no less than two occasions of five hours per week, and (b) that the father provide the mother with at least 14 days’ notice of the dates he will be present in australia, and (c) that the father be permitted to take the children to visit the paternal grandmother, paternal aunts and paternal uncle when the children are in his care.   that the father provide the mother with at least 14 days’ notice of the dates he will be present in australia, and (c) that the father be permitted to take the children to visit the paternal grandmother, paternal aunts and paternal uncle when the children are in his care.   that the father be permitted to take the children to visit the paternal grandmother, paternal aunts and paternal uncle when the children are in his care.   the mother provide the father with 30 days’ written notice of her intention to travel, including proposed destination, copies of return flight itineraries when available and details of where the children will be staying during the proposed trip, and (b) the mother continue to facilitate the children communicating with the father via video or voice call on two occasions per week at times to be agreed during her period of travel, and (c) the mother provide the father with written confirmation of landing at each destination (including upon the children’s return home).   the mother continue to facilitate the children communicating with the father via video or voice call on two occasions per week at times to be agreed during her period of travel, and (c) the mother provide the father with written confirmation of landing at each destination (including upon the children’s return home).   the mother provide the father with written confirmation of landing at each destination (including upon the children’s return home).
handover of the children was done [in early] 2022 by [city b] court judge.
relevant legal principles
60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant. ...  the children live with the mother.
67q meaning of recovery order
a recovery order is an order made by a court doing all or any of the following: (a) requiring the return of a child to: (i) a parent of the child, or (ii) a person with whom the child is to live under a parenting order, or (iii) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (iv) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (v) a person who has parental responsibility for the child, (b) authorising or directing a person or persons, with such assistance as he or she requires or they require, and if necessary by force, to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft, and to enter and search any premises or place, for the purpose of finding a child, (c) authorising or directing a person or persons, with such assistance as he or she requires or they require, and if necessary by force, to recover a child, (d) authorising or directing a person to whom a child is returned, or who recovers a child, to deliver the child to: (i) a parent of the child, or (ii) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii), (e) giving directions about the day‑to‑day care of a child until the child is returned or delivered to another person, (f) prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child. note 1: section 122a deals with the use of reasonable force by certain persons in making an arrest, and subdivision d of division 6 deals with what is to happen to a person arrested without warrant under a recovery order. note 2: if a recovery order authorises a person to recover a child, the person is authorised to recover the child on each occasion that it is necessary to do so while the order remains in force: see subsection 67w(3).   a parent of the child, or (ii) a person with whom the child is to live under a parenting order, or (iii) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (iv) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (v) a person who has parental responsibility for the child,  ) a person with whom the child is to live under a parenting order, or (iii) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (iv) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (v) a person who has parental responsibility for the child,  i) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (iv) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (v) a person who has parental responsibility for the child,  ) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (v) a person who has parental responsibility for the child,   a person who has parental responsibility for the child,   authorising or directing a person or persons, with such assistance as he or she requires or they require, and if necessary by force, to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft, and to enter and search any premises or place, for the purpose of finding a child, (c) authorising or directing a person or persons, with such assistance as he or she requires or they require, and if necessary by force, to recover a child, (d) authorising or directing a person to whom a child is returned, or who recovers a child, to deliver the child to: (i) a parent of the child, or (ii) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii), (e) giving directions about the day‑to‑day care of a child until the child is returned or delivered to another person, (f) prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.   authorising or directing a person or persons, with such assistance as he or she requires or they require, and if necessary by force, to recover a child, (d) authorising or directing a person to whom a child is returned, or who recovers a child, to deliver the child to: (i) a parent of the child, or (ii) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii), (e) giving directions about the day‑to‑day care of a child until the child is returned or delivered to another person, (f) prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.   authorising or directing a person to whom a child is returned, or who recovers a child, to deliver the child to: (i) a parent of the child, or (ii) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii), (e) giving directions about the day‑to‑day care of a child until the child is returned or delivered to another person, (f) prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.   a parent of the child, or (ii) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii),  ) a person described in subparagraph (a)(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v), or (iii) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii),  i) some other person on behalf of a person described in subparagraph (i) or (ii),   giving directions about the day‑to‑day care of a child until the child is returned or delivered to another person, (f) prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.   prohibiting a person from again removing or taking possession of a child, (g) authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.   authorising or directing a person to arrest, without warrant, a person who again removes or takes possession of a child.
67r how recovery orders authorise or direct people   an authorisation or direction described in paragraph 67q(b), (c) or (d) may be addressed to: (a) a named person, or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in a specified office of the commonwealth or of a state or territory. (2) without limiting the generality of subsection (1), an authorisation or direction described in paragraph 67q(b), (c) or (d) may be addressed to: (a) a named person who holds an appointment as a child recovery officer under subsection (3), or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in an office of child recovery officer. (3) the attorney‑general may appoint persons to be child recovery officers for the purposes of this subdivision.   a named person, or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in a specified office of the commonwealth or of a state or territory.   every person from time to time holding or acting in a specified office of the commonwealth or of a state or territory.   without limiting the generality of subsection (1), an authorisation or direction described in paragraph 67q(b), (c) or (d) may be addressed to: (a) a named person who holds an appointment as a child recovery officer under subsection (3), or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in an office of child recovery officer. (3) the attorney‑general may appoint persons to be child recovery officers for the purposes of this subdivision.   a named person who holds an appointment as a child recovery officer under subsection (3), or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in an office of child recovery officer.   every person from time to time holding or acting in an office of child recovery officer.   the attorney‑general may appoint persons to be child recovery officers for the purposes of this subdivision.   an appointment under subsection (3) may be of: (a) a named person only, or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in a specified office of the commonwealth or of a state or territory. 67s how recovery orders to stop and search etc. name or describe vehicles, places etc.   a named person only, or (b) every person from time to time holding or acting in a specified office of the commonwealth or of a state or territory.
an authorisation or direction described in paragraph 67q(b) may be expressed to apply to: (a) a vehicle, vessel, aircraft, premises or place named or described either specifically or in general terms, or (b) any vehicle, vessel, aircraft, premises or place in which there is, at any time, reasonable cause to believe that the child concerned may be found.   a vehicle, vessel, aircraft, premises or place named or described either specifically or in general terms, or (b) any vehicle, vessel, aircraft, premises or place in which there is, at any time, reasonable cause to believe that the child concerned may be found.   any vehicle, vessel, aircraft, premises or place in which there is, at any time, reasonable cause to believe that the child concerned may be found.
67t who may apply for a recovery order
a recovery order in relation to a child may be applied for by: (a) a person with whom the child is to live under a parenting order, or (b) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (c) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or (caa) a person who has parental responsibility for the child under a parenting order, or (ca) a grandparent of the child, or (d) any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child.   a person with whom the child is to live under a parenting order, or (b) a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (c) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or   a person with whom the child is to spend time under a parenting order, or (c) a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or   a person with whom the child is to communicate under a parenting order, or  ) a grandparent of the child, or (d) any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child.   any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child.
67u court’s power to make recovery order
in proceedings for a recovery order, the court may, subject to section 67v, make such recovery order as it thinks proper.
67v child’s best interests paramount consideration in making a recovery order
in deciding whether to make a recovery order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. note: sections 60cb to 60cg deal with how a court determines a child’s best interests.
jurisdiction
69e child or parent to be present in australia etc. (1) proceedings may be instituted under this act in relation to a child only if: (a) the child is present in australia on the relevant day (as defined in subsection (2)), or (b) the child is an australian citizen, or is ordinarily resident in australia, on the relevant day, or (c) a parent of the child is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (d) a party to the proceedings is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (e) it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings. (2) in this section:   the child is present in australia on the relevant day (as defined in subsection (2)), or (b) the child is an australian citizen, or is ordinarily resident in australia, on the relevant day, or (c) a parent of the child is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (d) a party to the proceedings is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (e) it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.   the child is an australian citizen, or is ordinarily resident in australia, on the relevant day, or (c) a parent of the child is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (d) a party to the proceedings is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (e) it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.   a parent of the child is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (d) a party to the proceedings is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (e) it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.   a party to the proceedings is an australian citizen, is ordinarily resident in australia, or is present in australia, on the relevant day, or (e) it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.   it would be in accordance with a treaty or arrangement in force between australia and an overseas jurisdiction, or the common law rules of private international law, for the court to exercise jurisdiction in the proceedings.
relevant day, in relation to proceedings, means: (a) if the application instituting the proceedings is filed in a court—the day on which the application is filed, or (b) in any other case—the day on which the application instituting the proceedings is made. note: division 4 of part xiiiaa (international protection of children) has effect despite this section.   if the application instituting the proceedings is filed in a court—the day on which the application is filed, or (b) in any other case—the day on which the application instituting the proceedings is made.   in any other case—the day on which the application instituting the proceedings is made.
international protection of children phasis added]
111cc application of this subdivision
this subdivision applies only if an issue under this act is whether a court, as opposed to any of the following authorities, has jurisdiction to take measures directed to the protection of the person of a child: (a) a central authority or competent authority of a convention country, (b) a competent authority of a non‑convention country.   a central authority or competent authority of a convention country, (b) a competent authority of a non‑convention country.   a competent authority of a non‑convention country.
111cd jurisdiction relating to the person of a child   a court may exercise jurisdiction for a commonwealth personal protection measure only in relation to: (a) a child who is present and habitually resident in australia, or (b) a child who is present in australia and habitually resident in a convention country, if: (i) the child’s protection requires taking the measure as a matter of urgency, or (ii) the measure is provisional and limited in its territorial effect to australia, or (iii) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   a child who is present and habitually resident in australia, or (b) a child who is present in australia and habitually resident in a convention country, if: (i) the child’s protection requires taking the measure as a matter of urgency, or (ii) the measure is provisional and limited in its territorial effect to australia, or (iii) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   a child who is present in australia and habitually resident in a convention country, if: (i) the child’s protection requires taking the measure as a matter of urgency, or (ii) the measure is provisional and limited in its territorial effect to australia, or (iii) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   the child’s protection requires taking the measure as a matter of urgency, or (ii) the measure is provisional and limited in its territorial effect to australia, or (iii) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  ) the measure is provisional and limited in its territorial effect to australia, or (iii) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  i) the child is a refugee child, or (iv) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  ) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence, or (v) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (vi) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  ) the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   a child who is present in a convention country, if: (i) the child is habitually resident in australia, or (ii) the child has been wrongfully removed from or retained outside australia and the court keeps jurisdiction under article 7 of the child protection convention, or (iii) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge, or (iv) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (v) the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or (d) a child who is present in australia and is a refugee child, or (e) a child who is present in a non‑convention country, if:   the child is habitually resident in australia, or (ii) the child has been wrongfully removed from or retained outside australia and the court keeps jurisdiction under article 7 of the child protection convention, or (iii) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge, or (iv) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (v) the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  ) the child has been wrongfully removed from or retained outside australia and the court keeps jurisdiction under article 7 of the child protection convention, or (iii) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge, or (iv) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (v) the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  i) a request to assume jurisdiction is made to the court by, or at the invitation of, a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge, or (iv) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (v) the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  ) a competent authority of the country of the child’s habitual residence or country of refuge agrees to the court assuming jurisdiction, or (v) the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or   the child is habitually resident in a convention country and the court is exercising jurisdiction in proceedings concerning the divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage (but see subsection (3)), or  the child is habitually resident in australia, and (ii) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child, or  a child who is present in australia, if: (i) the child is habitually resident in a non‑convention country, and (ii) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child.   the child is habitually resident in a non‑convention country, and (ii) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child.  ) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child.   a court may only exercise jurisdiction in accordance with subparagraph (1)(b)(ii) if the measure is not incompatible with a foreign measure already taken by a competent authority of a convention country under articles 5 to 10 of the child protection convention. (3) a court may only exercise jurisdiction in accordance with subparagraph (1)(b)(vi) or (c)(v) for a commonwealth personal protection measure relating to a child if: (a) one or both of the child’s parents are habitually resident in australia when the proceedings referred to in that subparagraph begin, and (b) one or both of the parents have parental responsibility for the child, and (c) the jurisdiction of the court to take the measure is accepted by the parents and each other person with parental responsibility for the child, and (d) the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised. (4) paragraphs 111cd(1)(a) to (d) are subject to the limitations in sections 111ce, 111cf and 111ch.   a court may only exercise jurisdiction in accordance with subparagraph (1)(b)(vi) or (c)(v) for a commonwealth personal protection measure relating to a child if: (a) one or both of the child’s parents are habitually resident in australia when the proceedings referred to in that subparagraph begin, and (b) one or both of the parents have parental responsibility for the child, and (c) the jurisdiction of the court to take the measure is accepted by the parents and each other person with parental responsibility for the child, and (d) the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised. (4) paragraphs 111cd(1)(a) to (d) are subject to the limitations in sections 111ce, 111cf and 111ch.   one or both of the child’s parents are habitually resident in australia when the proceedings referred to in that subparagraph begin, and (b) one or both of the parents have parental responsibility for the child, and (c) the jurisdiction of the court to take the measure is accepted by the parents and each other person with parental responsibility for the child, and (d) the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised.   one or both of the parents have parental responsibility for the child, and (c) the jurisdiction of the court to take the measure is accepted by the parents and each other person with parental responsibility for the child, and (d) the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised.   the jurisdiction of the court to take the measure is accepted by the parents and each other person with parental responsibility for the child, and (d) the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised.   the exercise of jurisdiction to take the measure is in the best interests of the child, and (e) the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised.   the proceedings on the application for divorce or separation of the child’s parents or the annulment of their marriage have not been finalised.   paragraphs 111cd(1)(a) to (d) are subject to the limitations in sections 111ce, 111cf and 111ch.  tations omitted]
this subdivision applies only if an issue under this act is whether an australian court has jurisdiction to take measures directed to the protection of a person of a child, as opposed to a central authority or competent authority of a convention country, or a competent authority of a non-convention country.   the child is habitually resident in australia and (ii) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) apply to the child”.
hence, that paragraph 111cd(1)(e) does apply if there is an issue.
conclusion
associate: dated: 25 september 2023
dated: 25 september 2023
[1] the bill that inserted subdivision b in the act. [2] subdivision b is within division 4. [3] yaling & tsen at [38].