last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gounelle & crozier [2023] fedcfamc2f 1229
orders
the court orders that:  x’s educational progress by forwarding x’s school reports to the mother. (b) outcomes of counselling received by x each 6 months, first notice 6 months from the date hereof. (c) any emergency or non‑routine medical treatment received by x. (d) an address to which she can sent communication to x.   outcomes of counselling received by x each 6 months, first notice 6 months from the date hereof. (c) any emergency or non‑routine medical treatment received by x. (d) an address to which she can sent communication to x.   any emergency or non‑routine medical treatment received by x. (d) an address to which she can sent communication to x.   an address to which she can sent communication to x.
reasons for judgment
judge dunkley
7. the child spend time with the parents as follows: on the child’s birthday, as may be agreed between the parents and if there is no agreement then from 10.00am until 3.00pm with the parent who does not normally have the child on that day with changeover to take place at [town e] unless otherwise agreed, on the parent’s birthdays, as may be agreed between the parents and if there is no agreement then for at least 3 hours on a school day and from 10.00am to 6.00pm on a non-school day with the parent who does not normally have the child on that day with changeover to take place at [town e] unless otherwise agreed, on the mother’s day weekend the father’s time with the child shall be suspended from 3.30pm on friday with the mother to collect the child from school, on the father’s day weekend the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended from 3.30pm on friday, on [country d day] with the mother, with the father’s time being suspended from the conclusion of school the day prior or 5.00pm on a non-school day until the commencement of school or 10.00am on a non-school day, the day following [country d day]. it is noted that the father agrees to the mother taking the child out of school for [country d day] celebration. the mother is responsible for all travel, on christmas when in australia: with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day and, with the father from 10.00am christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day other times as may be agreed from time to time in writing (text). the mother may take the child to [country d] for holidays for no longer than three weeks to include the christmas and new year period unless otherwise agreed. that, without admitting the necessity for the same, each of the mother and father, by themselves, their servants or agents be and are hereby restrained from: removing or interfering with the child’s current enrolment at [f] school unless otherwise agreed between the parents, discussing any issue in dispute in these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child. changeover take place at the child’s school on a school day and at [town e] on non-school days and public holidays unless otherwise agreed. the parents use their best endeavours to ensure that the child is not exposed to smoking. the parents shall ensure that the child is not exposed to excessive alcohol use and shall not use alcohol to excess while having care of the child. if the child is to spend time with the paternal grandmother the father shall ensure that the child is safe and that the paternal grandmother is able to provide adequate care for the child if the father is absent. each parent undertakes not to denigrate the other parent in the presence of the child and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no other person denigrates the other parent in the presence of the child. each parent keep the other informed of any significant child’s health issues as well as any procedures or operations to be undertaken prior to these procedures or operations being undertaken except in the case of an emergency (with the parent in whose care the child is, to inform the other parent as soon as possible) and each parent authorises the child’s doctor/medical practitioner to provide information and documents in relation to the child to the other parent. each parent authorise the school where the child attends to provide to the parents upon request copies of school reports, certificates, correspondence, letters, any other documents and information in relation to the child. the parents shall communicate with each other in a civil and child focussed manner. within 14 days of the making of these orders the father shall attend upon his doctor to seek a referral to [ms g], psychologist. after obtaining a referral the father shall make an appointment with [ms g] for joint counselling with the mother. in the event that there is additional costs which is not covered by medicare the parents shall share the cost equally. both the mother and father agree to follow the reasonable recommendations of [ms g]. the mother shall seek a referral to a dietician/nutritionist for the purpose of discussing the child’s dietary requirements and the parents shall follow all reasonable recommendations of that dietician/nutritionist. notwithstanding anything contained in these orders, nothing shall prevent the parents from agreeing in writing, with text being considered writing, to such further or other times from either parent to spend time with or communicate with the child. it is directed: that the minutes of consent orders remain on the court file. it is certified that pursuant to rule 21.15 of the federal circuit court rules 2001, the court certifies that it was reasonable for the parties to employ an advocate. it is noted: the father was advised of his right to seek independent legal advice prior to signing. the parents will provide make up time, as may be agreed, for any changes to these orders if necessary. the father may take the child to south australia for weekends on short notice.
the court orders until further order that the child [x], female, born [in] 2011 (“the child”) live with the applicant father from 12 noon this day until 12 noon on friday 16 april 2021. that thereafter, the child live with each parent in accordance with the minutes of consent orders made by this court on 24 july 2017. that the respondent mother be restrained from having the child baptised or from undergoing any other such similar religious ceremony.
final hearing
while the maternal grandmother is in australia that she: has care of the child [x] at least 1 day a week on sundays. be allowed to participate in school events and any other events where you would normally find a grandmother attending including extra-curricular activities. 3. be allowed to phone the child at least once a week on wednesdays. be allowed to spend 2 extra days with the child the week before she leaves australia. while she is not in australia, that she: 5. communicate with the child by video conference at least once a week. in both cases, that: 6. she be allowed to exchange letters and gifts with the child. she be made aware of any significant health issues with the child and be allowed to have access to the child's medical records and talk to the child's medical practitioners and mental health workers. 8. that the child be allowed to travel to [country d] to visit her at least every 2 years. that, if the respondent mother, [ms crozier], has substantial and significant care of the child, this application be dismissed.
witnesses
documents
other evidence
determination
associate: dated: 21 september 2023
dated: 21 september 2023