last updated: 6 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sylvan & sylvan [2023] fedcfamc2f 1176
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with and spend time with   as and from saturday 21 october 2023 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (b) commencing as and from saturday 20 january 2023 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am until 3:00pm, (c) commencing as and from saturday 23 march 2024 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am to 5:00pm, (d) commencing as and from saturday 22 march 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 10:00am sunday, (e) commencing as and from saturday 21 june 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, (f) commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from saturday 20 january 2023 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am until 3:00pm, (c) commencing as and from saturday 23 march 2024 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am to 5:00pm, (d) commencing as and from saturday 22 march 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 10:00am sunday, (e) commencing as and from saturday 21 june 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, (f) commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from saturday 23 march 2024 and each alternate saturday thereafter from 10:00am to 5:00pm, (d) commencing as and from saturday 22 march 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 10:00am sunday, (e) commencing as and from saturday 21 june 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, (f) commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from saturday 22 march 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 10:00am sunday, (e) commencing as and from saturday 21 june 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, (f) commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from saturday 21 june 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 2:00pm sunday, (f) commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from saturday 20 september 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday, (g) commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from 20 december 2025 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, and (h) commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   commencing as and from 20 march 2026 and thereafter each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm if not a school day friday to 9:00am or the commencement of school (whichever is earlier) on monday.   in odd numbered years, in the first week of school holidays from 10:00am on the first saturday until 10:00am of the middle saturday. (b) in even numbered years, from 10:00am on the middle saturday of the holidays until 10:00am on the last saturday of the holidays.   in even numbered years, from 10:00am on the middle saturday of the holidays until 10:00am on the last saturday of the holidays.   in 2024 from 10:00am until 5:00pm, (b) in 2025 from 10:00am the saturday prior to father’s day to 5:00pm sunday, (c) thereafter on the weekend that father’s day falls from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm, (whichever is the later) on the friday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm sunday.   in 2025 from 10:00am the saturday prior to father’s day to 5:00pm sunday, (c) thereafter on the weekend that father’s day falls from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm, (whichever is the later) on the friday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm sunday.   thereafter on the weekend that father’s day falls from the conclusion of school or 3:00pm, (whichever is the later) on the friday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm sunday.   in odd numbered years: (i) the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day. (ii) the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day. (b) in even numbered years: (i) the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day. (ii) the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.   the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day. (ii) the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.  ) the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.   in even numbered years: (i) the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day. (ii) the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.   the children shall spend time with the father from 4:00pm christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day. (ii) the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.  ) the children shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day.
changeover   contact the contact centre within 24 hours days and request an appointment for assessment for suitability for supervised changeovers, (b) attend for assessment at the times and places appointed by the contact centre, (c) attend any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (d) ensure that the child/ren attend/s any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (e) comply with all reasonable rules of the contact centre, and (f) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   attend for assessment at the times and places appointed by the contact centre, (c) attend any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (d) ensure that the child/ren attend/s any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (e) comply with all reasonable rules of the contact centre, and (f) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   attend any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (d) ensure that the child/ren attend/s any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (e) comply with all reasonable rules of the contact centre, and (f) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   ensure that the child/ren attend/s any appointments made by the contact centre for supervised changeovers, (e) comply with all reasonable rules of the contact centre, and (f) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   comply with all reasonable rules of the contact centre, and (f) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the contact centre.   the mother shall provide to the father in writing three proposed private supervision services able to facilitate the changeover so that the children’s time with the father is able to continue in accordance with these orders unabated, (b) the father shall advise the mother in writing of his selection of one such proposed facilitator within 24 hours thereafter, and (c) both parties shall forthwith thereafter do all things necessary to engage the chosen facilitator and shall each pay one half of all costs associated with such service.   the father shall advise the mother in writing of his selection of one such proposed facilitator within 24 hours thereafter, and (c) both parties shall forthwith thereafter do all things necessary to engage the chosen facilitator and shall each pay one half of all costs associated with such service.   both parties shall forthwith thereafter do all things necessary to engage the chosen facilitator and shall each pay one half of all costs associated with such service.
telephone/facetime
communication between the parties
emergencies and medication
educational information
medical information
restraints
international travel
psychological engagement  forthwith engage his treating psychologist and such other health professional as recommended by his general medical practitioner for the purposes of continuing to receive psychological assistance and treatment managing his mental health for such long as is recommended by such treating psychologist, (b) authorise his treating psychologist and such other health professional to forward to the mother a letter every three-month period for the next two calendar years and thereafter once every six months for a period of three years with the first letter issuing in the month of december 2023 stating information in relation to the following matters: (i) the father’s engagement with the psychologist, (ii) the father’s attendance upon the psychologist for scheduled appointments, (iii) the father’s progress, and (iv) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment. (c) bear the costs associated with obtaining such a correspondence.   authorise his treating psychologist and such other health professional to forward to the mother a letter every three-month period for the next two calendar years and thereafter once every six months for a period of three years with the first letter issuing in the month of december 2023 stating information in relation to the following matters: (i) the father’s engagement with the psychologist, (ii) the father’s attendance upon the psychologist for scheduled appointments, (iii) the father’s progress, and (iv) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment. (c) bear the costs associated with obtaining such a correspondence.   the father’s engagement with the psychologist, (ii) the father’s attendance upon the psychologist for scheduled appointments, (iii) the father’s progress, and (iv) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment.  ) the father’s attendance upon the psychologist for scheduled appointments, (iii) the father’s progress, and (iv) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment.  i) the father’s progress, and (iv) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment.  ) the father compliance with recommendations for treatment.   bear the costs associated with obtaining such a correspondence.
it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
background
the parties’ positions
the legal principles ] ...whilst s 60cc(2a) demands that greater weight be given to the consideration in s 60cc(2)(b) – something entirely consistent with the approach of the courts since the commencement of the act – the particular facts and circumstances of each individual case nevertheless require a careful evaluation and balancing of considerations, and all the more so when what is at stake is the potential for a child to never know their parent.
the single expert report
the father
i was beaten repeatedly by my uncle for 6 years or so, he was an alcoholic and he treated me differently to my cousins. ... my grandfather had a pretty old school parenting style. one time, i was expelled from school... he got me out of bed early each morning, made me take a cold shower, then take me to the oval... [for long runs].   sylvan]’s ability to maintain this potentially stressful role is not indicative of a person who in any way had anger management issues. he has never demonstrated any aggressive speech or body language in the clinician’s presence, regardless of the potentially distressing topics we discussed.[5]
ms aa
the mother
much of her history of the marital relationship had the quality of being a practised narrative. [ms sylvan] was unable to spontaneously provide details of the history and she repeatedly required to refer to her notes during the course of the assessment. her insight into her own mental health was poor. she described periods of extreme “stress” but did not engage in therapy previously. she described intrusive thoughts about [mr sylvan] killing her mother, a high startle response at the sound of an engine, secondary to reported domestic abuse, but did not recognise requiring further assessment or psychological interventions.
given her work [as a professional] and her understanding of [mental health disorders], i wondered if she had considered the symptoms of [mental health] disorders and was attempting to ensure there was no history suggestive of these disorders in her presentation. despite this, it appears that she does have some personality vulnerabilities, particularly in interpersonal relationships (previous romantic relationships, her relationship with her father) though there is no evidence of a [mental health] disorder. she did not report excessive alcohol consumption but did report alcohol consumption while breastfeeding. she also did not report or display symptoms of any other psychiatric illness.
... certainty in regard to her mental state and her firm discounting of any depressive or anxiety or trauma symptoms, coupled with her resolute description of the times she sought help as being due to “stress”, suggests a limited insight into her own mental health.
the maternal grandmother
ms r
the children
x
the reporting of the maternal family
on the drive home [x] said to me, “daddy likes me now.” i replied, “daddy likes you now buddy?” he said, “yes he let me play [a game] on his phone, we weren’t supposed to play there but we did so he likes me now.” i said, “ok buddy” he said, “remember at [suburb u] he didn’t let me play because he didn’t like me.” i replied with “is there ever a time when you feel mummy doesn’t like you?” he said “no” and i said “that’s good buddy and i want you to know no matter what happens i will always love you.”
he gets overly upset when reprimanded. the other day, when coming in from recess he asked to go to the toilet, i said of course but please remember to try to go to the toilet during recess. he got extremely upset and it took time to console him.
x’s treating psychologist  sylvan] advised this includes more aggressive play behaviours, poorer sleep patterns highlighted by not being able to sleep in his own bed and increased sensitivity to things going poorly. [ms sylvan] reports these behaviours settle after visitations though can take up to seven to 10 days to return to normal patterns for master [x], particularly his sleeping. [ms sylvan] has reported these behaviours are less present when visitations do not occur or have been more spread out due to unforeseen circumstances such as contracting covid19. [ms sylvan] has noted master [x]’s sleeping behaviours only change following visitations with [mr sylvan]. [ms sylvan] advised these behaviours also became present in school following the commencement of supervised visitations in late 2021 which had not been detailed previously. whilst these behaviours have not been observed in session, they are consistent with a child’s response to uncomfortable stimuli and can be a way for them to exert a level of control over their environment or seek safety.
i am of the belief master [x] has experienced adverse life experiences a younger age given his clinical presentation and given the reported changes in his behaviours following the separation of his parents and the changes in his behaviour following supervised visit with [mr sylvan], i am of the belief these adverse life experiences are likely related to his relationship with and perception of [mr sylvan].
the supervised service records
y
the mother’s reporting
... there have been instances where she will say things that suggest that she remembers living with [mr sylvan], eg, “daddy bad eyes”, and, “scared daddy get me”.
the supervisor records
discussion and findings as to the children
... if you look at the chronology of those events, my hypothesis is that what happens is [x] is reasonably okay. he then is going to have contact with his father. mum is heightened by this [contact with the father] and unable to attune because of her own experience or her belief in those experiences, and her heightened threat perception. so on the basis of what happened to [mr sylvan]’s parents, there is an increasing and escalating concern in mum, which is not un-understandable, but it contributes to a type of catastrophic thinking for want of a better word to describe it. so that heightens. [x] is then unable to regulate because mum is not able to co-regulate with him. the maternal grandmother, i thought, did very well in the assessment of trying to regulate him but having read her affidavit it is clear that she also is anxious around this, and so there isn’t a system of containment. so when he has the visit his experience of the visit is positive, from what we read in the supervision reports, but the narrative around that visit and the way that his other attachment figures are responding is negative. so there is this conflict between what his own personal experience is and the anxiety in the maternal household. and that may be contributing to why he is responding in – in an externalising manner after the visits.[23]
so i think that, you know, they are aware – they’re intelligent, articulate, caring children. they love their parents very much, and they wouldn’t want to do anything that would make either of their parents upset or sad or distressed, and so they would avoid talking about that because it doesn’t sit with them, the perception in that household of the father.[24]
her honour:
it is the mother’s evidence that [y] mostly makes positive comments about the father but...and i’m quoting from her affidavit: “...there have been instances where she will say things that suggest that she remembers living with [ms sylvan], eg, “daddy bad eyes”, and, “scared daddy get me”. [y] was born [in] 2020, and the parties separated on 2 february 2021. so at that time, [y] was months old...is it your view that those alleged comments could come from a memory that was held by [y] herself?
single expert:
i’m always hesitant to comment on things about memory, your honour, but with that caveat, no. i think that that is a narrative that is a learned one. she was pre-verbal at the time and had little in the way of any symptoms of anxiety in the observation that – that i did with her and her father, whereas the anxiety in the maternal household is very tangible. and so i’m by no means suggesting that the mother is deliberately making the children feel unsafe or that there is any malice intended in this, but as an inadvertent, perhaps, consequence of her own inability to contain what for her is a very distressing consequence that the children are having contact with someone who has – who, in her view, has perpetrated violence against her. that is that it’s – she – that is definitely the sense that one gets, and i think the most telling thing about that was in the supervision reports, where [y] – who was still quite young at the time – says something like, “mummy – i don’t like you, daddy, because mummy – mummy doesn’t like you”. so there’s – you know, there is – there is some evidence at least that there is that kind – that’s the tenor of the narrative.
meaningful relationship
... consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents ...[25]
family violence
much of her history of the marital relationship had the quality of being a practiced narrative. [ms sylvan] was unable to spontaneously provide details of the history and she repeatedly required to refer to her notes during the course of the assessment. [31]
thus the weight to be placed upon the mother’s affidavit is reduced.
the father’s allegations
the mother’s allegations
dinner and socialising
the trip to city qq: late 2014
the incident with the father’s flatmate
queensland: early 2015
the town vv trip: mid-2015
he has what i would describe as an “off-beat” sense of humour, which wasn’t always taken well by anyone who didn’t share that same sense of humour.[35]
you need to protect yourself from your family. they ask too much of your time. your relationship with them isn’t healthy. you give too much of yourself to others, it’s time you start putting yourself first.[36]
mother’s day celebration: may 2015
it wasn’t her spending too much time with them. it was me being there as well. so, in those circumstances i was required to be there, and it was often multiple times a week, and it may have just been invitations that came through but they were communicated to me by [ms sylvan] and i felt immense pressure to be able to do that and go to those things every week and multiple times a week.
the “homework”
i need to know what the actual parameters are to measure your control. what will you do if he puts me down. how often is an acceptable level of contact. what topics are off the table. what about the unrealistic expectations of me cleaning his shed????
the trip to the united kingdom: mid-2015
the trip to city ac: late 2015
i said it because i was upset. it was extremely foolish. it was ridiculous and foolish and that’s why i said i was joking. i completely regret it. it wasn’t about getting into the room – it was about collecting my belongings. i had picked up some of my personal belongings and i thought she was going to destroy them, like photos of my grandfather. it was very stupid.
x’s birth and discharge from hospital: 2016
the maternal grandmother’s visit: mid-2016
the dinner: mid-2016
thanks for the note [ms ab]. i wasn’t going to mention it but i was a bit disappointed considering the chat [ms sylvan], yourself and i had last week. i suppose if you just rehash the content from that conversation, we don’t have to look into this too deeply as it’s just more of the same.
i can see that she has interpreted it that way, i didn’t know it was going to go that way. it wasn’t that big an issue – i didn’t know she would reiterate that information [to the maternal grandmother]. it wasn’t that big a deal for me.
x and the mother’s trip to the united kingdom: early 2017
i just wanted to send you a quick separate note to let you know that [mr sylvan] has hit the roof about [mr ad] being at the wedding. he’s always struggled with trusting me and it’s been a long slow painful battle in getting him to feel confident to let me come over for this trip but i think the thought of me drinking at an event on the other side of the world with [mr ad] there is just a bridge too far and he said if [mr ad]’s going he doesn’t want me there, or i’ll find an empty house and a letter from his lawyer on my return. i do understand why he feels so strongly with [mr ad] having been such a messy part of my past but am so deeply sorry this causes a problem for you which is the last thing in the whole world i’d want. i’m going to send you a reply to your email that will sound quite strong as i think that’s what he needs to see me saying. i’m also going to delete this email and could i ask you not to reply to this as he may be checking my phone. i guess this had to come back and (sic) [mr ad] and i in the butt and (sic) one point! if i could just go back and delete it i bloody would! i’m so sorry my love, love you hugely xxxx
he seems much calmer this afternoon! may hold off replying properly until tomorrow! huge love and sorry for the panic. xxxx
physical assault: early 2017
the move to suburb o: mid-2017
the damage to the motor vehicle: late 2017
mother: hello love, we’ve been invited to [aj street] for dinner thursday night and i’d like to go. i appreciate you may feel differently and there’s no pressure from me to attend if you would prefer not to. i’m sorry i didn’t tell you in person but i didn’t have the courage to. i love you very much and hope you can understand xxxx.
the phone call to the mother’s place of employment: early 2018
mother (7:[30] pm): i’m going to be later love, i’m sorry but such good networking. i’ll make it up to you xxxx father: second time you have sprung last minute nights out....you have been untruthful about when you will be here to help. we need a serious chat. mother: or maybe you just don’t listen? i’ll be home at a reasonable hour xxx father (at 11:30 pm) hu hun, i’m worried with you being intoxicated and not having told me what’s going on that we may argue when you arrive tomorrow morning? please head to [ms g’s], i have let you know you will be coming xx
the car incident: early 2018
mother: [mr sylvan] you can’t take [x] like this. he’s not a game. where are you? [mr sylvan] you’ve taken this too far. please tell me where our son is. father: soz phone on silent. off to get milk. mother: what time are you going to be back? father: 2 mins away mother: how are you tracking? father: he’s just waking up now. mother: [ms g]’s offered to look after [x] so we can talk love xxx father: nah we’re fine x mother: ok well i’ll see you both soon.
the parties’ move to suburb q and the n company te] 2018 father 2:49pm: i can drive to get [ms r] with [x] asleep in the back x mother: ok love if that’s what you feel most comfortable with i completely understand and i know it will mean a lot to her xxxx mother: fyi her bed is all made up and room is tidy, just couldn’t move [x’s] cot out myself this morning xxx father: thanks love. sorry to get stroppy. they have done more for us than we can ever repay and we need to show that through our actions x mother: i know my love and i’m so conscious of it too. last thing in the world i want is for her to not feel our huge gratitude i’m just at absolute capacity. had a big cry after we got off the phone as don’t want to let you or our family down. please know i’m doing my very best to put us first xxxx father: thanks love. don’t be upset we will work it out. i’ve been doing the heavy lifting with [x] and that’s adding to my pressure. remember the [work function] won’t be here in a month. x mother: i know love and [ms r]’s coming to help ease that load. i have to deliver what’s expected of me and from now on that’s 24/7 xxx father: you’re not the only one love. [x’s] got some expectations too [emoji] mother: it’s just 10 days love xx father: i understand that x ... [late] 2018: mother 5:43pm: hello love would you mind letting the daycare ladies know that [ms r] will be dropping off tomorrow morning? mother: what time are you heading to the airport? will do my best to make it back xxxx father: it starts father: i have to leave around 7:30 ... mother: confirming i’ll be home for 7:30 xxxx father: right father: [x’s] a mess mother: bugger, sorry love xxxx father: all good. i got some food into him and he calmed down mother: well down love xxxx
how are u doing? noticed he still had cranky’s on this morning stay at work as long as you need to today and don’t worry about home. work comes 1st for this week. [x] is fine and forget [mr sylvan]’s demand of you needing to be home, that’s him not [x]. xo
“the entertainer”: early 2019
i don’t think anybody cared that there was going to be a [entertainer] i think everybody cared that [x] was going to be there ... what i was told was that [x] was going to be there. i know she’s very capable of looking after [x]. i wasn’t telling her about [x], or about the hen’s night or about the [entertainer]. i said to her did she know that there was beef between my side and her side about it.
the wedding
the hole in the wall incident with x: late 2019
i can’t remember where this one comes from sorry but [x] had got into some sort of trouble i don’t really know what it was ... that was the time he pushed me while i was pregnant ... and he’d also slammed the door so hard into the wall that like a hole went into the wall from the door handle coming into the room.
the mother fainting: early 2020
argument: early 2020
the dog
father: i’m at capacity and i’m trying to not let it get to me but if you think i’m distracted it’s because i’m constantly managing the house and the yard and the dog. i know you’re pregnant love and i’m trying. you just need a routine to help it all happen. yesterday i asked you to pick up meat, you just flatly said no. if i do a [supermarket] shop i also do [another shop] every time without fail that’s why we eat good food cheaply i’m not asking for help on these things because i’m an asshole i’m accepting you saying no and moving on but it’s not easy.
mother: me not pulling my weight at home has been a constant theme since we moved up to [suburb u], not only is it hurtful it’s simply not true. i never sit down at night until everything possible is done (bar a mop which i have just given up on at the moment until the garden is sorted but it’s certainly more than liveable) mother: the difference is i’m not physically there as much which means you are absolutely doing the lions share father: you asked what’s bothering me and i’ve told you. the other thing is you’re not particularly nice to me. i went through this last time you were pregnant so i know what it’s about and it’s mostly out of your control. the other stuff is within your control, i can handle the meanness of the other stuff is working but not both. mother: every time we have a minute together you’re ranting about how much someone i love has pissed you off. i sit and swallow it for a few nights and then it creates conflict between us. it’s nothing to do with being pregnant. it’s an age old issue that i’ve asked you to handle differently time and time again. mother: plus you refuse to do anything about your snoring which creates huge tension between us all night every night. it means we start everyday with conflict and it’s going to seriously escalate in just a few weeks’ time when we’re both sleep deprived. father: ok cool, instead of talking about it you treat me like shit. you start every day with conflict and i’m the stupid schmuck making your breakfast. if i were you, i would find another method, because you never know how much damage you’re really doing or what the affect would be. it’s like you’re happy to treat me like shit but not a single other soul. that’s a rubbish existence for me. father: and when it comes to your family – you are the problem not them. mother: i feel like you’re the only person in my life that says a cruel word to me and i feel like i’m under constant attack. then i have to sit there and listen while you joke about how mean i am to you when i’m pregnant? what about you up in my face shouting swearing and pointing, or the bruise that’s on my right shoulder? mother: [x] mentioned your swearing last night and instead of apologising you made him feel bad about himself by telling him he was using the word wrong. father: you should take on board what i’ve told you   lied to me twice today too...secondly he weed on the balcony and told me it was [the dog], she got an ass kicking too my life is so weird right now, i don’t have a single person around me doing what they say they will do. it’s sickening.[49]
the camping holiday: mid-2020–late 2020
virtual baby shower: 2020
i am fucking fuming sort your shit out leaving me with a crying baby who needs a nap when i’m due on a conference call you’re failing us and our marriage how dare you do this to us i hope it’s worth it.
things don’t go to plan when we don’t talk properly love x you need to be more transparent.
during the exchange the father then says:-
all i ask is that you keep me first tell me first don’t plan without me ... you have to talk with me about anything that concerns us before you act you know that if i do things without confirming with you it’s disruptive isn’t it?[52]
the incident in late 2020
mr k, the mother’s cousin: late 2020  sylvan]. can’t believe what you and [mr sylvan] said to [mr k] and [ms g] ... you have cut us all badly, especially [mr k]. [ms sylvan] would not have done this, but it seems the new [ms sylvan] had no hesitation. it goes against all our family values. it has wrecked christmas, caused anger and arguments but most of all you have divided the family...[mr k] was going through a rough time with a breakup, you let your [mr sylvan] throw him out in the street. nice one...take a good look next time you look in the mirror [ms sylvan]. ask yourself if what you have done was a good thing. in fact every time you look in the mirror remember what family you had ... as for [mr k] and [ms g] buying a house near you, it’s nothing to do with you. you put [x] on some sort of pedestal will ruin him. your biggest worry with him is if he grows up with his father’s traits. i don’t know what the future holds [ms sylvan]. it saddens me that happened.
the maternal grandmother moving in: early 2021
father: maybe she needs a shock to get her to realise she needs to listen to me. mother: what do you mean by shock [mr sylvan]? father: an argument. mother: i’ll speak to her. father: you better because it’s really beginning to piss me off.
x going missing: early 2021
the holiday letting
alleged financial control
conclusion as to family violence
46. coerce is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as
1. to restrain or constrain by force, law or authority, force or compel, as to do something. 2. to compel by forcible action control is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as: 1. to exercise restraint or direction over, dominate, command the phrase “coerces or controls” is expressed disjunctively. however it may be seen that the two concepts are closely related. together they form an expanded concept of the exercise of power, to restrain another or to cause another to act, by force, domination or command. the examples given at s 4ab(2) illustrate the potential modes of force, domination or command as incorporating both physical and non-physical means. for example, control through the unreasonable withholding of financial support constitutes a non-physical means of domination of another. it should be noted that the definition contained at s 4ab does not encompass all occasions where one family member causes another to act other than in accordance with his or her inclinations. the nature of interactions within a family often involves the various members of the family preferring the interests of other members of the family ahead of their own. however, where this is the result of the exercise of power, by force or domination or command, that is, it is the product of coercion or control, it then constitutes family violence and falls within the definition at s 4ab. it should be accepted that the definition of family violence goes well beyond physical assaults to encompass behaviours that, absent context may appear innocuous, but in context may be examples of coercion or control. however, the mere assertion that the conduct has the quality of being coercive or controlling does not make it so. it is necessary that the evidence, particularly where the behaviour is ambiguous and may bear an innocuous explanation, be sufficient to allow a characterisation of coercion or control. by way of example, a pattern of disagreements and criticism can form controlling or coercive behaviour. whether they do or not must be derived from consideration of their form, intensity, context and the impact upon a person. the mere fact of disagreement or criticism does not automatically equate to family violence.
the assessment of whether conduct that falls within one of the provided examples constitutes family violence as defined in s 4ab(1) of the act necessarily requires that conduct to be considered in the context in which it occurred.
intention on the part of the perpetrator is not a necessary component of family violence under s 4ab of the act and for good reason.
risk of abuse or neglect
the additional considerations
any views expressed by the children
he spontaneously reported that he missed his father and wished to spend time with him, and that his mother was kind and he enjoyed being with her.[63]
the nature of the child’s relationship with the parents and other significant persons
... able to demonstrate that he nurtured and protected [x] appropriately, that he was appropriate aligned with him, that he is able to provide [x] access to developmentally appropriate cognitive and social simulation and that he can provide guidance and developmentally appropriate limit setting ...[64]   adores and trusts his father. they share a warm and nurturing relationship, evidenced by the joyful nature of their interactions. [x] delighted in playing with his father and looked to him for guidance and support when required. [x] responded well to his father’s authoritative parenting approach, in which the boundaries and expectations were clearly explained. he was noted to startle when his father used a stern voice with him when he was being overly boisterous with his sister, but his response was not sustained or considered unusual.[65]
... her emotional alignment and inability to help him emotionally and behaviourally regulate, as well as the lack of physical closeness [x] initiated with her, suggested an insecure attachment at observation. she also struggled to provide developmentally appropriate limit setting, or containment to [x]. i note that the previous psychologist assessed this attachment relationship as being a secure one. however, it is my understanding that he did not assess this relationship by asking [ms sylvan] to leave or return to the room, nor was there another attachment figure present. this limits the psychologist’s assessment of the attachment relationship between [ms sylvan] and [x] ...[66]
... she was not emotionally aligned with her and her ignoring of [y]’s distress when [x] was dis-regulated, as well as the quiet and self-contained manner in which [y] isolated herself and self-soothed, suggested an insecure attachment to her mother. [y] also did not seek physical comfort or contact with her mother except when being breastfed, though she did seek out her maternal grandmother several times at the assessment.
... was able to demonstrate that he nurtured and protected [y] appropriately, that he was appropriately emotionally aligned with her that he is able to provide [y] access to developmentally appropriate cognitive and social stimulation and that he can provide guidance and developmentally appropriate limit setting. it is noted that he was successfully able to contain both children through play and attend to each one’s needs are some retaining sleep.[67]
[y] also delighted in playing with her father and looked to him for guidance and support when required, often seeking hugs. [y] responded well to her father’s authoritarian of parenting approach, in which the boundaries and expectations were clearly explained.[68]
the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues or spend time or communicate with the child
the capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s needs and their attitude to the children and parenthood
... because i was advised by the psychologist, the child psychologist, to tell them, “the reason we don’t live with daddy anymore is mummy doesn’t feel safe with daddy ... and “it’s not normal for mummies or daddies to feel unsafe with each other, and we are going to work with some people to help us work out how to make everyone feel safe.”[70]
single expert: ... in [x] in particular having that conflict where there is a sense that he’s supposed to have had these negative experiences and be unsafe with his father, but his experience within the supervision and certainly in my assessment is that that’s not how he’s actually presenting. he’s actually enjoying the time. and what that creates for him is a cognitive dissonance and an uncertainty about, well, you know, “mummy says i’m not safe there or she’s not safe, but i feel safe, so what do i do with that?” and it’s unsettling and uncertain and so it creates a distress. her honour: and could that cognitive dissonance also be grounded or be reinforced by the mother, for example, using the word “safe” to [x] on several occasions? her evidence is his psychologist is someone “safe” to talk to. another example was telling [x] prior to his time with the father commencing on the supervised basis that he was going to a “safe” place where he could have a play date with daddy. would using that terminology ground that cognitive dissonance that you’ve just described? single expert: yes ... i think that that’s the work that needs to be done in terms of reassuring the children that where they are is a safe space. and ... i think i mentioned it in my report, that the work with the therapist that [x] was seeing was very focused around managing the child whose parent was having difficulty navigating a domestic violence experience or trauma, and so that was the focus...i’m not trying to be critical of the therapist but i do feel that that was taken as a given and, in some ways, validated, which it needed to be for the mother’s experience and the mother’s trauma – but, also, it heightened and escalated the response of the children.[71]
effect of changes in the children’s circumstances
... provided his secure attachment’s relationships with his father and grandmother is maintained and that his attachment relationship with his mother is strengthened. [x] does not understand why the family left their home or his father, and it is important that he is provided with appropriate developmental scaffolding to understand the circumstances in the care arrangements that are decided upon. this should be done with the support of an experienced and well trained child psychologist.[73]
so i think it’s well-established in the literature that disruptions to secure attachments are detrimental, particularly when there has been long or sustained periods of uncertainty in a ... household in which there is a heightened anxiety ... the subtext of a lot of the mother’s and the grandmother’s affidavits it that there is anxiety around ... [x] having contact with his father. and i think that that lack of containment in that system coupled with the severing of the secure attachment could be ... very ... detrimental to [x], in that ... could potentially be experienced by him as quite traumatic and then all the consequences of trauma that we’ve already described could cascade from it.[75]
... in the short term there could be significant emotional dysregulation and anger manifesting as externalising disorders which could disrupt his schooling. it could disrupt his relationship with his mum and his grandmother. it could affect his relationship with his sister. longer term would be abrupt discontinuation of secure attachments, his sense of himself or his internalised sense of himself may be negatively impacted and he has an increased risk then of developing a number of psychiatric conditions, including some of the externalising disorders such as oppositional defiance disorder, conduct disorder, increased risk of substance misuse, depression, anxiety, and etcetera.[76]
obligations to financially maintain the children
the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with a parent
disposition
time with orders
i think that there are opportunities for coercion and control to occur, but the opportunities are diminished because there is less interaction just by virtue of the fact that people are no longer living together. so the – each person has more autonomy and agency over their finances, for example, or things like that. so within the parenting relationship, yes, that might occur, but it’s certainly less than if people live together, even if it’s coercive control.[84]
... that is a potential risk, but it’s not one that is evident in my assessment, the latter supervision records, nor does [x] present in a way that suggests that he would have difficulty with his father’s rules. and what was really telling in the assessment was that he was very naturally sought guidance in a – you know, in a very calm way from his father, which didn’t suggest that he was trying to placate him at the assessment ...[85]
but one of the things that was very evident in both parents, if i may be so bold as to say, was they care for their children and their desire to be good parents. i think that came across in both parents really strongly. and i think that that can be a motivator for people to engage in work that helps them to address and contain some of those vulnerabilities and build on strength that each of them have...that if something untoward did happen between himself and the father that he would report this to the mother and/or grandmother and she feels that he would be able to articulate those things in school.[87]
i admit in looking at the evidence at around 2015-2016, i had no perception of how she felt in regard to how she and i were interacting. reading some of her text messages there, i’d never seen them.
yeah, primarily the impact on her. i had no idea. i needed some time to actually realise perhaps some of these family implications on [ms sylvan]. i never really put her in my mind to understand what was really happening. it’s no excuse to me but i was working massive hours at the time – 12 to 13 hours and commuting for 3 hours a day and so i was really just rushing around trying to get things done. whereas i guess now looking at how my life has changed over the last couple of years has given me the opportunity to think.
single expert: it’s not always absolutely necessary to have insight in order to effect change, i guess, is the summary of what i’m saying. it’s – it’s useful if the person can tolerate it. ms mahony: it is important, is it not, that the father is able to demonstrate an understanding of what part of his behaviour represents coercive and controlling violence? single expert: yes. but a way to achieve that might be to look, perhaps, at what acceptable behaviours are. ms mahony: so the treatment model might be that the father is engaged in a therapeutic environment where examples of positive behaviour are given to him rather than a focus on the history of behaviour? single expert: yes.[88]
the other type of therapy that has really good evidence for people with personality vulnerabilities – or personality disorders really is something called a mentalization-based therapy. and what that looks at is a person trying to see things – to be aware of the mental state of other people so that they can respond to it appropriately... and because of the things i was talking about before where cognitive distortions are sometimes protective and then allow people to move on from whatever it is they have done, the longer-tem therapies that focus more on building, you know, empathy deficits, improving a person’s emotional and cognitive understanding of other people’s feelings and a capacity to understand other people’s mental states have more effect in addressing those kind of vulnerabilities.[90]
... in upholding children’s right to protection from sexual, psychological and/or emotional harm, the court must take into account any anxiety on the part of the primary caregiver concerning the child’s exposure to potential harm where such anxiety is likely to impact adversely on that parent’s caregiving ability.  ] importantly, the full court in marra held that not only is it necessary for the court to determine whether a parent has a genuine concern about the welfare of the child in the care of the other parent but it is also necessary to determine whether the concerned parent’s parenting capacity will be “discernibly impaired”. ‘discernibly’, or similar expressions that have been used in the relevant authorities to which we have referred, means no more than being an evident or detectable impairment in parenting capacity such that there is an unacceptable risk that the child’s welfare will be adversely impacted.
... the first enquiry is whether there is objectively an unacceptable risk. if there is the court must take steps proportionate to the degree of risk. if there is not, the court may then need to consider whether the residence parent has a genuinely held belief that such a risk exists and whether that will have a significant impact on that party’s capacity as the resident parent and so impinge on the best interests of the children. the court then needs to take steps proportionate to that circumstance ... (emphasis added)
in terms of parenting, i think that that is what i was seeing when i did the assessment was in the context of feeling disempowered, an almost frozen response to being able to attend and attune and align with the children. normally if i had seen that, i would have been more concerned than perhaps my report indicates. the reason being that i felt that it was something that could be scaffolded because she presented with other strengths. so she was still functional in terms of her work. she was maintaining relationships with her mother and with her extended family, including her sister. and she was still – although she was not emotionally attuned at the time and it appears that, you know, she has potentially reactivated in when the children have contact with – or potentially reactivated when the children have contact with the father, etcetera, her practical skills in terms of parenting the children were very intact. so i felt that, despite my assessment that at the time there was an insecure attachment relationship that that was perhaps or could be attributed to her experiences of domestic violence, but i had no way of saying that definitively because i had two completely separate narratives. and so i hypothesised in my formulation that that was the case and that with the scaffolding that she had, building on her resilience that she would then be able to move towards a more secure attachment and a more aligned parenting style.[93]
and i think i was very clear that i think that the mother needs to engage in individual therapy that is around managing sometimes her own anxieties that do not only focus on, i guess, in some way dealing with how the children respond but, rather, her own – her own experiences and her own feelings – her own current feelings about this contact because what i think is happening or my – my primary hypothesis is that because the mother is dysregulated and anxious in the context of the children having contact, she’s unable to attune and align with the children, which is potentially why we’re seeing some of [x]’s escalations at school or at home. that may not be the case. there are many hypotheses for why that might be occurring, all of which i have considered in my formulation when i say he doesn’t have any psychiatric conditions, but i – that would be my primary view. and the reason that i say that is because when i look through the notes, for example, mum is very – the mother is very proactive in seeking help for [x] after they leave the family home but in – and in the intake assessment to the mental health unit she says very – or the report says that there are no behavioural disturbances noted in [x] at that time, and the way that the narrative goes is that once contact is re-established there are these behavioural disturbances. so that’s my hypothesis and how i’ve made sense of it after i’ve had an opportunity to look at the additional material.[94]
... but i also think from my assessment of her that she has a number of protective or resiliency factors and that with appropriate therapy and interventions she ... has – she appears to have the skillset to be able to cope with that. so despite the experience of trauma, when i saw her she was not reporting clear symptoms of – or manifesting as functional impairment in the form of ... ptsd. she was certainly worried and distressed, but with some scaffolding and therapy ... i feel that she has the capacity to be able to do that.[96]
further orders to be made
so if [x] is going to remain under the care of [mr c], then it is really – and – and he’s going to help him manage the transitions, it’s really important that his father be included because what you want is a – is a new – is a different perspective or both perspectives to be in the room with the therapist at the same time. i mean, whether he can do that or not and – and be able to change tack slightly, i guess, is up to [mr c], but in terms of family therapy, i think it has to be an individual, impartial therapist who’s doing that work.[97]
her honour: ... you’ve had [x] attending upon this person for over two years, but your evidence is that his behaviour hasn’t improved during that period of time. so have you considered at all that the sessions simply aren’t assisting him? mother: i don’t think the sessions are the aggravator. her honour: right. that’s not what i asked?‑‑‑ mother: yes, i - yes, sorry. her honour: no, i will be quite upfront with you. my concern is this. you’ve got [x] attending upon a person to - from what [mr c] says in his report, to manage some of his behaviours. and there hasn’t been an improvement in those behaviours now for over a period of two years. so my question to you is why haven’t you considered that perhaps it isn’t working, and that [x] needs some other form of assistance? mother: i did seek out another psychologist, one closer to home. her honour: well, no, that’s another psychologist, isn’t it? mother: to, i guess, explore a different model. i - i have asked the - i have asked myself that question. i believe the treatment to be effective and helpful for [x].
her honour: ... it has been two years that [x] has been engaged with [mr c], and the mother’s evidence yesterday was that she hasn’t seen any improvement in [x]’s behaviour during that two-year period. so accepting all of that, is there any recommendation or any comment you want to make about these sessions with [mr c] moving into the future? i appreciate they’ve happened now for two years, because i’m grappling with the question of whether these sessions are in [x]’s best interests? single expert: ... so i think it would be fair to say that they’re not necessarily mitigating his level of hyperarousal, but i also think that the focus of the therapy is different to what [mr c] is doing. so i think the focus of the therapy has to be, “how do you navigate change, and how do you manage when, you know, your – your mum and dad are not aligned?”, and how do you access [x]’s internal world and strengthen what he already has, which is, you know, he’s functioning very well at school, he has good peer relationships. by and large, he’s not overreacting to things or presenting with a marked externalising disorder, and so i think that is what is necessary to – to help him to navigate the transition whilst being thoughtful about both his parents. her honour: ... in light of your opinion as to what assistance [x] needs potentially in the future, is it your view that in circumstances where the assistance that [mr c] has been providing to date, if i find was through that lens of family violence, including coercive and controlling behaviour that he was advised of by the mother prior to him commencing sessions with [x], do you think that that assistance that you say that [x] needs is capable of being obtained by [mr c]? single expert: no. i think the – the focus of the therapy is different. and the nature of the therapy, and i think it’s very hard to unknow something. so as a therapist, if your work has been trauma-focused work, trying to build resilience with a child who has had significant experiences of domestic violence, then - i’m sure that [mr c] is very skilled, and i think you can potentially do it, where you say, “okay. well, that’s not going to be the focus of my work anymore. i’m now going to try and see how this person can align with his father while also maintaining the integrity of his mother’s beliefs”, is a very difficult thing to do, especially as the engagement has been primarily over audio visual link. ... that doesn’t mean that he wouldn’t be able to but i think maybe, you know, a narrative in which that therapy could be safely ended and completed, as the way that you would want a contained therapy to end, because, you know, the – “[x] has already done that work, and he’s now at a stage when he feels good and safe and comfortable, and he’s going to see his father, and he’s going to see a new therapist who’s going to help him to manage any troubles that he might have because things are going to be a little bit different”, is an easier – is an easier approach.[98]
her honour: ... for example, and in her affidavit she says it again at the suggestion, i think, of [mr c] that when [x] brings up something negative about his father, that she – well, i will say it out to you. so one of the examples:
when negative comments arise from [x], i respond by repeating back what he has said to me, mindful of giving him the opportunity to continue to talk but not expressing any opinion.
and i will just give you the first example in the affidavit:   started crying and said, “when you use that voice it reminds me of when daddy used to hit me”. this is the first time that [x] has ever told me anything of this nature. i said words to the effect, “i’m sorry, buddy. i didn’t mean to make you feel that way. it is important that we brush our teeth. it reminds you of when daddy used to hit you?”
so is there a different narrative that you would suggest that the mother should use in those circumstances to reassure [x] that he is now in a safe place? single expert: yes. so in the work that i do with parents and children, i would have a different approach. and so i would be suggesting that there is a validation of his experience, if necessary, but also, you know, a reinforcement of the boundary without the end of that sentence.[99]
conclusion
associate: dated: 27 september 2023
dated: 27 september 2023
[1] mother’s affidavit, p.127-128.[2] masson v parsons (2019) 266 clr 664 at [8].[3] transcript 3 may 2023, p.13.[4] affidavit of ms cc paragraph 10. [5] affidavit of ms cc paragraph 35.[6] single expert report, paragraph 1170.[7] ibid, 1760.[8] ibid, paragraph 1770 and 1780. [9] exhibit m11, page 2.[10] mother affidavit, paragraph 166. [11] affidavit of maternal grandmother filed on 26 may 2022, p.48-51. [12] exhibit m7.[13] mother affidavit, paragraph 171. [14] ibid, paragraph 172. [15] ibid, paragraph 173. [16] ibid, paragraph 174.[17] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 182.[18] ibid.[19] ibid.[20] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 182.[21] report of mr c, paragraph 5. [22] exhibit icl1 and icl2. [23] transcript 3 may 2023, p.40.[24] transcript 3 may 2023, p.48. [25] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405, 83,476 at [118]–[119]; [2009] famcafc 92.[26] mazorski v albright (2007) 37 fam lr 518; [2007] famca 520.[27] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[28] wk v sr [1997] famca 57 at [47].[29] amador & amador [2009] famcafc 196; (2009) 43 fam lr 268, 282 at [88]; [2009] famcafc 196.[30] keating & keating [2019] famcafc 46.[31] single expert report, paragraph 850.[32] single expert report, paragraph 390.[33] single expert report, paragraph 580.[34] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 26.[35] ibid.[36] ibid, paragraph 27.[37] exhibit m5, page 73.[38] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 64.[39] exhibit f3, page 4.[40] exhibit m11, page 8.[41] exhibit m11, page 1.[42] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 73.[43] mother’s affidavit p.74.[44] mother’s affidavit p.75.[45] mother’s affidavit p.85.[46] father’s affidavit, p123.[47] mother’s affidavit p.86.[48] father’s affidavit, p.124. [49] exhibit m5, page 97.[50] father’s affidavit, paragraph 100.[51] father’s affidavit, pages 89–90.[52] exhibit m5, pages 99–101.[53] mother’s affidavit, page 95(b).[54] father’s affidavit, pages 125–126.[55] mother’s affidavit, page 95(d).[56] single expert report, paragraph 660.[57] mother’s affidavit, page 102.[58] mother’s affidavit, page 105.[59] mother’s affidavit, page 106.[60] father’s affidavit, page 128.[61] mother’s affidavit, pages 111–113.[62] mother’s affidavit, page 118.[63] single expert report, paragraph 2050.[64] single expert report, paragraph 1840.[65] single expert report, paragraph 1850.[66] single expert report, paragraph 1830.[67] single expert report, paragraph 1870.[68] single expert report, paragraph 1840.[69] single expert report, paragraph 2080.[70] transcript 1 may 2023, p.42.[71] transcript 3 may 2023, p.46.[72] transcript 1 may 2023, p.33. [73] single expert report, paragraph 1900.[74] transcript 1 may 2023, p.12.[75] transcript 3 may 2023, p.37.[76] ibid, p.38.[77] dieter & dieter [2007] famca 608.[78] m & m (1988) flc 91-979; [1988] hca 68.[79] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97.[80] johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344.[81] m & m (1988) flc 91-979; [1988] hca 68 and b & b [1993] famca 143; (1993) flc 92-357. [82] napier & hepburn [2006] famca 1316; (2006) flc 93-303[83] transcript 1 may 2023, p.27. [84] transcript 3 may 2023, p.17.[85] ibid, p.32.[86] ibid, p.17.[87] ibid, p.40.[88] transcript 3 may 2023, p.27.[89] ibid, p.29.[90] transcript 3 may 2023, p.29.[91] t and s [2001] famca 1147; (2001) flc 93-086.[92] transcript of proceedings, 1 may 2023, page 6. [93] transcript 3 may 2023, p10. [94] transcript 3 may 2023, p.41. [95] ibid, p.41.[96] transcript 3 may 2023, p.13.[97] transcript 3 may 2023, p.52.[98] transcript 3 may 2023, p.49.[99] transcript 3 may 2023, p47.