last updated: 25 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mestre & goodman [2023] fedcfamc2f 1217
orders
the court orders that:   list the suburb c property for sale by private treaty with an agent to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement to be selected by the applicant from a list of two agents proposed by the respondent (the agent) with the costs of and incidental to such appointment (if required) to be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and the respondent shall reimburse the applicant of her 50% of same at settlement, (b) the sale price at which the suburb c property shall be listed shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties or, in the absence of agreement as recommended by the agent, (c) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the agent including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): (i) providing the agent with a copy of these orders, (ii) forthwith instructing the agent in writing to copy both parties in on all correspondence concerning the sale, feedback from prospective purchasers and any offers, (iii) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors. (d) the parties shall jointly instruct a conveyancer to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement to be selected by the applicant from a list of two lawyers or conveyancers proposed by the respondent (the conveyancer) with such conveyancer to have the conduct of the sale on behalf of both parties with the costs of and incidental of the conveyancer to be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and the respondent shall reimburse the applicant of her 50% of same at settlement, (e) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the conveyancer: (f) the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   the sale price at which the suburb c property shall be listed shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties or, in the absence of agreement as recommended by the agent, (c) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the agent including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): (i) providing the agent with a copy of these orders, (ii) forthwith instructing the agent in writing to copy both parties in on all correspondence concerning the sale, feedback from prospective purchasers and any offers, (iii) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors. (d) the parties shall jointly instruct a conveyancer to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement to be selected by the applicant from a list of two lawyers or conveyancers proposed by the respondent (the conveyancer) with such conveyancer to have the conduct of the sale on behalf of both parties with the costs of and incidental of the conveyancer to be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and the respondent shall reimburse the applicant of her 50% of same at settlement, (e) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the conveyancer: (f) the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the agent including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): (i) providing the agent with a copy of these orders, (ii) forthwith instructing the agent in writing to copy both parties in on all correspondence concerning the sale, feedback from prospective purchasers and any offers, (iii) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors. (d) the parties shall jointly instruct a conveyancer to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement to be selected by the applicant from a list of two lawyers or conveyancers proposed by the respondent (the conveyancer) with such conveyancer to have the conduct of the sale on behalf of both parties with the costs of and incidental of the conveyancer to be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and the respondent shall reimburse the applicant of her 50% of same at settlement, (e) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the conveyancer: (f) the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   providing the agent with a copy of these orders, (ii) forthwith instructing the agent in writing to copy both parties in on all correspondence concerning the sale, feedback from prospective purchasers and any offers, (iii) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.  ) forthwith instructing the agent in writing to copy both parties in on all correspondence concerning the sale, feedback from prospective purchasers and any offers, (iii) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.  i) making keys available to the agent, (iv) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.  ) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (v) doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.   doing or saying nothing to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, (vi) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.  ) ensuring the suburb c property, including the grounds, is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers, and (vii) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.  i) signing all documents requested by the agents in relation to the listing for sale of the suburb c property, including but not limited to an agency agreement, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the parties’ solicitors.   the parties shall jointly instruct a conveyancer to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement to be selected by the applicant from a list of two lawyers or conveyancers proposed by the respondent (the conveyancer) with such conveyancer to have the conduct of the sale on behalf of both parties with the costs of and incidental of the conveyancer to be paid by the applicant in the first instance, and the respondent shall reimburse the applicant of her 50% of same at settlement, (e) the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the conveyancer: (f) the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   the parties shall each co-operate in every way with the conveyancer: (f) the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   the parties shall each execute a contract for sale in the form prepared by the conveyancer having conduct of the sale, and (g) neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   neither party may confer on any agent without the consent of the other party any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the suburb c property or to any commission.   list the suburb c property for sale by public auction with the agent with the costs of and incidental to such appointment to be borne by the applicant, (b) the reserve price at which the suburb c property shall be listed shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties or, in the absence of agreement as recommended by the agent, and (c) otherwise as set out in orders 6 (c) to 6 (g) inclusive above.   the reserve price at which the suburb c property shall be listed shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties or, in the absence of agreement as recommended by the agent, and (c) otherwise as set out in orders 6 (c) to 6 (g) inclusive above.   otherwise as set out in orders 6 (c) to 6 (g) inclusive above.   in payment of the costs of and incidental to such sale, including legal costs and disbursements, the agent's commission, valuer's fees and auction expenses, (b) in payment of the amount required to discharge the mortgage in favour of d bank being registered dealing number ... (the mortgage) registered over the title of the suburb c property, (c) in payment to the respondent the sum of $332,060.00 together with interest therein in accordance with rule 10.17 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 being the rate that is 6 percent above the cash rate last published by the reserve bank of australia before that period commenced, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the applicant.   in payment of the amount required to discharge the mortgage in favour of d bank being registered dealing number ... (the mortgage) registered over the title of the suburb c property, (c) in payment to the respondent the sum of $332,060.00 together with interest therein in accordance with rule 10.17 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 being the rate that is 6 percent above the cash rate last published by the reserve bank of australia before that period commenced, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the applicant.   in payment to the respondent the sum of $332,060.00 together with interest therein in accordance with rule 10.17 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 being the rate that is 6 percent above the cash rate last published by the reserve bank of australia before that period commenced, and (d) in payment of the balance remaining to the applicant.   in payment of the balance remaining to the applicant.   register the applicant as a director of e pty ltd, (b) the respondent shall execute all documents necessary to assign to the applicant the whole of the applicant’s rights, title and interest in any loan account with e pty ltd, (c) the respondent shall transfer to the applicant her shares in e pty ltd, (d) the respondent shall resign as a director of e pty ltd, (e) the applicant both personally and in his capacity as director of e pty ltd upon compliance with these orders, hereby discharges and releases the respondent and indemnifies her against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of actions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interests) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the company now has or may have at any time or times against the respondent in respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the parties and e pty ltd and each of them respectively up to and including the date of the making of these orders, and (f) the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.   the respondent shall execute all documents necessary to assign to the applicant the whole of the applicant’s rights, title and interest in any loan account with e pty ltd, (c) the respondent shall transfer to the applicant her shares in e pty ltd, (d) the respondent shall resign as a director of e pty ltd, (e) the applicant both personally and in his capacity as director of e pty ltd upon compliance with these orders, hereby discharges and releases the respondent and indemnifies her against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of actions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interests) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the company now has or may have at any time or times against the respondent in respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the parties and e pty ltd and each of them respectively up to and including the date of the making of these orders, and (f) the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.   the respondent shall transfer to the applicant her shares in e pty ltd, (d) the respondent shall resign as a director of e pty ltd, (e) the applicant both personally and in his capacity as director of e pty ltd upon compliance with these orders, hereby discharges and releases the respondent and indemnifies her against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of actions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interests) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the company now has or may have at any time or times against the respondent in respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the parties and e pty ltd and each of them respectively up to and including the date of the making of these orders, and (f) the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.   the respondent shall resign as a director of e pty ltd, (e) the applicant both personally and in his capacity as director of e pty ltd upon compliance with these orders, hereby discharges and releases the respondent and indemnifies her against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of actions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interests) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the company now has or may have at any time or times against the respondent in respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the parties and e pty ltd and each of them respectively up to and including the date of the making of these orders, and (f) the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.   the applicant both personally and in his capacity as director of e pty ltd upon compliance with these orders, hereby discharges and releases the respondent and indemnifies her against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of actions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interests) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the company now has or may have at any time or times against the respondent in respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the parties and e pty ltd and each of them respectively up to and including the date of the making of these orders, and (f) the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.   the respondent hereby discharges and releases e pty ltd and indemnifies it against any and all manner of actions, suits, cause of auctions, arbitrations, debts, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity which the respondent now has or may have at any time or times against the company howsoever arising up to and including the date of the making of these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the conduct of the matter
brief background
jurisdiction
the competing proposals
25.3 ...to effect a division of the overall asset pool as follows:-
25.3.1 to the respondent: 50% of the overall asset pool as at date of final hearing including  any monies, shares, debentures, tax credits, superannuation value, non-transferable goodwill managed investments, business assets, indirect investments and direct investments, stood solely or jointly in either the applicant or respondent’s names, including those standing in either of the applicant or respondent’s names as director, co-director, shareholder or co-shareholder (as confirmed by the australian tax office (ato) register and/or the australian securities and investment commission (asic) register).  the sum of $80,000, to provide for: applicant’s refusal to authorise the respondent and the child to access to the marital home since [early] 2021 for the purposes of removing all personal belongings and moveables of the respondent and the child second hand value of personal belongings for the respondent and the child, retained by the applicant since [early] 2021,  second hand value of jointly owned and all solely owned moveables for the respondent and child retained by the applicant since [early] 2021   debts minus interest incurred by the respondent for the provision of third party domestic violence financial support provided during period of maternity leave from 2021 until 2022, per applicant’s refusal to authorise respondent access to joint financial resources for the respondent and child from [early] 2021 and ongoing ) debts incurred minus interest due to applicant’s refusal to authorise the respondent and the child to reside in marital home in any capacity from [early] 2021 until [late] 2022 including but not limited to attainment of: urgent accommodation suitable to respondent’s specific post-partum requirements and the child’s specific newborn child requirements. long term accommodation within reasonable proximity to respondent’s workplace and child’s enrolled child care facility, for respondent and child mandatory return to sydney on application of the applicant. 25.3.2 the balance then remaining, to the applicant.
and thereafter the applicant discharges and indemnifies the respondent with respect to any debts or liabilities of the e pty ltd.
the evidence
the statutory regime   make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties, or either of them, at the time of the hearing and determine the legal and equitable interests of the parties in such property, (b) consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79sm(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s90f(3) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.   consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79sm(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s90f(3) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.   after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to the either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79sm(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations pursuant to s90f(3) of the act, and (d) ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.   ensure that the orders to be made are just and equitable in all the circumstances.
duty of disclosure
the balance sheet
ownership
description
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
j
b street, suburb c
1,700,000
1,900,000
a
motor vehicle 1
48,000
54,075
r
motor vehicle 2
15,000
13,528
p company shares (...@ $98.38 in 5.2023)
3,148
cba account #...67
nk
11
q bank account #...58
64
cba account #...39
1
q bank account #...52
765
e pty ltd
nominal
mestre pty ltd
household furniture
80,000
firearms
3,500
8,000
d bank offset account #...07
nil
motor vehicle 3
4,000
10,000
motor vehicle 4
1,500
l company
n/a
not known
r company shares
e15,000
s company shares
motor vehicle 5
1,900
motor vehicle 6
1,600
total
1,775,977
2,089,592
addbacks
transfer of credit card funds by r 2/2021
8,431
nil
transfer of e pty ltd funds by r 5/2022
600
transfer of e pty ltd funds by r 7/2022
7,800
transfer of funds from d bank home loan by r on 2/2023
3,640
r’s half share of mediation costs with mr u
2,200
22,671
superannuation
respondent’s
mestre family superannuation
280,000
super fund 1
57,488
super fund 2
285,658
294,487
623,146
351,975
financial resources
member
name of fund
type of interest
pro bono legal funding
230,000
0
liabilities
home loan (d bank) ...13 (as at 31.5.2023)
562,915
562,230
home loan offset (d bank) ...21 (as at 31.5.2023)
559,930
558,744
d bank credit card
ato tax liability (as at 30.3.2023)
1,150
t company (motor vehicle 1 vehicle finance as at 30.3.2023)
30,090
q bank credit card ...70 (as at 3.5.2023)
7,698
debt to v pty ltd
7,983
cba credit card #...86*
low fee cba mastercard #...32*
cba credit card #...03*
low fee gold cba mastercard cc #...68*
cba credit card #...45
7,135
cba credit card #...03
capital gains tax liability following disposal of h street, suburb j
85,775
centrelink debt
nk/disputed
5,408
payday loan
3,000
loan – ms w
nk/disputed
71,000
1,255,541
1,225,948
net total assets (including superannuation)
1,396,253
1,217,819
balance sheet findings
items sought to be excluded from the balance sheet:
due to short relationship, and extensive post separation period, proposed that these property items are excluded from calculation of the property pool.
items 1 - 20: assets
item 1: b street, suburb c
item 2: motor vehicle 1
on this basis i do not find [mr mestre]’s costs relating to any utilities, his motor vehicle or insurances to be any different to that of other parents and the allowance provided in the self-support amount is fair as applied to all other cases.
item 3: motor vehicle 2
item 5: commonwealth bank account #...67 and item 7: commonwealth bank account # ...39 in the respondent’s name
item 11: household furniture
item 12: firearms
item 14: motor vehicle 3
item 16: l company
item 17: r company shares
item 18: s company shares
item 19: motor vehicle 5
item 20: motor vehicle 6
contested add backs – items 21- 24
item 21: transfer of credit card funds by respondent on 15 february 2021
item 22: transfer of e pty ltd funds by respondent in may 2022
item 23: transfer of e pty ltd funds by respondent in july 2022
item 24: transfer of funds from d bank home loan by respondent in february 2023
...when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion — usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property.
item 25: respondent’s half share of mediation costs with mr u
items 26 to 28: superannuation
item 26: mestre family superannuation
item 28: super fund 2
financial resources
item 29: pro bono legal funding
items 30 to 47: liabilities
item 30: home loan (d bank)
item 31: home loan offset (d bank)
item 34: t company (motor vehicle 1 finance as at 30 march 2023)
items 37 to 40 – cba cards ending #...86, #...32, #...03 and #...68
items 41 and 42: cba ultimate rewards credit cards #...45 and #...03
items 45 and 46: payday loans
items 47: monies owed to ms w (respondent’s mother)
item 43: capital gains tax liability
item 44: centrelink debt
centrelink family tax benefit 2012-2022 and newborn allowance overpayment in 2012 – repayments required - $4,732.26
conclusion as to the property pool
value found
$1,700,000
$48,000
$13,528
p company shares (...) @ $98.38 in 5.2023)
$3,148
$11
$64
$1
$765
$3,500
$4,000
$1,500
$1,774,517
self-managed super fund
$280,000
accumulation fund
$57,488
$285,658
$623,146
$562,230
$558,744
$1,150
t company (motor vehicle 1 finance as at 30.3.2023)
$30,091
$7,698
$7,983
$7,135
$85,775
$4,732
$3,000
$1,600
$1,270,138
$1,127,525
whether an order altering property interests should be made
the assessment of contributions
relevant s 90sm(4)(d) – (g) matters
i applied the sum of $128,126 of the remaining sum towards repayment of a loan to my mother, [ms ee].... i currently owe my mother a further $10,391.12 under the terms of that agreement. [8]
6. [mr mestre] has recently repaid me $60,000 7. [mr mestre] still owes me $10,000 as of today’s date.
counsel: but you gave all the money – the entirety of the sale proceeds, to your mum? father: yes. .... counsel: as at the date you received the sale proceeds, you owed your mum $219,242.05? father: i don’t know the number. .... counsel: and you have not provided in these proceedings any bank statements to show money that has left your mothers account and come to you? father: that’s not correct. counsel: where do we find them in the evidence father: it’s been provided as disclosure throughout the proceedings. counsel: i call for those bank statements. your mother has filed evidence in these proceedings? father: yes. counsel: and nowhere in her affidavit does she make reference, at all, to monies she has loaned you, does she? father: i don’t know. counsel: i simply suggest to you that’s because there was no loan with your mother. father: that’s not true. counsel: your decision to sell the [suburb j] property was a decision you made in order to try and have that asset removed from the property pool in this matter. father: no. counsel: and it’s just another attempt by you to try and prevent adequate provision being made by way of property orders for [ms goodman] and your daughter. father: no. .... counsel: the first financial statement you filed in these proceedings was on 2 march 2021? ... counsel: i’ll show you a copy of that financial statement. identify in that financial statement where there is any record of a liability to your mother? father: it’s not in that one. counsel: so, we can assume then that in 2 march 2021 there was no money owing to your mother? father: yes. counsel: and while you’ve got that in front of you, go to the third page and have a look at what your total salary before tax was, item 9? father: yes. counsel: and what does it say your weekly income was at that point in time, from your total salary before tax. father: $5,736 counsel: i’ll show you your financial statement on 3 june 2021 – it refers to it being an updated financial statement. where do we find on that financial statement reference to loan from your mother? father: on the last page in part f. counsel: under the heading “expenses paid by others for your benefit?” father: yes. and on the last page are the expenses being paid on my behalf. counsel: can i ask you to confirm your salary at item 9? father: $5,736 counsel: you agree with me that part f of the financial statement deals with expenses being paid on your behalf by other persons – correct? father: yes. counsel: in that financial statement you say your mums meeting your bills and credit cards in the amount of $2,359 per week? father: i don’t know whether it’s a week or a month, i don’t know. counsel: there’s no commensurate liability that appears in the liability section is there? father: no. .... counsel: did she require you to sell the [suburb j] property in the lead up to the trial? fasther: i had to pay her back for some of my legal fees she had been paying for ongoing. counsel: you sold the [suburb j] property for legal fees? father: well, that’s part of it. counsel: you’ll have to give more of an explanation, because we don’t know what your mum has been paying for. there is no evidence about any of the loans in your mother’s evidence, your evidence or your accountant’s evidence. you say your mother required you to sell the [suburb j] property, did she? father: my mother required me to pay back the money she had been lending me. counsel: and how much did she say to you that you had to pay her back? father: she didn’t specify an amount. counsel: did she send this to you in an email, text message or was it in a conversation? father: she would’ve spoken to me about it, [ms n] the accountant would’ve spoken to me about it. counsel: they would’ve, or they did? father: they did. counsel: did you say to your mum, well look, we’ve got a final hearing in may when property issues are going to be resolved, just wait until that is sorted out and i can pay you back then. did you ask your mother to delay calling in that loan until your property proceedings were imminently dealt with by this court? father: yes counsel: and this is the same person that is going to lend you money to effect a property settlement with [ms goodman] in order to keep the [suburb c] property. father: yes. counsel: because in effect, what your mother is going to be doing is giving you back the money you parked with her from the [suburb j] property isn’t she? father: not all of it. counsel: how much is she going to pay back of the money you parked with her from the [suburb j] property? father: i can’t answer that. counsel: you have been served with a cost notice from your solicitor in the lead up to the trial, correct? a document that is provided to the court that shows what your paid and anticipated legal fees are? father: yes counsel: that document identifies the source of the funds, doesn’t it? that is, the source of funds you have used to pay your legal fees to date. father: yes. counsel: and the source of the funds to date on your costs notice for this trial records that “our clients legal fees and disbursements to date are being paid from his personal income, that is income you’ve received – and from the “contributions of family members.” you agree with me that nowhere there does it relate to loans you have got to family members in relation to your legal fees does it? father: yes counsel: the first time we are hearing about a supposed loan in relation to legal fees is on the second day of your oral evidence in this trial? father: no. counsel: there is no loan you owe to your mother father: that’s incorrect. counsel: the time and the manner of which you sold the [suburb j] property was all geared toward trying to have that removed as an asset off the balance sheet. father: that’s incorrect. counsel: and when this trial is over, the money you have given to your mother will be returned to you as an asset owned by you. father: no that’s incorrect. counsel: and i suggest to you that if there was some form of agreement between you and your mother there would be evidence to that effect in your trial material. father: that’s incorrect.
just and equitable and orders to be made
value
the suburb c property
funds held in q bank account #...58
funds held in q bank account #...52
mestre co pty ltd
total assets:
$1,757,829
mestre family self-managed super fund
total superannuation:
$337,488
t company (motor vehicle 1 as at 30.3.2023)
cash payment to wife
$334,260
total liabilities:
$1,587,931
total net asset pool:
$507,386
p company shares (... @ $98.38 in 5.2023)
cash payment from husband
$350,948
$16,467
total net:
$620,139
associate: dated: 27 september 2023
dated: 27 september 2023
[1] rule 8.03. [2] exhibit c1. [3] exhibit r2.[4] exhibit c2.[5] notice to admit, page 183. [6] respondent’s balance sheet filed 31 may 2023, item no 46 page 3. [7] the applicant’s outline of case, page 7. [8] affidavit of the applicant filed 30 march 2023, paragraph 276.[9] notice to admit filed by the applicant on 27 june 2023, paragraphs 76 - 79