last updated: 10 november 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wahba & noori [2023] fedcfamc2f 1285
orders
the court orders by consent that:
parenting  once a fortnight for up to two (2) hours during the day as supervised by the family contact centre b contact centre at such times nominated by the family contact centre, at the father’s expense, if any, (b) each party do forthwith all things necessary to enrol in b contact centre contact centre in suburb c and upon such enrolment, and upon the father returning to australia then time take place at such times as can be accommodated by b contact centre for the maximum period available, (c) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months, (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months, (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday, and (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   each party do forthwith all things necessary to enrol in b contact centre contact centre in suburb c and upon such enrolment, and upon the father returning to australia then time take place at such times as can be accommodated by b contact centre for the maximum period available, (c) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months, (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months, (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday, and (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months, (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months, (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday, and (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months, (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday, and (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter 4 hours each sunday, and (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   as otherwise agreed between the parties.
and the court orders that:
and the court orders by consent that:  for 3 hours on the child’s birthday as agreed in writing by text message or email, and in default of agreement, from 11:00am until 2:00pm.   for 4 hours on father’s day as agreed in writing by text message or email, and in default of agreement, from 10:00am until 2:00pm,   for 4 hours on eid al-fitr, and in default of agreement, on the day nominated by the father in writing by text message or email (‘the nominated day’), on or before seven days prior to the day, and in default of agreement, from 10:00 am until 2:00 pm on the nominated day.   for 3 hours as agreed on the father’s birthday as agreed in writing by text message or email, and in default of agreement, from 11:00am until 2:00pm.
property
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
the proceedings and final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
witnesses
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
credit of the parties and reliability of the evidence ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]  ] in carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson”) at [165] to [169] kent j made the following observations concerning the making of adverse credit findings against a parent in a parenting case:  5] as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw. ... [169] moreover, the resolution of parenting proceedings in this court usually requires consideration of not only the credibility of the parties as witnesses or litigants but appreciation of the characters and personalities of them as people whose future relationship, or the context of that relationship with their child, the court has the responsibility to decide.  ] we agree with those observations. it follows from them that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to.
some significant events and controversies
i [the father] promise to do these following commitments:- 1/ i will not threat [the mother] in any scenario till my death. 2/ i have no share in any of [the mother’s] assets. 3/ i will pay monthly $1000 to [the mother] to look after my son [the child] till my p.r. (permanent ressidence) 4/ i will not contact anyone of my wifes family members, in any circumstances 5/ i will not see him and not bother him
i have no share in my wife [the mother’s] assets including car, house and bank accounts under her name. i do not owe any money to [the mother] now.
parenting
family law act provisions
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
the issues in dispute
1. that all previous parenting orders be discharged. 2. that the child ... live with the mother. 3. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the said child. 4. that the father spend time and communicate with the child as follows:- (a) once a fortnight for up to two (2) hours during the day as supervised by the family contact centre ... at such times nominated by the family contact centre, at the father’s expense, if any (b) that each party do forthwith all things necessary to enrol in [the family contact centre] and upon such enrolment, and upon the father returning to australia then time take place at such times as can be accommodated by [the family contact centre] for the maximum period available, (c) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months , (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties. that in january 2024 the parties attend fdrs or other mediation to discuss other and further time the father spends with the child. that for the purposes of all time, changeover take place at [the family contact centre] or other agreed public location. that upon the cessation of supervised time, the father spend time and communicate with the child for special occasions as follows:   once a fortnight for up to two (2) hours during the day as supervised by the family contact centre ... at such times nominated by the family contact centre, at the father’s expense, if any (b) that each party do forthwith all things necessary to enrol in [the family contact centre] and upon such enrolment, and upon the father returning to australia then time take place at such times as can be accommodated by [the family contact centre] for the maximum period available, (c) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months , (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   that each party do forthwith all things necessary to enrol in [the family contact centre] and upon such enrolment, and upon the father returning to australia then time take place at such times as can be accommodated by [the family contact centre] for the maximum period available, (c) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months , (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter unsupervised for a period of 2 hours each sunday for 3 months , (d) thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter unsupervised for a period of 3 hours each sunday for 3 months (e) thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   thereafter 4 hours each sunday (f) as otherwise agreed between the parties.   as otherwise agreed between the parties.   for 3 hours as agreed on the sunday closest to the child’s birthday (b) for 4 hours form 10-2 on father’s day (c) from 10-2 on the third day of eid. (d) for 3 hours as agreed on the father’s birthday in the event the father goes overseas for longer than 2 months, then the first 4 time spend visits after his return be supervised by an agreed supervisor, at the father’s expense, if any. that the mother keep the father updated as to any serious injury affecting the child and advise him of the name of any medical practitioner or allied health practitioner the child attends upon from time to time and the father be authorised to contact and the father be authorised to contact and obtain information from such persons. that in relation to any other medical treatment the mother will provide the father with any written reports, letters and any other documents which are provided to the parent by the medical and/or health practitioner and the father be authorised to contact and obtain information from such persons. any medication prescribed to the child is to be passed to the other parent at changeover. the father be at liberty to attend pta meetings at a separate time from the mother. the father be authorised to receive any school notices, photographs and like material, at his expense, if any. each parent shall ensure that they communicate via a parenting app which they use for matters relating to the child and futter that each advise the other and keep them informed of their residential addresses and forthwith advise the other of any change within 24 hours. each party their servants and agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction from denigrating, criticising or speaking disparagingly of the other within the hearing of the child or allowing any other person to do so. usual 65 da(2) and 62b particulars to apply. remove all children’s matters from the list of cases awaiting hearing.  phasis added to highlight those parts of the minute that were disputed]
family report
application of the applicable law
primary considerations
benefit of the children having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship of with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent each parent has taken or failed to participate in decisions or spend time
extent to which each fulfilled obligations to maintain the child
likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the needs of the child
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions)
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood
any family violence and any family violence order that applies
order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
parental responsibility
conclusion as to parenting arrangements
property alterations
the applicable law
section 79 alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the marriage, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
...   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
section 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance   in exercising jurisdiction under section 74, the court shall take into account only the matters referred to in subsection (2).   the matters to be so taken into account are:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and
... (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and ...  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in this section: "party" means a party to the marriage concerned.
section 80 general powers of court   the court, in exercising its powers under this part, may do any or all of the following: (a) order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (ba) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (e) appoint or remove trustees, (f) order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  ) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   the making of an order of a kind referred to in paragraph (1)(ba), or of any other order under this part, in relation to the maintenance of a party to a marriage does not prevent a court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the party.
stanford ] ...the fundamental propositions that have been identified require a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interest during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4),
the parties’ property cases
the father’s property case
... [the mother] and i opened a joint bank account in early 2016. before that time, we each operated our own bank accounts, although [the mother] always had access to my bank account. i on the other hand never had access to [the mother’s] bank account. [the mother] used to take my bank card when she would purchase groceries and buy other things for the family. when we opened the joint bank account we did so following our legally registered marriage and in anticipation of the birth of [the child]. [the mother] and i spoke about establishing a strong financial position before the birth of our son. [the mother] suggested that both our salaries should be deposited into the joint bank account. i agreed and changed my bank details with [the transport company] so that my income was paid to the joint account. whilst both our salaries were deposited into the joint account, [the mother’s] salary was transferred by her to her own separate account. my salary was used to pay all familial expenses, including rent and all other expenses. i did not make any issue about [the mother] transferring her income from the joint account to her own bank account. she always said that in her view and islamically speaking, it was my responsibility to look after the family and that her income belonged to her solely. i did not argue and accepted her views. i have never disregarded my responsibility to provide for the family, however i believe that [the mother] was financially controlling and abusive. at no time during our relationship did i shy away from paying familial expenses, however, [the mother] always tried to add pressure by bringing up my religious and cultural responsibility towards meeting all the familial expenses. ... in or about [early] 2017 i decided that it would be best for me to leave our house rather than continue to fight and live with [the mother’s] behaviour. i noted that our lease was ending in about [mid]-2017 and i asked [the mother] whether she wanted to continue it or move out after that time. [the mother] said that she would make arrangements in [mid]-2017. at that time i had no idea that [the mother] was planning to purchase a property, or already had bought a property. ... when the lease expired in [mid]-2017, i moved out. it was about [early] 2017 that i discovered that [the mother] had in fact bought a property. she at that stage suggested that we would move together to this property. at first i was shocked to hear that [the mother] had purchased a property without any discussion with me. i was also surprised as to how she could have come up with the deposit. however, i was happy to know that we would finally be homeowners and that [the child] would have a proper home. i was still hoping at that time that [the mother] and i could fix our relationship and that the separation under the same roof would allow us to re-assess what we each wanted, hoping that we could re-unite and focus on [the child]. ... [the mother] deposes to the circumstances in which she allegedly purchased the property. in about [early] 2017 just before final separation, [the mother] withdrew all of the savings from our joint bank account. these savings totalled $19,000. ... [the mother] also took $6000 in cash around [early] 2017. i had saved this money at home in my bedroom draw next to my bed. i had saved this sum over a period of about 6 months.
ms wiener: thank you, your honour. firstly, can i say this: this was a combination of two people who were working hard in a joint enterprise to try and build up a nest for their family. and that is, despite what my friend might say to the contrary, both parties were working hard. we readily concede, your honour, that the respondent was working hard during the marriage as was my client, despite what my friend might say about him, you know, allegedly sneaking around and sleeping all day. that’s, in my submission, not the evidence. he worked as a [transport worker]. he worked in the [business]. he had a [motor vehicle]. he did everything he could to try and support the family. it’s unfortunate that the [business] didn’t pan out, but he picked himself up, got the [transport] licence and, again, most unfortunate that he had the accident, the car is written off and then of course he goes overseas. ... ms wiener: ... there’s no substance to the argument that they weren’t conducting themselves, as it were, as a joint enterprise for the betterment of the two of them, not jointly [and] severally, but for the betterment of the two of them as a unit, whilst they were together. albeit that they had separate accounts. that’s not unusual and some people may say it’s prudent, your honour, for various reasons. and in my submission, the only inference – the only appropriate inference your honour can draw is that the wife in these proceedings was either able to save the deposit for the house because my client was paying many other expenses... [in] any event, your honour, in my submission, it’s fanciful for the wife to say i’ve paid all the expenses but i’m still able to save up all this money. it just doesn’t pan out, your honour, in my submission. and yes, your honour – yes, it’s a small pool. yes, [since] separation she has been making the contributions by way of mortgage and so forth. ... ms wiener: ... the wife maintains that she can’t borrow. that, you know, to use the emotive phrase, i will lose the house and be on the street. but the reality is she was able to refinance. she was able to get a loan and paid off her car and repaying [mr p] from whom she had borrowed money. so it cannot be out of the question for her to again refinance and pay out my client. ... ms wiener: ... in my submission your honour should make an order. in my submission it’s appropriate. it would be just and equitable to make an order. yes, it’s a small pool but a small pool in and of itself doesn’t mean that there shouldn’t be an order. my client made contributions and those contributions should be recognised, in my submission. his honour: yes. thank you. ms wiener: and there’s simply no evidence that she can’t borrow, because she hasn’t made those inquiries. ... his honour: and in terms of post-separation contribution, is it open to me to find – if i were to find it’s just and equitable to make an order, that [the mother’s] contribution as homemaker and parent in difficult circumstances with [the child], as well as night duty, that post separation, her contribution is greater than [the father’s]? ms wiener: it is, your honour. ... ms wiener: ... i am instructed as to one other thing i should mention. my client has, of course, remarried and has, of course, the responsibility of a wife and a child and the child is an australian citizen. so that is responsibilities that he has which, of course, your honour is obliged to consider under the act.
the mother’s property case
property available to the parties at separation
section 79(2) – whether it is just and equitable to make property orders
assets
mother’s pool $
father’s pool $
the property (in m’s sole name) mortgage debt approximate equity
mortgage debt approximate equity
approximate equity
495,000 (298,000) 197,000  8,000) 197,000
197,000
$495,000 ($298,000) 197,000  98,000) 197,000
mother’s motor vehicle 1
20,000
father’s motor vehicle 2
2,000
$5,000
total
other liabilities
mother’s loan from mr p  8,000)
nil
mother’s hecs debt  8,077)
not included
mother’s unpaid legal fees  ,032)
addbacks
refinance of mortgage in 2018
$50,000
cash transfers to country f by m ($55,926 + $7375)  5,926 + $7375)
$63,301
superannuation
mother’s super fund 1
$61,092
father’s superannuation
$3,886
conclusion
associate: dated: 6 october 2023
dated: 6 october 2023
[1] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [142] to [143].[2] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [64].[3] tp – 99. [4] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [144].[5] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [146] to [147].[6] tp – 90 to 91. [7] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [60].[8] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [148].[9] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [149] to [150].[10] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [152] to [153].[11] exhibit f1 29 october 2021.[12] tp – 72. [13] tp – 79 to 80, 83 to 84. [14] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [139] to [140].[15] tp – 34.[16] tp – 34.[17] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [62].[18] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [157].[19] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [65] to [68].[20] the mother’s affidavit filed 24 february 2020, [3(xix)][21] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [79] to [85].[22] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [64].[23] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [162] to [168].[24] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [169] to [171].[25] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [20].[26] annexure a of the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020.[27] the mother’s affidavit filed 14 february 2020, [19]. [28] see pages 7 and 8 of 45.[29] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [155] – [160].[30] the father’s affidavit filed 21 october 2021, [94-95] and [172].[31] tp – 122. [32] tp – 124. [33] tp-119.[34] tp - 106[35] tp – 108. [36] tp – 108. [37] the mother’s affidavit of 14 february 2020, [72].[38] tp – 108. [39] tp – 40 to 41.[40] tp – 75 to 76. [41] tp – 76. [42] the mother’s affidavit of 14 february 2020, [73].[43] tp – 92 to 94. [44] the mother’s affidavit of 14 february 2020, [62] – [63].[45] affidavit filed 14 feb 2020 at [63][46] not a total of “$50,000 plus stamp duty and transfer costs” as the mother’s counsel submitted in final address[47] tp – 123. [48] from [42] of stanford[49] the italicised quotes in this part are all from stanford at [41] – [42] recited above.[50] $498,000 less $298,000 less debt of $18,000 to mr p plus the mother’s car = $182,000 plus the father’s car or modest value and modest superannuation.