last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sparks & powers [2023] fedcfamc2f 1383
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment(delivered ex tempore, revised from transcript)
judge blake:
background  stated that he is employed as a professional, and that he has no idea why the mother has stopped his time with the children, (b) says that the mother has maintained a baseless, and fake narrative that the relationship was one of violence, and abuse, and that it is simply not true, (c) stated that the mother made false statements that underpinned apprehended domestic violence orders (‘advo’) that were made against him, (d) attaches an affidavit he swore in relation to an earlier set of proceedings on 7 june 2016, (e) says that while there have been two police applications for advo’s, there has never been a charge against him by police arising from a violence offence, and (f) that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   says that the mother has maintained a baseless, and fake narrative that the relationship was one of violence, and abuse, and that it is simply not true, (c) stated that the mother made false statements that underpinned apprehended domestic violence orders (‘advo’) that were made against him, (d) attaches an affidavit he swore in relation to an earlier set of proceedings on 7 june 2016, (e) says that while there have been two police applications for advo’s, there has never been a charge against him by police arising from a violence offence, and (f) that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   stated that the mother made false statements that underpinned apprehended domestic violence orders (‘advo’) that were made against him, (d) attaches an affidavit he swore in relation to an earlier set of proceedings on 7 june 2016, (e) says that while there have been two police applications for advo’s, there has never been a charge against him by police arising from a violence offence, and (f) that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   attaches an affidavit he swore in relation to an earlier set of proceedings on 7 june 2016, (e) says that while there have been two police applications for advo’s, there has never been a charge against him by police arising from a violence offence, and (f) that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   says that while there have been two police applications for advo’s, there has never been a charge against him by police arising from a violence offence, and (f) that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   that the children were removed from an advo in 2022.   he was issued with a provisional avo on around late 2015 after he refused to leave the family home, (b) in early 2016, he rang the mother asking for time with the children. he was subsequently issued with a court attendance notice for breach of the avo, (c) on around early 2016, he attended court where he pleaded guilty to an offence, and was issued with a bond, (d) in early 2016, he called the mother. he was subsequently charged in early 2016 with a breach of the avo for this call, (e) in early 2016, he went to the family home. he was subsequently charged for a breach of the avo for going to the family home, (f) in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   in early 2016, he rang the mother asking for time with the children. he was subsequently issued with a court attendance notice for breach of the avo, (c) on around early 2016, he attended court where he pleaded guilty to an offence, and was issued with a bond, (d) in early 2016, he called the mother. he was subsequently charged in early 2016 with a breach of the avo for this call, (e) in early 2016, he went to the family home. he was subsequently charged for a breach of the avo for going to the family home, (f) in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   on around early 2016, he attended court where he pleaded guilty to an offence, and was issued with a bond, (d) in early 2016, he called the mother. he was subsequently charged in early 2016 with a breach of the avo for this call, (e) in early 2016, he went to the family home. he was subsequently charged for a breach of the avo for going to the family home, (f) in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   in early 2016, he called the mother. he was subsequently charged in early 2016 with a breach of the avo for this call, (e) in early 2016, he went to the family home. he was subsequently charged for a breach of the avo for going to the family home, (f) in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   in early 2016, he went to the family home. he was subsequently charged for a breach of the avo for going to the family home, (f) in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   in early 2016, he sent a text to the mother asking to speak with the children. he was subsequently charged with breaching the avo for this text. he was arrested, taken to the police station, and served with a court attendance notice, and (g) in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.   in mid-2016, he pleaded guilty to all three breaches of the avo as charged, and was given a section 10 bond. the avo was also made final at that time.
legal principles
102na mandatory protections for parties in certain cases (1) if, in proceedings under this act: (a) a party (the examining party) intends to cross‑examine another party (the witness party), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   a party (the examining party) intends to cross‑examine another party (the witness party), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination, then the requirements of subsection (2) apply to the cross‑examination.   either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  ) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  i) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  ) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,   both of the following requirements apply to the cross‑examination: (a) the examining party must not cross‑examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party. note 1: this section applies both in the case where the examining party is the alleged perpetrator of the family violence and the witness party is the alleged victim, and in the case where the examining party is the alleged victim and the witness party is the alleged perpetrator. note 2: this section does not limit other laws that apply to protect the witness party (for example, section 101 requires the court to forbid the asking of offensive questions and section 41 of the evidence act 1995 requires the court to disallow certain questions, such as misleading questions). note 3: to avoid doubt, a reference to a party in this section includes a reference to a person who is a party because of the operation of a provision of this act (for example, sections 92 and 92a, which are about intervening parties). this section only applies to an intervening party if the intervening party is involved in the allegation of family violence, whether as the alleged perpetrator or as the alleged victim. (3) the court may make an order under subparagraph (1)(c)(iv):   the examining party must not cross‑examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of: (i) the witness party, or (ii) the examining party, or   the witness party, or (ii) the examining party, or  ) the examining party, or  i) if an independent children’s lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings—that lawyer.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.  ] the family law act 1975 (cth) contains no statutory guidance about matters to be considered by a court in determining whether or not to make an order that the requirements of s 102na(2) apply to the cross-examination referred to in s 102na(1) of the act. however, the purpose of the legislation by which ss 102na and 102nb of the act were introduced into the act is made clear by the explanatory memorandum which accompanied that bill. the contents of the same included that:
personal cross-examination by an alleged perpetrator can expose victims of family violence to re-traumatisation and can affect their ability to give clear evidence. it can also be problematic for victims to personally cross-examine their alleged perpetrator, due to the power imbalances created by family violence.  ] that is, the purpose of the sections might be regarded as protecting the integrity of the litigation process by protecting against the potential that being cross-examined by a perpetrator of family violence can affect a victim’s ability to give clear evidence, and also protecting against the possibility that, by virtue of the impacts of family violence, a victim may not be able adequately to cross-examine the perpetrator.
consideration
the contention of the father is also at odds with statements by superior courts that have examined the provision. see gill j in owen & owen [2020] famca 90, (2020) 60 fam lr 334 at paragraph [9].   the act has used the term, ‘violence’, in subsection (1)(c)(i), it has not used the term, ‘family violence’, (b) family violence is defined in section 4ab of the act. the term, ‘violence’, is not defined in the act, (c) absent any other evidence or submission before me, the acts use of the term, ‘violence’ in subsection (1)(c)(i) (and not ‘family violence’), would appear to be deliberate, (d) it is a curiosity that the act would use the term, ‘violence’, in subsection (1)(c)(i) in circumstances where: (i) it has used the term, ‘family violence’, earlier in the same subsection: see subsection (1)(b), and (ii) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.   family violence is defined in section 4ab of the act. the term, ‘violence’, is not defined in the act, (c) absent any other evidence or submission before me, the acts use of the term, ‘violence’ in subsection (1)(c)(i) (and not ‘family violence’), would appear to be deliberate, (d) it is a curiosity that the act would use the term, ‘violence’, in subsection (1)(c)(i) in circumstances where: (i) it has used the term, ‘family violence’, earlier in the same subsection: see subsection (1)(b), and (ii) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.   absent any other evidence or submission before me, the acts use of the term, ‘violence’ in subsection (1)(c)(i) (and not ‘family violence’), would appear to be deliberate, (d) it is a curiosity that the act would use the term, ‘violence’, in subsection (1)(c)(i) in circumstances where: (i) it has used the term, ‘family violence’, earlier in the same subsection: see subsection (1)(b), and (ii) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.   it is a curiosity that the act would use the term, ‘violence’, in subsection (1)(c)(i) in circumstances where: (i) it has used the term, ‘family violence’, earlier in the same subsection: see subsection (1)(b), and (ii) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.   it has used the term, ‘family violence’, earlier in the same subsection: see subsection (1)(b), and (ii) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.  ) where the purpose of section 102na is, among other things, to limit re-traumatisation of victims of family violence, and ensure victims of family violence give clear evidence.   in absence of an express statutory definition, the word, ‘violence’ must bear its ordinary meaning, (b) the ordinary meaning of the word, ‘violence’, is not limited to physical violence. as the macquarie dictionary makes plain, violence can include ‘any unjust or unwarranted exertion of force or power, as against rights, laws, etc: injury, wrong, outrage’, (c) support for the proposition that violence is not limited to physical violence can be seen from the terms of subsection (1)(c)(i) itself. subsection (1)(c)(i), on its face, is clearly not limited to acts of actual physical violence. it also applies to threats of violence. plainly, a threat need not involve physical violence against another, (d) here, the mother had the benefit of an advo. that advo created rights for her benefit, and protection. the father breached the terms of that advo by contacting her or visiting her. that was plainly unwarranted, or unjust, and an exertion of power by him against rights she enjoyed under the advo, (e) the father was unable to point to any textual considerations within the act that supported his preferred construction of the term, ‘violence’, and (f) the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.   the ordinary meaning of the word, ‘violence’, is not limited to physical violence. as the macquarie dictionary makes plain, violence can include ‘any unjust or unwarranted exertion of force or power, as against rights, laws, etc: injury, wrong, outrage’, (c) support for the proposition that violence is not limited to physical violence can be seen from the terms of subsection (1)(c)(i) itself. subsection (1)(c)(i), on its face, is clearly not limited to acts of actual physical violence. it also applies to threats of violence. plainly, a threat need not involve physical violence against another, (d) here, the mother had the benefit of an advo. that advo created rights for her benefit, and protection. the father breached the terms of that advo by contacting her or visiting her. that was plainly unwarranted, or unjust, and an exertion of power by him against rights she enjoyed under the advo, (e) the father was unable to point to any textual considerations within the act that supported his preferred construction of the term, ‘violence’, and (f) the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.   support for the proposition that violence is not limited to physical violence can be seen from the terms of subsection (1)(c)(i) itself. subsection (1)(c)(i), on its face, is clearly not limited to acts of actual physical violence. it also applies to threats of violence. plainly, a threat need not involve physical violence against another, (d) here, the mother had the benefit of an advo. that advo created rights for her benefit, and protection. the father breached the terms of that advo by contacting her or visiting her. that was plainly unwarranted, or unjust, and an exertion of power by him against rights she enjoyed under the advo, (e) the father was unable to point to any textual considerations within the act that supported his preferred construction of the term, ‘violence’, and (f) the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.   here, the mother had the benefit of an advo. that advo created rights for her benefit, and protection. the father breached the terms of that advo by contacting her or visiting her. that was plainly unwarranted, or unjust, and an exertion of power by him against rights she enjoyed under the advo, (e) the father was unable to point to any textual considerations within the act that supported his preferred construction of the term, ‘violence’, and (f) the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.   the father was unable to point to any textual considerations within the act that supported his preferred construction of the term, ‘violence’, and (f) the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.   the terms of section 14 of the nsw act are of little assistance in construing the terms of the act.
associate: dated: 31 october 2023
dated: 31 october 2023