last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kozina & kozina [2023] fedcfamc2f 1310
orders
the court orders that:  keep the mother and father informed in writing of all decisions made by them in relation to major long term issues, including decisions in relation to x’s education, health, medical treatment, overseas travel and living arrangements, and (b) provide the mother and father in writing with the names and contact details of all: (i) schools or education facilities at which x is enrolled, (ii) medical practitioners or therapists assessing or providing treatment to x, (iii) support services providing assistance to x, and (iv) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.   provide the mother and father in writing with the names and contact details of all: (i) schools or education facilities at which x is enrolled, (ii) medical practitioners or therapists assessing or providing treatment to x, (iii) support services providing assistance to x, and (iv) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.   schools or education facilities at which x is enrolled, (ii) medical practitioners or therapists assessing or providing treatment to x, (iii) support services providing assistance to x, and (iv) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.  ) medical practitioners or therapists assessing or providing treatment to x, (iii) support services providing assistance to x, and (iv) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.  i) support services providing assistance to x, and (iv) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.  ) x’s ndis co-ordinator and his current co-ordinator is mr d at e centre, city f.   any school or education facility at which x is enrolled, (b) any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or providing treatment to x, (c) any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or providing treatment to x, (c) any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   x’s ndis co-ordinator.   provide a copy of the psychological assessment report of ms g dated 8 september 2023 to x’s school and general practitioner (“gp”), (b) obtain a referral from x’s gp to a clinical psychologist with expertise in autism for the purposes of obtaining advice from time to time as to strategies to assist x in moving between the parties’ households, (c) make an appointment for x to attend upon the clinical psychologist referred to in order 4(b), and (d) contact a disability support service to arrange a support worker for x as recommended in ms g’s report.   obtain a referral from x’s gp to a clinical psychologist with expertise in autism for the purposes of obtaining advice from time to time as to strategies to assist x in moving between the parties’ households, (c) make an appointment for x to attend upon the clinical psychologist referred to in order 4(b), and (d) contact a disability support service to arrange a support worker for x as recommended in ms g’s report.   make an appointment for x to attend upon the clinical psychologist referred to in order 4(b), and (d) contact a disability support service to arrange a support worker for x as recommended in ms g’s report.   contact a disability support service to arrange a support worker for x as recommended in ms g’s report.   for a period of 3 months from the date of these orders in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, (b) thereafter in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on thursday from after school (or 3 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, noting that in the event the mother does not comply with order 11, then time will continue in accordance with order 8(a) until the mother complies with order 11, (c) notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the mother on special occasions as follows: (i) for mother’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the mother’s day weekend, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, and on christmas eve in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   week 1: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm,  ) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm,   thereafter in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on thursday from after school (or 3 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, noting that in the event the mother does not comply with order 11, then time will continue in accordance with order 8(a) until the mother complies with order 11, (c) notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the mother on special occasions as follows: (i) for mother’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the mother’s day weekend, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, and on christmas eve in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   week 1: on thursday from after school (or 3 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, noting that in the event the mother does not comply with order 11, then time will continue in accordance with order 8(a) until the mother complies with order 11,  ) week 2: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, noting that in the event the mother does not comply with order 11, then time will continue in accordance with order 8(a) until the mother complies with order 11,   notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the mother on special occasions as follows: (i) for mother’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the mother’s day weekend, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, and on christmas eve in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   for mother’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on mother’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the mother’s day weekend, subject to the mother’s compliance with order 11 below, (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, and on christmas eve in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.  ) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, and on christmas eve in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   for a period of 3 months from the date of these orders in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, (b) thereafter in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, and (ii) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, (c) notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the father on special occasions as follows: (i) for father’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on father’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the father’s day weekend. (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, on boxing day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   week 1: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, and (ii) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm,  ) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm,   thereafter in a two week cycle: (i) week 1: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, and (ii) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm, (c) notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the father on special occasions as follows: (i) for father’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on father’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the father’s day weekend. (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, on boxing day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   week 1: on friday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm on saturday, and (ii) week 2: on thursday from after school (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 7.00 pm,   notwithstanding any other order, x is to spend time with the father on special occasions as follows: (i) for father’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on father’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the father’s day weekend. (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, on boxing day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   for father’s day each year: during the first 3 months of the date these orders, from 10.00am until 5.00 pm on father’s day, and thereafter, from after school on friday (or 3.00 pm if x is not attending school) until 5.00 pm on sunday on the father’s day weekend. (ii) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, on boxing day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.  ) at christmas time each year: on christmas day in each even numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, on boxing day in each odd numbered year from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm.   if x is attending school on the day he is scheduled to spend time with either the mother or father in accordance with these orders, then the parent who is scheduled to spend time with x, will collect him from school that day, and return him to the paternal grandparents at suburb j mcdonalds at the conclusion of the time, and (b) if x is not attending school on the day he is scheduled to spend time with the mother or father, then changeovers at the commencement and conclusion of time are to take place at suburb j mcdonalds.   if x is not attending school on the day he is scheduled to spend time with the mother or father, then changeovers at the commencement and conclusion of time are to take place at suburb j mcdonalds.   any school or education facility at which x is enrolled, (b) any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or providing treatment to x, (c) any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or providing treatment to x, (c) any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   any support service providing assistance to x, and (d) x’s ndis co-ordinator.   discussing these court proceedings with x or in his presence or hearing, (b) asking x about his wishes in relation to his time with each parent, (c) telling x that he does not need to spend time with his mother or father if he does not wish to, and (d) allowing x to refer to his mother and father by their first names.   asking x about his wishes in relation to his time with each parent, (c) telling x that he does not need to spend time with his mother or father if he does not wish to, and (d) allowing x to refer to his mother and father by their first names.   telling x that he does not need to spend time with his mother or father if he does not wish to, and (d) allowing x to refer to his mother and father by their first names.   allowing x to refer to his mother and father by their first names.   provide to the mother and father at least 2 months' notice in writing of the overseas travel plans, (b) provide to the mother and father a copy of the travel itinerary, return prepaid air travel tickets and contact details for x whilst overseas as soon as reasonably practicable, and no later than 14 days before the intended departure date, and (c) not propose to take x to a country listed on the australian government smart traveller website as posing a travel or safety risk.   provide to the mother and father a copy of the travel itinerary, return prepaid air travel tickets and contact details for x whilst overseas as soon as reasonably practicable, and no later than 14 days before the intended departure date, and (c) not propose to take x to a country listed on the australian government smart traveller website as posing a travel or safety risk.   not propose to take x to a country listed on the australian government smart traveller website as posing a travel or safety risk.
the court orders by consent that:  each alternate week from after school thursday (or 3.00 pm if not a school day) until 6.00 pm on the following sunday, (b) for one half of the school holidays, and (c) at any other time as agreed between the mother and the father.   for one half of the school holidays, and (c) at any other time as agreed between the mother and the father.   at any other time as agreed between the mother and the father.
the court further orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge glass:
primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of his parents  continued to show reluctance to spending time with [ms kozina] which increased to the point that we cannot get him to spend time on a sunday with [ms kozina]. [x] would say to me "do not want to visit mummy today". i would say "mummy would be happy to see you" and "it will be ok, we will be here once you get back".[5]
ms kozina deposes as follows:
sunday visits are incredibly difficult to arrange for my husband and i as [x] is strongly refusing to leave the house. due to [x]'s refusal, and subsequent meltdowns when we try and encourage him, [x] did not spend time with [ms kozina] on 13 of the 14 sundays below...[6] .... i am unsure about [x]'s reasons behind the willingness to spend time with [ms kozina] from school, while refusing to visit her from our home. i try to encourage [x] by telling him "you should go see your mum", "she loves you " and "she wants to see you". [x] becomes frustrated and repeats "this is [x]'s house. [x]stay in this house ". i am unsure as to why [x] thinks he will be taken from his home.[7]
by the time he gets to my car, he’s okay, yeah. he kind of switches off once he realises he’s definitely coming, then he will start about the shade of, why is it the shade longer in winter, and you know, he switches like that.
there is no dispute that [x] would benefit from having a meaningful relationship with each of his parent (sic). the pgps expressed clear support for this proposition.[9]
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
ms kozina’s drug and alcohol abuse  kozina] has been smoking cigarettes, 'from 15 years, up till current, on nicotine patch', she has been drinking alcohol, 'from 15 years, binges in weekends, got blackouts, sexually disinhibited, anger outbursts, drink 3-4 nights in a row, off 1 year’, she has been smoking [an illicit drug], 'when 17-18 years, get paranoid, what's going on in the head, last 1.5 year ago', she was on [illicit drugs], get increased energy, feel busy, [illicit drugs], at 18-21 years, got psychotic at 18 years, got spiritual, knew what word, had deep thinking, was in [country l], would like it, then feel down', she was on [prescription medication], she was on [prescription medication], later replaced by ibuprofen and [prescription medication] dependence, on ibuprofen 200 mg+ [prescription medication], up to 60-80 tab/day, she was in rehab at [m centre], [suburb p], for 12 months, 'had 6 months residential rehab, 3 months transition, last 3 months as aftercare, finished last week, was hard, ,want to use yet keep off substance'.[12]
... accurate, except i notice that i’ve haven’t tried [prescription medication], i wasn’t, i didn’t know how to get, i didn’t even know what [prescription medication] was back then. but that doesn’t matter, it’s all the same, it’s addiction.
i don’t know where they got that from to tell you the truth, but that’s okay, i don’t know where they got that... i never misused [sleep medication]. .... some of this information i’m hearing, i don’t remember much. .... i don’t abuse [sleep medication]. ... i don’t abuse it, i take it to sleep.
i am presently on [antidepressants and sleep medications]. i have been on these medications for about eight (8) years now, following treatment with a psychiatrist from [r centre]. i cannot now remember the psychiatrist's name.[14]
a review of current medication particularly the amount of [sleep medication] [ms kozina] is currently prescribed. she is currently observed to be experiencing an over medicated presentation. after [ms kozina] takes her medication in the morning she becomes drowsy immediately, she appears disconnected, her memory is impacted and ability to focus is impaired. this also appears to be impacting her ability to attend to, and connect with her 5 year old daughter as well as impacting her ability to participate fully in our program.[15]
on another occasion i attended the former matrimonial home to collect the children at an agreed time with [ms kozina]. [she] failed to answer the door and through the window i observed [her] to be slumped on the lounge in a state of undress and in a stupefied state. i entered the premises to observe beer bottles and other alcohol bottles scattered around the floor and rubbish scattered throughout the kitchen. i then found [x] running around the home inside unsupervised and unwashed.[16]
ms kozina’s mental health
in or around 2007 i was diagnosed with adhd and [a mental health disorder]. following rehabilitation, that diagnosis was revised to adhd and [a mental health disorder].[17]
she gave oral evidence that the affidavit is erroneous, and that she was only diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (“adhd”), in 2015.  ntal health] disorder, features of adhd, panic disorder with agoraphobia, social anxiety, previous nicotine dependence, previous alcohol abuse, previous cannabis abuse, previous [illicit drugs] abuse, previous opioid dependence, and nsaid dependence, borderline personality traits.[18]
she failed to disclose the other diagnoses in her affidavit material despite recalling in cross-examination having been diagnosed with those other conditions.
in terms of adhd, she has had difficulties both in childhood and adult life, with difficulties with attention and concentration. she was very forgetful, bad a hot temper, was very impulsive, easily distracted and had problems with short-term memory.[21]
so the one thing... the concentration and that is not too much. there’s an issue i get also is where i’m full on in the morning, i get what i need done, and then i crash, and i get exhausted easy. that is what i believe will be hard, but like i said, another reason why adhd medication works for people like me.
she went on to give evidence that when she crashes, she does so for about four hours, and that she needs a “nice big rest” before starting a late shift at work. she described her need to crash as related to her chronic sleep problem, a problem she has always had.
if i am struggling, i’m big on pharmaceutical, because it’s been big for me. um, i’ll go back, talk to a psychiatrist, and you know, i know i didn’t go and see a psychologist when they asked me to that time, that was in regards to work, i got over it. if i feel i need to, i’ll take the time and do that as well.
she needs individual therapy dealing with mood chart, grief and loss issue, sleep hygiene, dealing with negative thoughts, relaxation techniques, exposure therapy, mindfulness, stress tolerance, emotional regulation, inter-personal effectiveness, motivational interview with substance use.[22]
i don’t know, there was a lot going on i guess. look, i’m a very different person today, so it’s hard for me to go... um, i didn’t stick to much. but, i can tell you one thing, in rehab, i was in there, for one of them, for a year, i had plenty of therapy.
whatever ms kozina’s perception of herself is, she remains non-compliant with recommendations for psychological intervention to treat her mental health conditions.
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as his maturity or level of understanding) that are relevant to the weight to be given to his views
the nature of x’s relationships with each of his parents and other people, including any grandparent or other relative
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x, to spend time with him, and to communicate with him
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain him
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on x of any separation from either of his parents, or any other child or other person, including grandparent or other relative, with whom he has been living
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of x’s parents and any other person, including any grandparent or other relative of x, to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
i asked [the paternal grandparents] if they were going to apply for ndis for [x] and they said because they are not [x]'s legal guardians they can’t apply for things. i will refer to [ms aa], school counsellor to see what can be done.[31]
in oral evidence, mr z could not recall, what, if anything, had been done with that referral.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of his parents, and any other relevant characteristics of x
if x is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, his right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order will have on that right
the attitude to x, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents  currently lived with the paternal grandparents and the parents do not intend to make any significant changes to [x]'s routine, living arrangements or schooling without the agreement and input from the paternal grandparents.[32]
i was contemplating prior to that, um, but i think when i’d come in, i’d just really realised that, you know, i know that [x] will be so uncomfortable at first to come and live with me, so i was trying to avoid that, um...
...
i didn’t want to disrupt what he already had, i just wanted to add to his life, that’s all. and then um, coming to that i just realised that these people aren’t going to come to the party, and that they’re not gonna support,.. you know, my relationship with me, his sister, his father.  's bond with each of his parents will benefit from being strengthened through regular contact with each parent in their home, and with [y] as he moves between his parents’ homes. as [x] moves into adulthood and his paternal grandparents’ age, the bonds between [x], his parents and sister will become increasingly important.[33]
any family violence involving x or a member of his family  late] 2010 the victim [mr kozina] has recieved a phone call from the accused [ms kozina]. the phone message consisted of threats to harm the victim if he did not allow the accused to have their son [x] 4 years. a few minutes later the accused has arrived at the victims address, ... the accused, their daughter ... and a male person have pulled up on the front lawn. the accused has got out of the vehicle and started yelling at the victim who was standing on the top floor veranda. the accused has gone to the boot of her car and pulled her wedding dress out and threw it on the wall. the male person has then got out of the car holding a knife. the victim has then rang police and the male person ran off .. the accused has then pulled a cricket bat out of her car and walked up the drive way and started to bash the garage roller door. the accused the walked to the front door and hit it with the cricket bat, all the time yelling at the victim. the accused has walked back to the drive way and swung the cricket bat back and then smashing it foreward into the front left hand panel of the victims car. .. the accused then jumped back into her car yelled out at the victim,"tell the police i am not scared of avo's, if i don't get [x] tomorrow, i am going to come back here with my boy friend ......... and a few friends and we are going to get you".the accused then drove away.[34]
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of his family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x
any other relevant fact or circumstance
conclusions
parental responsibility
living arrangements
spend time arrangements
overseas travel
other relief sought
associate: dated: 17 october 2023
dated: 17 october 2023
[1] carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 at [165] to [169], adopted in adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232; (2014) flc 93-622 at [89] to [90].[2] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60b.[3] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60ca. [4] family report of ms n dated 20 october 2022 (“family report”), paragraph 104. [5] affidavit of mr b kozina, filed 1 august 2023, paragraph 39.[6] affidavit of ms c kozina, filed 1 august 2023, paragraph 135. [7] affidavit of ms c kozina, filed 1 august 2023, paragraph 136.[8] amended response of the paternal grandparents filed 1 august 2023, page 2. [9] submissions of the paternal grandparents filed 30 september 2023, paragraph 21. [10] family law act 1975 (cth) ss 60cc(2a). [11] affidavit of ms c kozina filed 1 august 2023, paragraph 138. [12] exhibit 2r2, page 2. [13] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at [31] per gleeson cj, gummow & kirby jj.[14] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 232. [15] exhibit 2r5, page 95.[16] affidavit of mr kozina filed 17 august 2010, paragraph 46. [17] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 231. [18] exhibit 2r2, page 99. [19] exhibit 2r4, page 184. [20] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 233.[21] exhibit 2r4, page 116. [22] exhibit 2r4, page 113. [23] family report, paragraph 82. [24] family report, paragraph 94. [25] family report, paragraph 94. [26] family report, paragraph 94. [27] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 16 september 2015. [28] affidavit of mr kozina filed 6 september 2023, paragraph 39.[29] kramer & another & ward [2017] famcafc 270; (2017) flc 93-817 at [10]. [30] family report, paragraph 57. [31] exhibit 2r4, page 206.[32] final orders dated 20 september 2016, notation a. [33] family report, paragraph 94.[34] exhibit 2r4, page 15. [35] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 52. [36] affidavit of mr kozina filed 6 september 2023, paragraph 14. [37] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 77. [38] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61da. [39] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65dac.[40] family report, paragraph 104. [41] submissions of the independent children’s lawyer filed 29 september 2023, paragraph 22.[42] proposed minute of orders on behalf of applicant filed 16 august 2023, paragraph 15. [43] affidavit of ms kozina filed 25 july 2023, paragraph 246. [44] family law act 1975 (cth) ss 117(4)(b).