last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
melton & domara (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1339
orders
the court orders that:  during school terms: (i) on each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day or 9:00am tuesday in the event of a public holiday monday), (ii) for the remainder of 2023 and for term 1 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to 7:00pm, (iii) as and from the commencement of term 2 2024, on each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (iv) as and from the commencement of term 4 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), (b) for one half of the short term school holidays at times to be agreed between the parties via the appclose application or in default of agreement for the half of the school holidays coinciding with the cycle referred to in paragraph 4(a)(i) herein, (c) during the christmas school holidays in each year on a week about basis with the children to spend the first week of such holidays with the father (and each alternate week thereafter) and the children to spend the second week with the mother (and each alternate week thereafter), (d) on the children’s birthdays at times to be agreed between the parties (or in default of agreement for a period of three (3) hours at times to be nominated by the party who does not have the care of the children) via the appclose application, (e) on mother’s day from 10:00am to 5:00pm, and that the mother’s time with the children is to be suspended from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day, (f) at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   on each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school friday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day or 9:00am tuesday in the event of a public holiday monday), (ii) for the remainder of 2023 and for term 1 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to 7:00pm, (iii) as and from the commencement of term 2 2024, on each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (iv) as and from the commencement of term 4 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day),  ) for the remainder of 2023 and for term 1 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to 7:00pm, (iii) as and from the commencement of term 2 2024, on each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (iv) as and from the commencement of term 4 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day),  i) as and from the commencement of term 2 2024, on each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), and (iv) as and from the commencement of term 4 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day),  ) as and from the commencement of term 4 2024, on each wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) to commencement of school on thursday (or 9:00am if a non-school day),   for one half of the short term school holidays at times to be agreed between the parties via the appclose application or in default of agreement for the half of the school holidays coinciding with the cycle referred to in paragraph 4(a)(i) herein, (c) during the christmas school holidays in each year on a week about basis with the children to spend the first week of such holidays with the father (and each alternate week thereafter) and the children to spend the second week with the mother (and each alternate week thereafter), (d) on the children’s birthdays at times to be agreed between the parties (or in default of agreement for a period of three (3) hours at times to be nominated by the party who does not have the care of the children) via the appclose application, (e) on mother’s day from 10:00am to 5:00pm, and that the mother’s time with the children is to be suspended from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day, (f) at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   during the christmas school holidays in each year on a week about basis with the children to spend the first week of such holidays with the father (and each alternate week thereafter) and the children to spend the second week with the mother (and each alternate week thereafter), (d) on the children’s birthdays at times to be agreed between the parties (or in default of agreement for a period of three (3) hours at times to be nominated by the party who does not have the care of the children) via the appclose application, (e) on mother’s day from 10:00am to 5:00pm, and that the mother’s time with the children is to be suspended from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day, (f) at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   on the children’s birthdays at times to be agreed between the parties (or in default of agreement for a period of three (3) hours at times to be nominated by the party who does not have the care of the children) via the appclose application, (e) on mother’s day from 10:00am to 5:00pm, and that the mother’s time with the children is to be suspended from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day, (f) at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   on mother’s day from 10:00am to 5:00pm, and that the mother’s time with the children is to be suspended from 10:00am to 5:00pm on father’s day, (f) at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   at christmas in each year from 3:00pm christmas day to 3:00pm boxing day, with the children to be in the care of the father from 3:00pm christmas eve to 3:00pm christmas day each year, and (g) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing via the appclose application.   a full itinerary of the travel, address and contact telephone details, and (b) no less than fourteen (14) days written notice of such intended interstate travel.   no less than fourteen (14) days written notice of such intended interstate travel.
and it is ordered by consent that:  at eid at times and days as agreed between the parties via the appclose application, (b) at such other times as agreed between the parties via the appclose application.   at such other times as agreed between the parties via the appclose application.   for easter: (i) with the father in each year from 3:00pm (or the conclusion of school) easter thursday to 3:00pm easter sunday, and (ii) with the mother in each year from 3:00pm easter sunday to 3:00pm easter tuesday (or the commencement of school), (b) for new years: (i) with the father in 2023 and each odd year thereafter from 1:00pm on new year’s eve until 1:00pm on new year’s day, and (ii) with the mother in 2024 and each even year thereafter from 1:00pm new year’s eve until 1:00pm new year’s day.   with the father in each year from 3:00pm (or the conclusion of school) easter thursday to 3:00pm easter sunday, and (ii) with the mother in each year from 3:00pm easter sunday to 3:00pm easter tuesday (or the commencement of school),  ) with the mother in each year from 3:00pm easter sunday to 3:00pm easter tuesday (or the commencement of school),   for new years: (i) with the father in 2023 and each odd year thereafter from 1:00pm on new year’s eve until 1:00pm on new year’s day, and (ii) with the mother in 2024 and each even year thereafter from 1:00pm new year’s eve until 1:00pm new year’s day.   with the father in 2023 and each odd year thereafter from 1:00pm on new year’s eve until 1:00pm on new year’s day, and (ii) with the mother in 2024 and each even year thereafter from 1:00pm new year’s eve until 1:00pm new year’s day.  ) with the mother in 2024 and each even year thereafter from 1:00pm new year’s eve until 1:00pm new year’s day.   physically disciplining either child or allowing any other person to do so, (b) denigrating, harassing, intimidating or assaulting the other party, their partner or family or allowing any other person to do so, (c) attending at the other party’s place of residence without their prior written consent having first been obtained, and (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   denigrating, harassing, intimidating or assaulting the other party, their partner or family or allowing any other person to do so, (c) attending at the other party’s place of residence without their prior written consent having first been obtained, and (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   attending at the other party’s place of residence without their prior written consent having first been obtained, and (d) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing any other person to do so.
reasons for judgment
judge dickson:
introduction
evidence and witnesses   amended application for final orders filed 3 july 2023, and (2) trial affidavits of the father filed 3 july 2023 and 18 august 2023.   trial affidavits of the father filed 3 july 2023 and 18 august 2023.   further amended response to initiating application filed 4 august 2023, (2) trial affidavit of the mother filed 4 august 2023, and (3) cctv footage of incident between the parties in late 2021 (‘exhibit f2’).   trial affidavit of the mother filed 4 august 2023, and (3) cctv footage of incident between the parties in late 2021 (‘exhibit f2’).   cctv footage of incident between the parties in late 2021 (‘exhibit f2’).   family assessment report of family consultant ms j dated 5 september 2022 (‘the family report’), and (2) affidavits of the independent children’s lawyer filed 16 may and 17 june 2023.   affidavits of the independent children’s lawyer filed 16 may and 17 june 2023.
exhibits tendered at trial
orders sought and issues in dispute  the apportionment of parental responsibility, (2) whether the children spend time with the mother during school terms on a week about basis or for some other formation each week, and (3) should the children spend time with the mother at christmas in each year.   whether the children spend time with the mother during school terms on a week about basis or for some other formation each week, and (3) should the children spend time with the mother at christmas in each year.   should the children spend time with the mother at christmas in each year.
background & relevent chronological events  the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (2) the children live with the father, (3) the children spend time with mother from the conclusion of school friday to 5:00pm sunday, (4) each wednesday from 3:00pm to 7:00pm, (5) for one half of all short term school holidays as agreed between the parties via sms or email, and (6) for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   the children live with the father, (3) the children spend time with mother from the conclusion of school friday to 5:00pm sunday, (4) each wednesday from 3:00pm to 7:00pm, (5) for one half of all short term school holidays as agreed between the parties via sms or email, and (6) for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   the children spend time with mother from the conclusion of school friday to 5:00pm sunday, (4) each wednesday from 3:00pm to 7:00pm, (5) for one half of all short term school holidays as agreed between the parties via sms or email, and (6) for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   each wednesday from 3:00pm to 7:00pm, (5) for one half of all short term school holidays as agreed between the parties via sms or email, and (6) for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   for one half of all short term school holidays as agreed between the parties via sms or email, and (6) for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   for special occasions on birthdays and at eid at times to be agreed.   christmas holiday time, and (2) travelling with the children. the mother sought an order that the children be able to travel with her to country d.   travelling with the children. the mother sought an order that the children be able to travel with her to country d.   the mother’s amended response filed 9 december 2021 shall not be dismissed at this preliminary stage pursuant to the rule in rice & asplund, (2) pursuant to section 62g of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) that a family assessment report be prepared, and (3) the parties attend a family dispute resolution conference upon production of the family assessment report.   pursuant to section 62g of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) that a family assessment report be prepared, and (3) the parties attend a family dispute resolution conference upon production of the family assessment report.   the parties attend a family dispute resolution conference upon production of the family assessment report.
the evidence
the father  the father’s presentation and his answers raise concern as to the father’s attitude to the children’s relationship with their mother, (2) the father appeared to unable to consider the positive aspects of the children’s relationship with their mother and was focused on viewing himself as a victim/martyr in the post-separation period of the parties relationship, (3) the father told y that the mother had slapping her on the face as an infant despite conceding that he had never seen this behaviour himself. the fact that he would seek to maintain this allegation to y and encourage her to repeat it to the family consultant supports a finding that the father has engaged in manipulative and deliberate conduct designed to impact on the family report, and (4) the court is able to confidently find that the father is unlikely to support nor foster the children’s future relationship with their mother. the impression gained from his evidence is that the mother’s involvement in the children’s lives is a nuisance to be tolerated and minimised as much as possible.   the father appeared to unable to consider the positive aspects of the children’s relationship with their mother and was focused on viewing himself as a victim/martyr in the post-separation period of the parties relationship, (3) the father told y that the mother had slapping her on the face as an infant despite conceding that he had never seen this behaviour himself. the fact that he would seek to maintain this allegation to y and encourage her to repeat it to the family consultant supports a finding that the father has engaged in manipulative and deliberate conduct designed to impact on the family report, and (4) the court is able to confidently find that the father is unlikely to support nor foster the children’s future relationship with their mother. the impression gained from his evidence is that the mother’s involvement in the children’s lives is a nuisance to be tolerated and minimised as much as possible.   the father told y that the mother had slapping her on the face as an infant despite conceding that he had never seen this behaviour himself. the fact that he would seek to maintain this allegation to y and encourage her to repeat it to the family consultant supports a finding that the father has engaged in manipulative and deliberate conduct designed to impact on the family report, and (4) the court is able to confidently find that the father is unlikely to support nor foster the children’s future relationship with their mother. the impression gained from his evidence is that the mother’s involvement in the children’s lives is a nuisance to be tolerated and minimised as much as possible.   the court is able to confidently find that the father is unlikely to support nor foster the children’s future relationship with their mother. the impression gained from his evidence is that the mother’s involvement in the children’s lives is a nuisance to be tolerated and minimised as much as possible.
the mother  it was important for the children to know that their mother loved them and was able to make decisions about their care, (2) in the week that the children were with her, she could focus on being “the best parent” and in the week when the children were with their father she could focus on her education and career, (3) the mother was said to miss the children when they were with their father, and (4) the mother considered that there were lots of benefits for ‘shared custody’ for both herself and the father.   in the week that the children were with her, she could focus on being “the best parent” and in the week when the children were with their father she could focus on her education and career, (3) the mother was said to miss the children when they were with their father, and (4) the mother considered that there were lots of benefits for ‘shared custody’ for both herself and the father.   the mother was said to miss the children when they were with their father, and (4) the mother considered that there were lots of benefits for ‘shared custody’ for both herself and the father.   the mother considered that there were lots of benefits for ‘shared custody’ for both herself and the father.   i accept that the mother loves her three children and wishes to be involved in their upbringing, (2) in my view, the mother has deliberately downplayed the events of 2019 which lead to her placing the children in the primary care of the father, the state of her home and her functioning as a parent, (3) i accept that the mother is now in “a better place” and that she regrets her past decision to place the children to live primarily with the father. to her credit, she concedes that the children are now settled in the father’s care and she does not seek to upset this arrangement, and (4) i consider that the mother has in engaged in parenting practises in the past which would not find favour in contemporary australian life being physical chastisement and leaving children unsupervised. i accept the mother’s evidence that she no longer engages in this behaviour and that her completion of a parenting course provided education on disciplinary techniques. should she do so in the future then there is little doubt that the children will report this to their father. the mother has consented on a without admission basis to a final order not to use future physical discipline on the children and the mother is bound by its terms.   in my view, the mother has deliberately downplayed the events of 2019 which lead to her placing the children in the primary care of the father, the state of her home and her functioning as a parent, (3) i accept that the mother is now in “a better place” and that she regrets her past decision to place the children to live primarily with the father. to her credit, she concedes that the children are now settled in the father’s care and she does not seek to upset this arrangement, and (4) i consider that the mother has in engaged in parenting practises in the past which would not find favour in contemporary australian life being physical chastisement and leaving children unsupervised. i accept the mother’s evidence that she no longer engages in this behaviour and that her completion of a parenting course provided education on disciplinary techniques. should she do so in the future then there is little doubt that the children will report this to their father. the mother has consented on a without admission basis to a final order not to use future physical discipline on the children and the mother is bound by its terms.   i accept that the mother is now in “a better place” and that she regrets her past decision to place the children to live primarily with the father. to her credit, she concedes that the children are now settled in the father’s care and she does not seek to upset this arrangement, and (4) i consider that the mother has in engaged in parenting practises in the past which would not find favour in contemporary australian life being physical chastisement and leaving children unsupervised. i accept the mother’s evidence that she no longer engages in this behaviour and that her completion of a parenting course provided education on disciplinary techniques. should she do so in the future then there is little doubt that the children will report this to their father. the mother has consented on a without admission basis to a final order not to use future physical discipline on the children and the mother is bound by its terms.   i consider that the mother has in engaged in parenting practises in the past which would not find favour in contemporary australian life being physical chastisement and leaving children unsupervised. i accept the mother’s evidence that she no longer engages in this behaviour and that her completion of a parenting course provided education on disciplinary techniques. should she do so in the future then there is little doubt that the children will report this to their father. the mother has consented on a without admission basis to a final order not to use future physical discipline on the children and the mother is bound by its terms.
family consultant, ms j
if the court accepts the allegations of physical abuse of the children and concern about [ms domara]’s propensity for violence, then it would be considered appropriate that [mr melton] have sole parental responsibility for the children.[11]
there is no magic in a family report. a judge is not bound to accept it and there should never be a suggestion that the counsellor is usurping the role of the court or that the judge is abdicating his responsibilities...”   conceded that provided structures were in place to assist in decision making, equal shared parent responsibility could be ordered in this case. her primary concern was to ensure that there was no detriment to the children if the parties could not communicate, (2) agreed to a question from the mother’s counsel that there was a risk in the mother being displaced from the children’s lives if an order was made for sole parental responsibility, (3) considered that an equal shared care arrangement with children of a young age could be problematic, particularly if communication between the parties is poor. she agreed that handovers at school would assist in reducing the direct interaction between the parties and further would allow the mother to engage in the school community, and (4) conceded that the child x had not described any recent episodes of being smacked by her mother stating that this had occurred “a few years ago” and that it was unlikely y was recalling incidents of “slapping” on her face from her own independent memory given that she was an infant at the time.   agreed to a question from the mother’s counsel that there was a risk in the mother being displaced from the children’s lives if an order was made for sole parental responsibility, (3) considered that an equal shared care arrangement with children of a young age could be problematic, particularly if communication between the parties is poor. she agreed that handovers at school would assist in reducing the direct interaction between the parties and further would allow the mother to engage in the school community, and (4) conceded that the child x had not described any recent episodes of being smacked by her mother stating that this had occurred “a few years ago” and that it was unlikely y was recalling incidents of “slapping” on her face from her own independent memory given that she was an infant at the time.   considered that an equal shared care arrangement with children of a young age could be problematic, particularly if communication between the parties is poor. she agreed that handovers at school would assist in reducing the direct interaction between the parties and further would allow the mother to engage in the school community, and (4) conceded that the child x had not described any recent episodes of being smacked by her mother stating that this had occurred “a few years ago” and that it was unlikely y was recalling incidents of “slapping” on her face from her own independent memory given that she was an infant at the time.   conceded that the child x had not described any recent episodes of being smacked by her mother stating that this had occurred “a few years ago” and that it was unlikely y was recalling incidents of “slapping” on her face from her own independent memory given that she was an infant at the time.   the family consultant did not hear the evidence at trial, in particular the evidence of the father regarding his attitude towards the mother.[13] nor did she have the opportunity observe the demeanour of the witnesses under cross-examination. (2) in this case, the evidence supports a clear finding that the father attempted to influence the outcome of the family report by discussing with y the allegation that she had been “slapped” as a baby by the mother and that she should “tell” the family consultant. the father conceded at trial that he had never observed the mother engage in this behaviour. the mother denied that it ever occurred. (3) the cctv footage of the physical altercation between the parties at the mother’s unit complex in late 2021 (exhibit f2) was distressing to watch but clear as to what had occurred. whilst the mother had initiated the physical exchange by attempting to retrieve her mobile telephone from the father, his response was disproportionate to the mother’s actions. the father’s reaction is all the more egregious when considering the difference in size between the parties and the fact that the father is trained as a community worker. (4) it is difficult to reconcile the weight attached by the family consultant to the disputed allegations about the mother in the face of clear video evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father. (5) the court is unable to place any weight on the perceived wishes of either child given the court’s concerns about the children being exposed to the father’s negative view of the mother and the reports made by the children of their mother’s conduct, which the family consultant conceded could not possibly come from their own memory. further, the mother also conceded in her evidence to discussing future living arrangements with the children.[14]   in this case, the evidence supports a clear finding that the father attempted to influence the outcome of the family report by discussing with y the allegation that she had been “slapped” as a baby by the mother and that she should “tell” the family consultant. the father conceded at trial that he had never observed the mother engage in this behaviour. the mother denied that it ever occurred. (3) the cctv footage of the physical altercation between the parties at the mother’s unit complex in late 2021 (exhibit f2) was distressing to watch but clear as to what had occurred. whilst the mother had initiated the physical exchange by attempting to retrieve her mobile telephone from the father, his response was disproportionate to the mother’s actions. the father’s reaction is all the more egregious when considering the difference in size between the parties and the fact that the father is trained as a community worker. (4) it is difficult to reconcile the weight attached by the family consultant to the disputed allegations about the mother in the face of clear video evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father. (5) the court is unable to place any weight on the perceived wishes of either child given the court’s concerns about the children being exposed to the father’s negative view of the mother and the reports made by the children of their mother’s conduct, which the family consultant conceded could not possibly come from their own memory. further, the mother also conceded in her evidence to discussing future living arrangements with the children.[14]   the cctv footage of the physical altercation between the parties at the mother’s unit complex in late 2021 (exhibit f2) was distressing to watch but clear as to what had occurred. whilst the mother had initiated the physical exchange by attempting to retrieve her mobile telephone from the father, his response was disproportionate to the mother’s actions. the father’s reaction is all the more egregious when considering the difference in size between the parties and the fact that the father is trained as a community worker. (4) it is difficult to reconcile the weight attached by the family consultant to the disputed allegations about the mother in the face of clear video evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father. (5) the court is unable to place any weight on the perceived wishes of either child given the court’s concerns about the children being exposed to the father’s negative view of the mother and the reports made by the children of their mother’s conduct, which the family consultant conceded could not possibly come from their own memory. further, the mother also conceded in her evidence to discussing future living arrangements with the children.[14]   it is difficult to reconcile the weight attached by the family consultant to the disputed allegations about the mother in the face of clear video evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father. (5) the court is unable to place any weight on the perceived wishes of either child given the court’s concerns about the children being exposed to the father’s negative view of the mother and the reports made by the children of their mother’s conduct, which the family consultant conceded could not possibly come from their own memory. further, the mother also conceded in her evidence to discussing future living arrangements with the children.[14]   the court is unable to place any weight on the perceived wishes of either child given the court’s concerns about the children being exposed to the father’s negative view of the mother and the reports made by the children of their mother’s conduct, which the family consultant conceded could not possibly come from their own memory. further, the mother also conceded in her evidence to discussing future living arrangements with the children.[14]
legal pathway   give consideration to the proposals put forward by the parties, (2) have regard to the objects expressed in section 60b(1) of the act and the underlying principles in section 60b(2) of the act, (3) have regard to the provisions of section 60cc of the act in order to determine in each case what is in the children’s best interests, (4) have regard to the primary considerations under section 60cc(2) of the act namely, the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both the children’s parents and the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, (5) have regard to the additional considerations under section 60cc(3) of the act, and (6) the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]   have regard to the objects expressed in section 60b(1) of the act and the underlying principles in section 60b(2) of the act, (3) have regard to the provisions of section 60cc of the act in order to determine in each case what is in the children’s best interests, (4) have regard to the primary considerations under section 60cc(2) of the act namely, the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both the children’s parents and the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, (5) have regard to the additional considerations under section 60cc(3) of the act, and (6) the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]   have regard to the provisions of section 60cc of the act in order to determine in each case what is in the children’s best interests, (4) have regard to the primary considerations under section 60cc(2) of the act namely, the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both the children’s parents and the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, (5) have regard to the additional considerations under section 60cc(3) of the act, and (6) the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]   have regard to the primary considerations under section 60cc(2) of the act namely, the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both the children’s parents and the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, (5) have regard to the additional considerations under section 60cc(3) of the act, and (6) the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]   have regard to the additional considerations under section 60cc(3) of the act, and (6) the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]   the evidence adduced by each of the parties in respect of particular considerations pursuant to sections 60cc(2) and (3) of the act will be considered and if more weight is to be given to one or more of the matters raised then it will be the subject of delineation and comment.[15]
legal principles   ensuring children have the benefit of both their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical and psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring children received adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care welfare and development of their children.[16]   protecting children from physical and psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring children received adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care welfare and development of their children.[16]   ensuring children received adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care welfare and development of their children.[16]   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care welfare and development of their children.[16]
section 60cc factors  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse and neglect or family violence.[17]   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse and neglect or family violence.[17]
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.[21]
it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a “meaningful relationship”.[24]
section 60cc(3) – additional considerations any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long‑term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living) the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility   the parties have a mistrustful co-parenting relationship, (2) the mother’s capacity to support the children’s attendance at school and sports is largely untested. in a few years time, she will have the responsibility of e attending at a different school and without the assistance of mr h, who continues to reside in country d. by contrast, the father has the assistance of his wife and the paternal grandmother, (3) the evidence also supports caution in relation to any expectation that the mother pay for the children’s extracurricular activities. at trial, the children were said by the father to be enrolled in a large number of sporting activities both at school and externally. the mother said in her evidence that she was unaware, for example, that x was now taking music lessons until hearing the father’s evidence. the payment of levies and for costs for sports and other activities may cause ongoing disputes between the parties which may in turn impact on the children, (4) the parties have been unable to maintain a flexible relationship needed to facilitate the children’s clothing and belongings between their respective homes. the issue of clothing for the children was the trigger for the incident in 2021, which resulted in a terrible physical altercation at a contact handover. the mother gave evidence that she will rely on x to bring clothing to her from the father’s home in the future, and (5) the parties do not communicate and have not done so for at least two years. the father has blocked the mother from his electronic devices. the parties have agreed to use the appclose application but as at the date of trial, the mother had not been able to use it on her mobile telephone. the paternal grandmother has been the main conduit of information between the parties for many years.   the mother’s capacity to support the children’s attendance at school and sports is largely untested. in a few years time, she will have the responsibility of e attending at a different school and without the assistance of mr h, who continues to reside in country d. by contrast, the father has the assistance of his wife and the paternal grandmother, (3) the evidence also supports caution in relation to any expectation that the mother pay for the children’s extracurricular activities. at trial, the children were said by the father to be enrolled in a large number of sporting activities both at school and externally. the mother said in her evidence that she was unaware, for example, that x was now taking music lessons until hearing the father’s evidence. the payment of levies and for costs for sports and other activities may cause ongoing disputes between the parties which may in turn impact on the children, (4) the parties have been unable to maintain a flexible relationship needed to facilitate the children’s clothing and belongings between their respective homes. the issue of clothing for the children was the trigger for the incident in 2021, which resulted in a terrible physical altercation at a contact handover. the mother gave evidence that she will rely on x to bring clothing to her from the father’s home in the future, and (5) the parties do not communicate and have not done so for at least two years. the father has blocked the mother from his electronic devices. the parties have agreed to use the appclose application but as at the date of trial, the mother had not been able to use it on her mobile telephone. the paternal grandmother has been the main conduit of information between the parties for many years.   the evidence also supports caution in relation to any expectation that the mother pay for the children’s extracurricular activities. at trial, the children were said by the father to be enrolled in a large number of sporting activities both at school and externally. the mother said in her evidence that she was unaware, for example, that x was now taking music lessons until hearing the father’s evidence. the payment of levies and for costs for sports and other activities may cause ongoing disputes between the parties which may in turn impact on the children, (4) the parties have been unable to maintain a flexible relationship needed to facilitate the children’s clothing and belongings between their respective homes. the issue of clothing for the children was the trigger for the incident in 2021, which resulted in a terrible physical altercation at a contact handover. the mother gave evidence that she will rely on x to bring clothing to her from the father’s home in the future, and (5) the parties do not communicate and have not done so for at least two years. the father has blocked the mother from his electronic devices. the parties have agreed to use the appclose application but as at the date of trial, the mother had not been able to use it on her mobile telephone. the paternal grandmother has been the main conduit of information between the parties for many years.   the parties have been unable to maintain a flexible relationship needed to facilitate the children’s clothing and belongings between their respective homes. the issue of clothing for the children was the trigger for the incident in 2021, which resulted in a terrible physical altercation at a contact handover. the mother gave evidence that she will rely on x to bring clothing to her from the father’s home in the future, and (5) the parties do not communicate and have not done so for at least two years. the father has blocked the mother from his electronic devices. the parties have agreed to use the appclose application but as at the date of trial, the mother had not been able to use it on her mobile telephone. the paternal grandmother has been the main conduit of information between the parties for many years.   the parties do not communicate and have not done so for at least two years. the father has blocked the mother from his electronic devices. the parties have agreed to use the appclose application but as at the date of trial, the mother had not been able to use it on her mobile telephone. the paternal grandmother has been the main conduit of information between the parties for many years.
conclusion and form of orders
associate: dated: 20 october 2023
dated: 20 october 2023
[1] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[2] whisprun pty ltd v dixon [2003] hca 48, [62]; housing commission of nsw v tatmar pastoral co pty ltd and penrith pastoral co pty ltd (1983) 3 nswlr 378, 385-386.[3] [1978] famca 84.[4] in his outline of case document, the father proposed a sharing of holidays and time each wednesday from 3:00pm to 7:00pm. under cross-examination, the father resiled from sharing of school holidays. in closing submissions, the father again promoted a sharing of school holidays but withdrew the proposal of wednesday teatime contact.[5] see the affidavit of ms domara filed 4 august 2023 at paragraph 14.[6] see the affidavit of ms domara filed 4 august 2023 at ‘annexure -1’.[7] see the written submissions filed on behalf of ms domara on 29 september 2023 at paragraph 16.[8] see the affidavit of mr melton filed 18 august 2023 at ‘annexure -15’.[9] see the family assessment report by ms j dated 7 september 2022 at paragraph 77.[10] see the affidavit of mr melton filed 3 july 2023 at paragraph 91.[11] see the family assessment report by ms j dated 7 september 2022 at paragraph 92.[12] [1979] famca 73; (1979) flc 90-713, 11.[13] see the written submissions filed on behalf of ms domara on 29 september 2023 at paragraph 72.[14] see paragraph 115 herein.[15] goode & goode (2006) flc 93–286.[16] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60b(1).[17] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cc(2). [18] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518, [26].[19] loddington & derringford (no 2) [2008] famca 925, [169].[20] [2007] famca 102.[21] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102, [36][22] [2011] famcafc 22.[23] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, [136].[24] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22, [136].[25] see the affidavit of ms domara filed 4 august 2023 at paragraph 52, and the affidavit of mr melton filed 3 july 2023 at paragraph 62.[26] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.[27] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61b.[28] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65dac.[29] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[30] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(2).[31] see the written submissions filed on behalf of ms domara on 29 september 2023 at paragraph 27.[32] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa.[33] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(2).