last updated: 30 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
avonlea & daxton [2023] fedcfamc2f 1377
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
65c who may apply for a parenting order a parenting order in relation to a child may be applied for by:   either or both of the child’s parents, or (b) the child, or (ba) a grandparent of the child, or (c) any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child.   any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child.  phasis added]
the proceedings
the final hearing
documents relied upon
and also,
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
credit and reliability of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]  ] in carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson”) at [165] to [169] kent j made the following observations concerning the making of adverse credit findings against a parent in a parenting case:  5] as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw. ... [169] moreover, the resolution of parenting proceedings in this court usually requires consideration of not only the credibility of the parties as witnesses or litigants but appreciation of the characters and personalities of them as people whose future relationship, or the context of that relationship with their child, the court has the responsibility to decide.  ] we agree with those observations. it follows from them that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to.
family law act provisions
4ab definition of family violence etc.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.
... 60b objects of part and principles underlying it   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child’s or torres strait islander child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child’s or torres strait islander child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child’s or torres strait islander child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.
note: the text of the convention is set out in australian treaty series 1991 no. 4 ([1991] ats 4). in 2011, the text of a convention in the australian treaty series was accessible through the australian treaties library on the austlii website (www.austlii.edu.au).
... 60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 60cg court to consider risk of family violence   in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:   is consistent with any family violence order, and (b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order.
... 61d parenting orders and parental responsibility   a parenting order confers parental responsibility for a child on a person, but only to the extent to which the order confers on the person duties, powers, responsibilities or authority in relation to the child. (2) a parenting order in relation to a child does not take away or diminish any aspect of the parental responsibility of any person for the child except to the extent (if any):   a parenting order in relation to a child does not take away or diminish any aspect of the parental responsibility of any person for the child except to the extent (if any):   expressly provided for in the order, or (b) necessary to give effect to the order.
... 65aa child’s best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order section 60ca provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 65d court’s power to make parenting order   in proceedings for a parenting order, the court may, subject to sections 61da (presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders) and 65dab (parenting plans) and this division, make such parenting order as it thinks proper.
note: division 4 of part xiiiaa (international protection of children) may affect the jurisdiction of a court to make a parenting order.   without limiting the generality of subsection (1) and subject to section 61da (presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders) and 65dab (parenting plans) and this division, a court may make a parenting order that discharges, varies, suspends or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order. (3) if the application for the parenting order was made as a result of the adjournment under paragraph 70neb(1)(c) of proceedings under subdivision e of division 13a of part vii: (a) the court must hear and determine the application as soon as practicable, and (b) if the court makes a parenting order on the application, the court may, if it thinks it is appropriate to do so, dismiss the proceedings under that subdivision.   if the application for the parenting order was made as a result of the adjournment under paragraph 70neb(1)(c) of proceedings under subdivision e of division 13a of part vii: (a) the court must hear and determine the application as soon as practicable, and (b) if the court makes a parenting order on the application, the court may, if it thinks it is appropriate to do so, dismiss the proceedings under that subdivision.   the court must hear and determine the application as soon as practicable, and (b) if the court makes a parenting order on the application, the court may, if it thinks it is appropriate to do so, dismiss the proceedings under that subdivision.   if the court makes a parenting order on the application, the court may, if it thinks it is appropriate to do so, dismiss the proceedings under that subdivision.
note 1: the applicant may apply to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) for the application for the parenting order or for the proceedings under subdivision e of division 13a of part vii, or both, to be transferred to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2): see section 52 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021. note 2: the applicant may apply to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) for the application for the parenting order or for the proceedings under subdivision e of division 13a of part vii, or both, to be transferred to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1): see section 149 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021. note 3: proceedings may also be transferred from the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) to the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) by order of the chief justice: see section 51 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021.
the authorities
no hierarchy of relationships
... in summary, in dealing with any parenting application by a person interested in the care, welfare or development of a child, a court will determine that application applying the relevant provisions of part vii to determine whether making (or not making) a parenting order would be in the child's best interests. ... at the conclusion of the hearing counsel for the mother submitted that greater caution was required of a court determining a parenting application involving a person other than parents and grandparents. she submitted the legislation encouraged a more cautious approach when the application included a member of the group she described as “others”. whilst we readily acknowledge the importance of the relationship between a child and his or her parents, we cannot give blanket endorsement to this submission. as is clearly demonstrated in the case law, each parenting case turns uniquely on its own facts (see for example mulvany & lane). ... ... in summary we would answer the questions posed at paragraph 52 as follows:
“(i) a two step approach is appropriate in dealing with an application for parenting orders brought by a person other than a parent, a child, or a grandparent. in other words is the applicant a person concerned with the care, welfare or development of the child (step 1) and if so, what order should be made in the best interests of the child. this consideration may lead to an order for parental responsibility, an order a child live with, spend time and or communicate with the person, or that no such order be made (step 2), (ii) s 65c does not prescribe a hierarchy of applicants. the application falls to be determined under s 60ca guided by the objects and principles in s 60b(1) and s 60b(2) and based on consideration of relevant matters under s 60cc(2) and s 60cc(3), ...
... the flexibility afforded by s 60cc(3)(m), and the ability to deal with aspects of the application under s 60cc(3)(f) involving a party who was not a parent was explained by moore j in potts and bims & ors [2007] famca 394 at paragraph 8 (see also mulvany & lane at paragraphs 76 and 77 per may & thackray jj). ...  ] if a court is satisfied that an approach to the upbringing of a child by a parent or parents in whatever way is contrary to that child’s best interests, then the court should interfere by putting in place appropriate orders. in the absence of substantive issues as to the child’s best interests, it is not the role of a court to peer over the shoulders of functional parents and second guess the decisions they make regarding the upbringing of their children. a court should only intervene in such decision-making in a cautious, careful and thoughtful manner and consider whether a better approach is to make no order at all.
role and application of section 60b
ms smallwood: your honour, you were asked to approach this matter through the perspective of the parents of [y] and [x]. it has been urged upon you that the parents should have the right to bring up their children, the parents should not... have to give up their time for [ms avonlea] to visit the children. [that] [t]hey should not be told what to do with respect to their parenting roles. all of those submissions and implications fly in the face of the purpose of the act, and if you look at section 60b of the objects... and principles underlying the parenting aspects of the act, 60b(ii)(b) says: ...
the principles underlying these objects all that except when it is or would be contrary to the children's best interests, (b) that the children have a right to spend time on a regular basis and communicate on a regular basis with both their parents-
and my emphasis[2] –
and other people significant to their care welfare and development, such as grandparents and other relatives.
... it has been said that where the enacting part of a statute is clear and unambiguous it cannot be cut down by the preamble. but this does not mean that a court cannot obtain assistance from the preamble in ascertaining the meaning of an operative provision. the particular section must be seen in its context, the statute must be read as a whole and recourse to the preamble may throw light on the statutory purpose and object. there is, however, one difficulty in seeking to restrict the generality of the operative provision by reference to a suggested restriction expressed in the preamble: it is that parliament may intend to enact a provision which extends beyond the actual problem sought to be remedied. recognition of this difficulty led viscount simonds in attorney-general v. prince ernest augustus of hanover to say “that the context of the preamble is not to influence the meaning otherwise ascribable to the enacting part unless there is a compelling reason for it”. see also pp. 460–461, 462–463. ... (footnote omitted) the wacando principles have been widely applied to the use and scope of objects clauses. it follows that objects clauses can be used as an aid to the construction of words of legislation (russo v aiello (2003) 215 clr 643). however, intention is to be gleaned from the whole act and, in addition to objects clauses, regard must be had to other sections (municipal officers assoc of australia v lancaster (1981) 37 alr 559). applying wacando, in s v australian crime commission [2005] fca 1310, (2005) 144 fcr 431 at [22] mansfield j said “[s]uch a [objects] clause cannot cut down the plain and unambiguous meaning of a provision if that meaning in its textual and contextual surroundings is clear”. and, in minister for urban affairs & planning v rosemount estates pty ltd (1996) 91 lgera 31 at page 78, cole ja said that “... whilst regard may be had to an objects clause to resolve uncertainty or unambiguity, the objects clause does not control clear statutory language, or command a particular outcome of exercise of discretionary power”. wacando was decided before b & b: family law reform act 1995 but it seems, was not brought to the attention of the full court. we think it is highly unlikely that had the full court in b & b: family law reform act 1995 been invited to consider wacando that this aspect of the case would have been decided the same way. with wacando and the cases which follow it in mind, we must respectfully disagree with b & b: family law reform act 1995 to the extent that that decision held that s 60b does more than provide context, indicate the legislative purpose of the part and operate as an aid to construction of the act. thus, we do not agree that in deciding a parenting case it was necessary to discuss the significance and weight of relevant s 60b factors or that where the outcome of s 60cc deliberations did not enable the court to determine a parenting order, s 60b may be decisive. section 60b has been significantly amended including by the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) act (2006) (cth) which inserted at the commencement of s 60b the words “the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by...” these words do no more than reinforce the relationship between s 60b and s 60cc and put beyond doubt that in relation to how a court determines what is in a particular child’s best interests, the facultative provisions are ss 60ca and 60cc and (where it applies) s 65aa. these words do not operate so as to elevate the role of s 60b beyond that envisaged by wacando. the same must be said about the court’s ability to take into account “any other fact or circumstance” that the court thinks is relevant (s 60cc(3)(m)). thus, in its current form, s 60b does no more than provide context, indicate the legislative intention or purpose of the part and otherwise operate as an aid to construction of the part and the act. it follows that we do not agree that the current s 60b can be used to change the ordinary and clear meaning of s 60cc or that where the s 60cc deliberations do not enable the court to determine whether or not a parenting order is in a child’s best interests, s 60b may be decisive.
... it follows that the primary judge could not attach greater weight to the factors referred to in s 60b than she did to the outcome of her s 60cc deliberations. as would be apparent from our summary of the primary judge’s reasons, her honour’s findings made pursuant to s 60cc as to the father’s application to change where the child lives were predominately neutral or weighed heavily against change. they certainly did not culminate in findings that supported a change in where the child lives. against this background, her honour could not permissibly use the provisions in s 60b to order the child lives with the father because, contrary to the application of s 60cc, that outcome would “...better meet the objects and principles in s 60b” [118]. in other words, an order that the child lives with the father had to be driven by the application of s 60cc and not her honour’s mistaken analysis of the role and scope of s 60b. it follows that we are in full agreement with their honours in aldridge v keaton at [49]:
... that no provision was included in the act suggesting greater or lesser weight should be given to any particular applicant. nor do we cavil with the well settled jurisprudence which establishes that in a parenting case undertaken between a parent and another person interested in the welfare of a child, the fact of parenthood requires careful consideration (aldridge v keaton). however, s 60b cannot be used to establish a hierarchy as to outcome in which parents sit at the apex. in our view, it is abundantly clear that the comparative significance for a particular child of the fact of parenthood (which may in an individual case be decisive) is to be considered and weighed along with the other matters identified in s 60cc (and if relevant s 65daa). but not on the basis that the factors referred to in s 60b can be used in favour of a parent to deliver an outcome inconsistent with the proper application of s 60cc.  emphasis in bold and italics]
... in this instance, the magistrate’s reasons reveal the appellant’s application was dismissed essentially because the respondents jointly opposed the children spending any time with the appellant. the magistrate considered the respondents were entitled to make that decision as an incident of their parental responsibility for the children and strongly implied the legitimacy of their decision need not be scrutinised, much less countermanded. deciding the dispute in that way improperly elevated the importance of the respondents’ parental authority over, and their responsibility for, the children in a way which was inconsistent with the law, as explained by the full court in maldera v orbel, valentine & lacerra, and aldridge & keaton. the appellant undoubtedly had standing under the act to bring the proceedings (ss 65c(ba) and 69c(2)(c)) and so her application ought have been considered on merit, not dismissed just because the respondents opposed it. ... it seems apparent from the evidence before the magistrate that other factors affecting the children’s best interests were pertinent and ought to have been considered. for example: the parties’ attitudes and their relative capacities to adequately provide for the children’s emotional needs in the midst of their personal conflict (ss 60cc(3)(f) and 60cc(3)(i)), the children are each happy, healthy and making sound academic progress in the respondents’ care despite the appellant’s limited involvement in their lives (s 60cc(3)(m)), and whether the appellant’s forced re-introduction to and continuing engagement with the children is liable to have any deleterious emotional affect upon them (s 60cc(3)(d)).  tation omitted]
the parties’ cases and evidence
ms avonlea’s case and evidence
... the children have a strong and loving relationship with the applicant. this was conceded by the respondents to the family report writer, who notes “it is also evident that [x] and [y] have a positive connection with [ms avonlea]”.4 the applicant provided not insignificant care to the children from a very young age, often in the absence of the respondents. ... section 60(f)(ii) – the capacity of any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs. the applicant has previously provided significant care to the children without issue. the supervised report supports the applicant’s assertion that she is attuned to the children’s needs when in her care. by way of example, the supervised report notes that the applicant “was observed to be focused on the children for the duration of the contact and responsive to their needs.” [footnote omitted] ... • as noted above, the applicant strongly denies any allegations of family violence, or that she poses any risk of harm to the children. • these allegations are not supported by the dhhs report and supervised report and are not addressed in the family report of [dr e]. section 60cc(3)(m) – any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant. the applicant holds concerns that the respondents will not facilitate any relationship between the children and her in circumstances where no orders for time are made. the respondents have consistently demonstrated a refusal to facilitate the children spending time with the applicant, including supervised time. the applicant has repeatedly expressed her discomfort at the first respondent supervising her time with the children and has sought for alternative arrangements to be put in place. the respondents have consistently refused that any time take place without the first respondent being present. no alternatives have been proposed by the respondents. the respondents have additionally sought to minimise the applicant’s role in the children’s care, by referring to her as a ‘babysitter’ and a ‘half-sibling’. the respondents do not acknowledge or demonstrate any appreciation for the significance of the applicant’s role in the children’s lives, or the value of their relationship with her. the applicant contends that the recommendations in the family report have been made on the assumption that the respondents will facilitate time with the children. the applicant asserts that this assumption is incorrect, as demonstrated by the consistent unwillingness of the respondents to co-operate with the applicant’s requests for time. the orders sought by the applicant require the children to spend minimal time in her care. no overnight or time during the school week is sought. the orders proposed will have no impact upon the children’s living arrangements, or their relationships with the respondents, and can flexibly be arranged around the children’s other co-curricular obligations.
ms smallwood: so the objects of the act is not a cascading, if you like, formula for children’s welfare that you start with the top, with the parents and then gradually it goes down and, indeed, the point was, in my submission, most unfortunately, made to you, she’s only a half-sister. that submission says it all, really, in terms of, certainly, mr burns’ client, if he was instructed to put that to you, which i’m sure he was. she is not considered to be important in these children’s lives from the viewpoint of their parents and she will not be accommodated if they can possibly avoid it. when i asked [mr daxton] in the witness box who the members of his family were, and i named them all, apart from [ms avonlea], he was keen to tell the court, “and [ms avonlea]”. well, [ms avonlea] is certainly not considered in all of the submissions you’ve heard with respect to the impact on the family unit. that never, ever includes [ms avonlea]. she has been completely ostracised from that family unit, and let’s have a look at why. we’ve heard, basically, what i would describe as an absolute character assassination from two members of counsel, who, of course, are doing their job, but it was an absolute character assassination with my client sitting behind. it would take an enormous amount of courage to sit there and listen to that, but my client did so. she’s extremely upset, of course. who wouldn’t be, listening to themselves described as, let’s face it, a monster. ... ms smallwood: a monster was the level of it, and what particularly monstrous thing she did, the most appalling thing in the world. she doesn’t take drugs, she doesn’t physically hurt anybody, she – what she did was engage in a dialogue with her, as she generously calls [b], her brother, who, in fact, of course, anyone else in the room would say was not related to her in any way because there’s no genetic connection, but she calls him her brother, just like she calls [y] and [x] her siblings. her brother and sister. she’s alone in that regard, and i submit that tells a story in itself, but what she did was engage with [b] over a period of time with texts in which she was critical of his parents. she’s critical, particularly, of her own father, who is not [b]’s father. he is his stepfather, and she was critical of him, because she saw characteristics of his disciplinary activity with [b] as being reflective of her own experience, and we know about the [m] signs. we know that [mr daxton] engages in very direct, some would say psychologically abusive, forms of bringing a 14-year-old to heel. to put – he said he hadn’t counted them, but to put signs around the house, it was bizarre and most unpleasant for [b] and reflective of what was going on in that house. nothing to do with my client. where my client comes into play is that [b] talked about it with her and she told him what she thought and that, apparently, makes her into a monster. she told him that she had had unpleasant experiences with her father, and there’s nothing to suggest her evidence about that is not true. [dr e], of course, her take on everybody in the family was my client has got personality problems and, therefore, everybody else has to be protected from her. now, if the family was still together and [ms avonlea] was living in the house, what would the problem be. the problem would be simply conversations occurring between teenagers and older people in the house. others could have their input, and that’s family life. certainly not akin to the character assassination of that monster marauding, waiting. planning, according to mr burns. planning the attack. it’s highly insulting and, in my submission, is completely fanciful. she was simply a sibling, as she perceived it – she perceives it, and as [b] willingly perceived it. we know that they were close. and she shared – she says no overshared, of course, but, sure, the content of the texts was highly critical of particularly her father, but that doesn’t make her a bad person and it does not make her a risk and it does not make her somebody who should be banned from all contact with their siblings in case she somehow besmirched the happy family in which they live, which we know is not a happy family, and we know, i suggest, that that’s not just because of [ms avonlea], but they would have you believe that. [ms avonlea] has been targeted as the cause for all problems, keeping in mind, your honour, that the problems that this family has that were constantly mentioned in the proceeding and in the addresses have never been articulated. i don’t know what the problems were and i’ve sat through the trial. it’s all just smoke and mirrors, words, handy phrases, but never do you get down to what particular problem did [ms avonlea] cause, because, in fact, her conversations with [b] – and i’m not suggesting that they were pleasant to read. i mean, clearly, there is lots of negativity in there. i don’t – can’t and don’t step away from that, but i do put this submission on behalf of my client that they do not create the profile of a monster who is waiting to destroy a family and circles until she can do so, which is pretty much what my two friends said. the sibling relationships are, of course, very important. they are lifelong. some might even say more important than parental relationships, because they last for longer, because everybody stays alive longer, but they are incredibly important. we see them recognised all the time in this court and we see them as recognised within the family law act. we know from the evidence, apparently, everybody was in agreement when they told [dr e] that the children had a loving, caring and positive relationship with [ms avonlea]. sounds like the usual sibling relationship has been in place. however, discord arises in the family, discord over the disciplinary actions adopted by [mr daxton] towards [b]. basically, that’s pretty much how it started, with the signs. the [m] signs. because, of course, they, to [ms avonlea], on her view of the world, signalled what was going to happen to [b] in terms of his relationship with her father would be very reflective of her similar experience. the discord within the family has caused my – a falling out between [ms gillies] and my client. most unfortunate, because, of course, [ms gillies] and my client were close, and it’s not a matter of – as has been put to you – [ms gillies] took [ms avonlea] into her family. once again, that says a mouthful. [ms avonlea] was part of that family. nobody took her into it. she was part of it and she has been excised from it and, in my submission, to the detriment of [x] and [y]. ... ms smallwood: ... exclude herself? she continually – and the affidavits show, she continually texted her father asking for some kind of counselling to take place for reconciliation. they could not agree on the form that should take. that doesn’t mean she excluded herself from the family. that means that they were at loggerheads about how that could occur, but it certainly does not mean she excluded herself from the family, keeping in mind this whole case is about [ms gillies] and [mr daxton] being in control of the family, that they should be unassailed, that it is a family unit and my client is circling, trying to break it up. that’s how the case is put. so to suggest that she has excised herself from the family, when, basically, the wagons are circling with respect to the family as far as [mr daxton] and [ms gillies] are concerned is, in my submission, completely unsustainable. she has a conversation with [ms gillies] over the phone, in which she says, well, when [ms gillies] is telling her about problems with respect to interplay in the family and disciplinary actions and so forth, [ms avonlea] says, “it sounds like dad’s doing the same thing”. that was untenable. absolutely could not be tolerated. things went on for a while, but, as [ms gillies] said, she was strained. his honour: well, is it dad’s doing the same thing, was that untenable, or was [ms gillies]’ position of, “we’re going to have to disagree about that”, untenable to [ms avonlea]? that’s - - - ms smallwood: well - - - his honour: that’s one of the factual disputes, isn’t it? ms smallwood: it is, and you would have to believe – that’s a credit issue to a large degree, and [ms gillies] gave evidence that after that phone call there was a degree of coolness, separation, withdrawal – i can’t remember the exact words she used, your honour, but that my client was less engaged with her, i think, would be a fair way of recalling what she said. i know that’s not her words. his honour: i’m not sure it’s – i will look carefully at whether it’s a credit issue or whether it’s an issue of the parties’ perceptions. they disagreed, but it doesn’t mean that one or both are lying or exaggerating. ms smallwood: it doesn’t, but my client’s evidence is that [ms gillies] screamed at her. his honour: yes. and [ms gillies] says she screamed at her on - - - ms smallwood: yes. his honour: - - - [mid-2023] and [ms avonlea] says [ms gillies] screamed at her and neither parties affidavit of evidence-in-chief acknowledges the other one screaming. ... ms smallwood: and for the purpose of your decision, why does it even matter. why does it matter. why does all of this matter. what matters to your honour only and solely is the welfare of [x] and [y]. you’re told, “if my client gets time with the children, that will be upsetting for [mr daxton] and [ms gillies] and it will affect the family unit”, once again, excluding my client, although, of course, she has excluded herself according to them. it will upset the family unit. that’s not a matter that your honour is asked to determine as to whether it upsets somebody else or not. your honour is fair and square required to focus upon the welfare of [x] and [y]. we know [ms gillies] is patently emotionally dysregulated, and that was – that phrase was accepted by [dr e] as her presentation when she went to see her. whilst you’re told constantly that, well, it’s [ms avonlea]’s fault that that happened. what [ms avonlea] did. what exactly did [ms avonlea] do, as we get back to it, the [b] incident was all [ms avonlea] did. okay. i accept that it is extreme, in texting between the two siblings, but it’s not as if [ms avonlea] was doing anything else. she was, in her evidence, supporting [b] when he was having difficulties at home. now, he was having difficulties at home. that wasn’t [ms avonlea]’s fault. he was having difficulties at home, but that has now all been piled on [ms avonlea]. he was only having difficulties at home because she was supporting him. she was telling him, “don’t listen to your father”, effectively, because, “i know what he’s like”. her evidence is that [b] was saying he felt like killing himself. she did the right thing. she encouraged him to go to the school counsellor, which he did, for which she is criticised and she went – he went to the school counsellor, she didn’t, and the school counsellor and he worked out a safety plan, and guess who the safety plan was directed at protecting him from? [mr daxton]. so it’s not what it seems on the surface, perfect family, terrific, wolf circling trying to destroy, which is what my friends would have you believe. there was trouble in paradise within that family, that’s for sure. we know that from the [m] signs and we know that from what [b] told the counsellor at the school and the safety plan which was devised, which had my client as a contact for a safe place, as well as others, and, of course, pointedly, not his parents. my client was chipped on that, 45 “don’t you think they should have been the persons on the safety plan?” in my submission, absolutely absurd. why would they be? they were the people that [b] was describing as feeling unsafe with. so the good part of the story is, if we can believe, that [b] now is doing well. good. but we now see, also, when he goes to [dr e] that he’s looking forward to making contact with [ms avonlea] again. he wants to see her again, because he has a good relationship with her and wants to see her again. we don’t know how that will go, in terms of whether he will be permitted or not, but that’s not important for your honour to consider. what your honour needs to consider is his comments to [dr e]. he says now, “things are going better that she’s out of my ear and so forth and so on”. okay. once again, can’t step away from those comments. that’s what he said, but it is not of a level of evil and psychotic behaviour which is being urged upon you, of which there is not one smidgeon of evidence, apart from the fact that my client attends a psychologist. well, she can take a number on that. every single person in this case, apart from [x] and [y], attends a psychologist. ‘ his honour: witnesses. witnesses and parties. ms smallwood: yes. okay. it took me a while to get that, your honour, but i get it. yes. witnesses and parties. yes. so, in my submission, there’s this swirling implication all this terrible stuff has been caused by [ms avonlea]. what, exactly? they didn’t even know about her exchanges with [b] until 2022 and there had been trouble going on for a year prior to that, but that’s shafted on [ms avonlea] now. “if she hadn’t been doing that, [b] would have been more easily able to control [b]”. [b], who is the subject of litigation in this court and has been, according to his mother in the witness box, for many, many, many years, and we now know from [ms gillies] evidence in the witness box, as she said, 15 years of family abuse she has suffered. well, [b] is 15. i assume that means from the day he was born. there have been orders made in this court. yes. now, that’s of interest. orders were made in this court for [b] to see his father, and [ms gillies]’ complaint was they constituted emotional abuse, he was psychologically and emotionally abused, and, “i have put up with this for 15 years”, and, “i’m basically at the end of my tether because of it”. well, the court, clearly, formed the view that [b] should see his father and made orders to that effect, but [ms gillies] certainly didn’t accept them, and she has been engaged, we gather – we don’t know the exact details, but from what she said yesterday she has been engaged in a constant fight to try and stop the application of those orders, and that is why she does not want orders to be made in this case, because, as she said, she would have to comply with them. yes. that’s the purpose of orders. orders are made because people – people come to this court because they can’t figure it out themselves. there’s absolutely no point, with the greatest respect to [dr e], saying, “well, don’t make any orders, because they should be able to figure it out themselves. there are other things they can do. they can go to therapy”. this court exists because people can’t sort things out for themselves and orders are made in order to ensure children receive the best possible chance at life with welfare, happiness and the like. and that’s what my client is here to endeavour to establish that [x] and [y] have the opportunity to have a fruitful, loving, caring and positive relationship with her for the rest of their lives, and both parents are here saying, “no, don’t make an order. it’s her fault. she could come to the house if she wants to whilst her father is there”. they know that there is absolute – animosity is probably the wrong word to use, because it’s a bit too active, but absolute antithesis of seeing the world in a harmonious fashion between [ms avonlea] and her father and it is not a new thing. it has been going on since 2008 when [ms avonlea] first saw a psychologist. her father went along, but her father was quick to point out to your honour it was nothing to do with him. it was because she was having trouble adjusting to his separation from her mother. when [mr daxton] gave evidence there was nothing, never once did he ever acknowledge that anything about himself could have contributed in any way to his poor relationship with his own daughter. it was all, “[ms avonlea] is – has mental health issues. so wipe her off, in case she infects the other children”, but, strangely enough, everybody in that household is struggling with mental health issues. that is the one constant in that particular family structure, and that is not because of my client. also [ms gillies] conflated, i would suggest to your honour, unfortunately, her experience with [b]’s father, [mr d], with her experience in these proceedings. they are not the same thing. she has, as she said, 15 years of family violence, 15 years of coercive control, of psychological and emotional abuse. they have been visited – that concept has been visited upon [ms avonlea] and she sees [ms avonlea] through the prism of her, what she describes as, lived experience, and that is not [ms avonlea]’s fault. she admitted she was hypervigilant, but only because – when it came to the safety of the children, i would submit, she has a distorted view of the danger [ms avonlea] places, and that distorted view is as a result of her own psychological difficulties, for which – were patently evident, i would submit, in the court. she couldn’t even bear to sit in the room whilst my client gave evidence and in the witness box her demeanour, her expressions, the manner in which she approached the giving of evidence, she is a person who is emotionally dysregulated and appears to require assistance. she herself says she can’t work. her psychiatric state – psychological state, i should say, is such to prevent her from working. she clearly needs assistance, and that is not my client’ fault, but that is the reason why she sees my client, in my submission, with such fear or resentment or as some sort of threat. there is no evidence, i would suggest to you, as to how, if your honour makes the orders, they would deleteriously affect [ms gillies]’ parenting or [mr daxton]’s parenting of [x] and [y]. once again, that’s a phrase that has just been thrown around liberally as a concept. that’s exactly what it is. it’s a concept. there is not a shred of evidence to that effect. not one. not one shred. if that was the case, if – let’s just stand and pretend for a moment that this is a conflict between parents, which we see all the time in these courts, it would be unthinkable that a parent came along and, on the basis that, “no, there can’t be any contact because i will be psychologically devastated if there is”, without producing expert evidence to that effect. of course they would produce expert evidence or they wouldn’t win, but here there’s a kind of claytons sense of what’s to be determined, and i will be urging your honour to not be lulled into a sense of, if you like, less rigorous an application of the principles. there is no evidence whatsoever of any potential impact to [ms gillies]’ psychological functioning or of [mr daxton] in terms of it affecting their parenting. 5 only their say so, and if they can say that, then they can do something about it and get treatment to address that particular vulnerability which they have, not my client. we have also the generalised statements coming thick and fast about the effect on the family, the effect on the family. last – in the future, in the past. what, exactly? there has been turmoil in the courtroom, that’s for sure, but we have no evidence of what actually was deleterious in the family at all. it’s just a – what it boils down to is my client exchanged those text dialogues with [b] over a long period of time. they were discovered a year after they had taken place and everything was retrospectively visited upon them. “that’s why we’ve been having trouble with [b], but we don’t know what the trouble was, because we never descended to those details. that’s why things haven’t been great”, but no details were descended to. from [b]’s point of view, he gets [m] signs put up because he forgot to put a glass of milk in the dishwasher. that’s what he says. and we know [mr daxton] says he didn’t do anything wrong, so to visit the turmoil on my client retrospectively because she has engaged in conversation with [b] about how he was feeling and how desperate he was feeling and the fact that she directed him to health, rather than ignored him, she is now described as a monster, but, once again, without any real details as to exactly what this terrible, terrible result was, because we come here today with the evidence being everything is fine in the family and that’s what we should be preserving. we shouldn’t let [ms avonlea] wreck that. so what, exactly, was the damage? of course, [mr daxton] didn’t like reading what he read and, of course, [ms gillies] found it upsetting, as well. yes. of course. my client realises now that wasn’t such a great thing to do and that she – she says she wouldn’t do it again and, i would submit, there’s nothing for your honour to suggest that she’s lying about that, and i would say the demeanour of my witness in the – my client in the witness box, your honour, she is a young woman of intelligence. she is a young woman of – with goals. she is a young woman engaged in both work to support herself and study to further her future interests. she is not the person which we heard spoken of earlier at all. [dr e] does these tests in – well, she has got this, “this is what her personality is like”. okay. well, that’s not a crime. everybody has got a different personality. it’s not as if her personality shows she’s a serial killer or she’s likely to suicide or she’s likely to harm others. no. 40 she’s just likely to be a bit bumpy to get along with, and that is not a reason to exclude [y] and [x]. bumpy to get along with, if you don’t agree with her or if she has a different view. well, in my submission, it’s a radical step to take to ban somebody because their 45 personality might be a bit scratchy from having a relationship with their siblings, because the scratchiness becomes irritating, particularly for [mr daxton], her own father. life is easier for him without her and that’s what will happen if and when your honour doesn’t make orders in this regard, as she seeks. ... ms smallwood: the extremity of the reaction to my client’s engagement with [b], in my submission, that in itself is a problem and it’s not [ms avonlea]’s problem. it’s the problem of those that have engaged in the extremity of that action. when asked the events leading up to [ms gillies] blocking my client on her phone, we had heard about how there was consistent phone calls and she had to block – when it came down to it, one hour on one occasion and she blocked her and that has remained so. so everybody in this particular scenario, in my submission, overreacts, and that is something that they all need to look at if they want to get along harmoniously, but that’s a matter for them. all your honour has to concentrate on is the welfare of [x] and [y] and the loss and, i would say, the certainly loss if no orders are made of their relationship with their sibling, [ms avonlea], because it is a fantasy, in my submission, to suggest that time will be facilitated in the future unless it is required by order, and we have [ms gillies]’ evidence on that herself, “it’s an order. i have to comply with it”. that’s right, because otherwise there won’t be time. and for [mr daxton] to say – [dr e] considered it to be genuine, but i would submit it is not a genuine wish for harmony for him to say, “i want to be there”. that’s simply as a watchdog. it is not an harmonious situation. it is not a natural situation for little children to spend with their siblings. it’s a matter of trust. i get that. i completely understand that the case is that they don’t trust [ms avonlea] any more, but, really, there has been, as i say, that one dialogue with [b] behind their back. that’s why they don’t trust her, because they didn’t know it was going on. ... ms smallwood: and it’s not as if there’s a happy little family, brady bunch all living together, melded family and there is this threat. it is not that simple at all and my client has been, if you like, profiled as the cause of all problems. nothing could be further from the truth. she is part of a series of problems in that family and she has been, like everybody else in that family, presumably, to a degree, a victim of problems within the family, but, in my submission, it is completely incorrect to profile her as the problem personified when she’s not. she did something that she now regrets. now we’re here, of course, she regrets it, but which – engaging in dialogue with [b], which was denigratory of her father and [ms gillies], insofar as their parenting went. as she said, “i didn’t denigrate them. i denigrated their parenting”, but that might be semantics, but nevertheless it is true and, in that situation, this has erupted to a degree where she is now portrayed as a threat. a psychological danger to all within the family structure apart from herself. so she must be excised and no orders made and i would submit to your honour that that deprives [x] and [y] of their right pursuant to the purpose of the act, their right to have a relationship with their sibling which couldn’t – can be of a lifelong quality and, if you look at my client in the witness box, that relationship, in my submission, would be extremely fruitful and extremely beneficial to them. that’s all i have to say, your honour.
... incident of [mid-]2023 as far as i am aware, the conflict between dad, [ms gillies] and myself arose following the below incident. prior to this event, the children would regularly spend time in my unsupervised care, and we enjoyed a normal relationship. [in mid-]2022, i received a message from [b] that said words to the effect of "[mr daxton]’s gone psycho". i was concerned by this message and wanted to check that [b] was ok, as i knew that he had a difficult relationship with dad. when i spoke to [b], he informed me that a number of paper signs with the word '[m]’ has been placed around dad and [ms gillies]’ home. as i had already organised to care for the children [in mid-]2022, i decided that it would be more appropriate to speak to dad and [ms gillies] about this issue on that date, so that we could discuss the matter in person. when i arrived at dad and [ms gillies]’ home [in mid-]2022, they were both present. they left the home approximately 10 minutes after i arrived. ... after arriving, i discovered approximately 25 paper signs around the house. these all read '[m]'. a further 15 or so signs had been printed but were left in a pile on the floor. when i spoke to [b] about the signs, he told me that they were put up around the house after he forgot to put a glass in the dishwasher. [b] told me that he found the signs distressing. when he discussed the signs with me, i observed [b] to be very upset about them. ... dad and [ms gillies] returned home at approximately 11 :30 pm. i understand that they had been at a dinner, and i observed them to be slightly intoxicated by the time that they returned. i asked dad and [ms gillies] about the signs, and attempted to raise my concerns given my conversation with [b]. in response, [ms gillies] became very defensive, and started yelling at me words to the effect of "you don't have to like it, this is our choice" and "this is how we've chosen to parent". i attempted to explain how [b] had expressed to me that he found the signs intimidating, and that it was hurtful for him to see them when he woke up. in response, [ms gillies] continued to yell at me, and repeated words to the effect of ''you have to accept and respect" the decision. i recall saying words to the effect of "it's disgusting that you're letting my dad treat [b] this way". although i did not agree with the comments made by [ms gillies], i acknowledge that my response was not appropriate in the circumstances. after this, [ms gillies] refused to participate in any further discussions with me. after [ms gillies] left the room, i had a brief conversation with dad, where he indicated that i had only heard [b]’s position and had not considered other factors. i reiterated that i thought the signs were hurtful, and would cause more harm to [b] than good. we didn't agree on this point, and so i decided to leave. i left the house ... without any further incident at approximately 12:30 pm. after this event, dad has insisted that he supervise any interactions i have with the children, notwithstanding the extensive amount of time i previously spent caring for the children alone. when i first attempted to bring up this conversation with dad, he sent me a message stating "i forgive you". i recall finding this response very disappointing, as it suggested to me that dad did not accept any responsibility for his role in the conflict. following this date, dad and [ms gillies] have limited my ability to spend any unsupervised time with the children. i did not spend any face-to-face time with the children until supervised time was ordered following the interim defended hearing in june 2023. ... ... prior to the [m] sign incident prior to the incident above, i had a very close relationship with the children. i have been intimately involved in their care and development since they were born and have consequently developed strong bonds with them. ... ... i would often care for the children when dad and [ms gillies] were not available. dad and [ms gillies] frequently encouraged me to spend time with the children without their supervision. ... i recall dad and [ms gillies] often expressing their appreciation for the time that i spent with the children, acknowledging the closeness of the relationship that we shared. ... ... following the interim defended hearing in this matter, i have noticed that the children have become more ambivalent to engage in facetime calls with me. ... often, these calls were only ended when dad told the children that they had to have a bath or get ready for bed. i do not recall the children otherwise being happy or willing to end the facetime calls with me. following the interim defended hearing, however, this has noticeably changed. i have observed that during our facetime calls, the children have become more reluctant to talk openly with me. they have also appeared distracted and have indicated that they want to end the calls early. ... ... i am concerned that the children are being encouraged not to participate in these facetime sessions. as this is one of the only ways that i can communicate with the children, i am worried that our relationship will be compromised as a result of this influence. ... prior to these proceedings, i regularly communicated with [b]. i consider [b] to be my brother. we were very close and would often discuss normal sibling matters in person or via electronic platforms. [b] would usually message me about matters that he was uncomfortable speaking about with [ms gillies] and dad. [b] confided in me, and we shared a significant level of trust between us.[4] ... [b] would often send messages that were personal, and that he did not want me to share. i respected his request in this regard and did not share these messages with dad and [ms gillies]. however, if [b] sent messages that concerned me, i would encourage him to express his feelings, or to reach out to his counsellor. i was aware that [b] had a difficult relationship with his father, and wanted to ensure he felt protected when talking about these kind of issues. ... later on the same date [late] 2022], i received a message from [b] which stated:
"im sorry i need a break from you right now, i won't be responding for a while. it's not that i don't love you. but i need a break [sic]."
... this incident made me acutely aware that [b] was being involved by dad and [ms gillies] in our dispute. in order to protect [b] from being further involved, i have respected his request that i no longer contact him. subsequent to the message sent by [b] above, i have not had any further contact with him, save for a few minor messages, for instance, wishing him happy birthday. my relationship with dad has been strained for a number of years. following my parents' separation, my dad and i have experienced various levels of conflict. in my experience, dad can be a highly combative and controlling individual, who struggles to deal with people who do not accept or share his opinions. i often find him to be a very intimidating person, especially when he is angry or frustrated. in order to address this conflict, i have attended upon a psychologist for a number of years for ongoing support. dad is aware of this, however, has not been supportive of my attendance, particularly if my appointments conflicted with other plans that he had made. i recall that on one occasion in 2018, dad sought for me to cancel my psychologist appointments so that he could go to the beach. notwithstanding the above, i have found that following the children's birth, dad and i have been able to maintain a co-operative relationship. we would often communicate via text message, with dad sharing anecdotes about the children, and checking in with regards to my day to day life. by way of example, i celebrated with dad and [ms gillies] as a family at their wedding in 2022. we would occasionally holiday together, and share other events as a family unit including the children and [b]. as i had a strong relationship with the children, and were actively involved in their life, dad and i were able to make arrangements and spend time together without issue. i am acutely aware of the harm that disputing parents can have on a child, having experienced it in the way my dad's relationship with my mum deteriorated following their separation. given this awareness, i have always attempted to take the 'high road' and remain civil with dad to protect the children. by contrast, prior to these proceedings, i had a positive relationship with [ms gillies]. i considered us to be close friends , and valued her opinion in the same way i would an older sister. i felt comfortable confiding in [ms gillies] with regards to my worries, and appreciated the advice that she would give me. in particular, we would often exchange messages about the children, which i enjoyed. ... ... although it will take time, i acknowledge there is potential that the relationship between me, dad and [ms gillies] can be repaired. i have previously suggested that we attend family therapy and am open to taking this step sometime in the future for the benefit of the children. ... in circumstances where dad and [ms gillies] have made it increasingly difficult to spend time with the children, i do not accept the recommendations of the family report. in my experience, the conduct of dad and [ms gillies] when attempting to organise my time with the children has indicated that they do not place any value on the children's relationship with me and will not facilitate any time between me and the children in the absence of court orders. ... given the history of our matter, and dad and [ms gillies]’ persistent refusal to recognise the value of my relationship with the children, i am deeply concerned that if no orders are made my relationship with the children will be irretrievably damaged. i am their older sister, and have a relationship that is different to that of their parents. i have been intimately involved in their care since they were very young and have shared many special memories with them during that time. ...
the supervisor’s evidence
although initially a little bit uncertain, the children were observed to quickly engage in mutual play with one another and [ms avonlea], such as using the bouncing pit and climbing wall area... wow the majority of the contact was spent in play, the writer also observed quieter portions wherein [ms avonlea] and the children were observed to be able to converse [with] one another and [about] normal topics (such as what the children had been doing at school). activities in general (after the initial meeting of [ms avonlea] and the children) were noted as seeming overall to be mutually engaged and generally positive in nature, with all seeming to enjoy their time. ... despite some initial uncertainty/unease (mainly from the children), both were observed to quickly settle and relax, presenting as enjoying their time while on the contact.   avonlea] was noted being able to parent/care for the children without clear issue. examples/exceptions below:- [ms avonlea] was noted as highly organised for the contact. this included varied food for the children such as fruit bowls and berries. some junk food was present, however [ms avonlea] was observed to only allow the children to have a limited amount (but being able to pick from a large selection – the children chose [muesli bars]). [ms avonlea] also brought filled water bottles for the children. the children also brought their own water bottles. [ms avonlea] was noted as generally able to direct/provide direction for the children without clear issue, such as keeping them on time for the [tour], and directing them where they needed to be/go. [ms avonlea] was also observed to remind the children to eat/drink if they needed to. [y] was noted as quite receptive to these instructions and to listen well. [x] generally listened, although he was noted as having trouble concentrating at times. [x] was also observed to seem to need strong/consistent stimulation, and if this did not occur (such as when waiting in line for the [tour] to begin), he could at times begin to annoy [y] or self-stimulate (such as tyring to climb a statue). when this occurred, [ms avonlea] seemed calm, correcting the behaviour such as saying “don’t hit please” (when he began to slap [y]’s map). [x] usually did as asked, although needing a few prompts at times. [ms avonlea] was noted as seeming positive towards the children for the duration of the contact and generally pleased to be with them. [ms avonlea] for instance was observed to call the children pet names such as “honey” in what seemed an affectionate manner. [ms avonlea] was observed to be strongly focused on the children for the duration of the contact and to keep a good eye on them, generally aware of where they were at al times. [ms avonlea] did not need prompt to behave in this manner. [ms avonlea] was noted as quickly noticing that [x] had a scratch on his neck, asking him how he got this. [x] said he received this playing with [y] (or words to this effect). ... both children were initially a little bit quiet, but otherwise settled. both children quickly settled during the first few minutes, being observed to chat with [ms avonlea] while in line to get their tickets. while in line, both children were observed to lean on [ms avonlea] without prompt. ... [ms avonlea] and the children were observed to be focused on one another and not the writer. both children were observed to direct their queries and engagement(s) towards [ms avonlea] (barring some infrequent interaction with the writer). both children and [ms avonlea] behaved in this manner with no need for prompt. ... [ms avonlea] was observed to be physically affectionate with/towards both children, such as rubbing each on the neck and head. [ms avonlea] and the children presented as at ease with this contact. [x] was observed to be desiring of physical contact with [ms avonlea], such as sitting on her lap without prompt at the café.
... although both children seemed a bit quiet during the initial minutes of the contact (mainly [x]), they were both observed to relax quite quickly and become talkative/animated once settled. both children were observed to seek out assistance and engagement with/from [ms avonlea], and not the writer. for instance, [y] calling out to [ms avonlea], saying “[ms avonlea], come over here!” as an invitation for [ms avonlea] to climb with her (which [ms avonlea] did). both children showed no clear issue with either close physical proximity or physical contact with/from [ms avonlea]. for instance, [x] was observed to ask for [ms avonlea] to push him while on the swing. he was also observed to sit on [ms avonlea]’s lap without prompt when taking a break from playing. another example is both children leaning on [ms avonlea] while they looked at a video on her phone together.
... the writer has noted/seen no issues of significant concern relating to [ms avonlea], whether safety or otherwise.
mr daxton’s case and evidence
mr combes: thank you, your honour. as your honour has pointed out, there’s a – it’s a difficult decision, in that the children are going to lose, or the family unit are going to lose. what i would say in relation to the past is the behaviour of [ms avonlea] can only be put as appalling in relation to her treatment of [b], but it goes further than just the treatment of [b], because it had an effect on, clearly, the whole family. it’s almost as if she set out to isolate the family from family and friends. ... ... mr combes: ... the difficulty with this case, i – as far as that behaviour is concerned, your honour, is that there is not one jot of evidence that anything has changed other than [ms avonlea] saying she regrets or she wouldn’t do it again. there is nothing to suggest that she has actually had a change of mind and, certainly, it was open to her on the basis that she has been seeing a psychologist since, i think, 2018 to get some evidence from him or her as to her current psychological state. she wasn’t asked about whether or not she showed the family report to her psychologist, so we don’t have any evidence of that, but one would assume that she certainly should have. ... mr combes: ... the problem as far as her position is concerned is that her evidence was that she only did it to help [b], that she had no intention of doing harm, and that in itself creates a problem, because, clearly, she has no insight whatsoever into what she was doing, and that raises, then, the problem that if she has time with the younger children there is nothing to suggest that if there are problems in the home, she wouldn’t behave in exactly the same way. [dr e] mentioned that she didn’t have any major mental symptoms, but she goes into some detail as to her psychological problems and, as i indicated to your honour, there is nothing to suggest that they have been in any way ameliorated, and it was open to her [[ms avonlea]] to do that. ... his honour: can i just say, mr combes, i’m not going to infer that because someone sees a psychologist they have problems, in inverted commas. mr combes: no, of course, but i think the – [dr e] indicated that there were psychological problems. the one and only question, your honour, is whether or not there’s more harm in the children not seeing their sister or there’s more harm in not seeing her – or having time with their sister and the effects that that will have on her family and that is the sole question that, really, has to be answered, and your honour has an abundance of evidence that the effect of the 12, 18 months has had a massive effect on this family. and not just on [b] or not just on [ms gillies] or my client, but on the younger children, too, and it has slowed down, because the parents were having difficulties as a result of her actions, the children were having difficulties. they were showing signs of some distress, and the difficulty, as far as [ms avonlea] is concerned, your honour, is that other than her word that she has changed or that she wouldn’t do it again, there is nothing to suggest that it can’t happen again. and, in fact, if one reads the report of the – [dr e], it’s likely to happen again. the other very salient matter, your honour, is the fact that if there were orders, they in themselves are going to have an effect on the family, and your honour has seen the distress of both the husband and the wife in these proceedings and you’ve heard about the distress that they’ve suffered over the last 12 or 18 months and, once again, that’s going to affect the welfare of these children. so it’s my submission, your honour, that the better of two evils is for there to be no time spent between the children and [ms avonlea]. it’s, obviously, agreed that there’s no supervised time, and i would submit that any facetime is also inappropriate. your honour, there is just too much of a danger that [ms avonlea] will at some point adopt the same methods with the two younger children. we heard that [b] was a vulnerable child and she used that to the full extent, exemplified by the questions your honour put to the – [dr e] in relation to her anger at him for not contacting her. she said many times that she has learnt her lesson. there’s no evidence that she has. so, your honour, the only course i would submit that’s appropriate to safeguard this whole family is for her to not have any contact whatsoever with the children. your honour has heard from my client and - - - his honour: are you saying if the application is dismissed, the consequence is there won’t be any time? mr combes: no, because it’s a matter for – and i’m just coming to that. it’s a matter for [ms avonlea]. my client has accepted all along that he would attend therapeutic counselling without condition. the only reason that i would submit that it hasn’t taken place is that [ms avonlea] imposes conditions on it that are just unrealistic. it seems that, in fact, she’s not saying, “i want therapeutic counselling to fix the relationship between myself and my father”. she’s saying, “i want some sort of mediation”, and in relation to that matter, your honour, i would say that it’s not appropriate to order therapeutic counselling. these people have got to make their minds up to attend and attempt to remedy their relationship. i was going to go through the ills and misdemeanours of [ms avonlea] and – but your honour is well aware of them. i can only say that my client and his wife have gone through hell over the last 18 months as a result of [ms avonlea]. your honour heard evidence from [ms gillies] yesterday that she overcame, with the support of her husband, the trials that she went through with [b]’s father, and it was the problems that were caused by [ms avonlea] that has brought her to the edge of sanity, and your honour would be well aware that the emotional stability of the parents is going to affect the safety and welfare of the children, and there is overwhelming evidence that if any orders are made, that stability will be put at risk.
ms gillies’s case and evidence
... i currently do not feel safe or comfortable talking to or being present in close proximity to [ms avonlea]. i have considered as to whether i would be able to supervise any time between [ms avonlea] and the children, however, i have anxiety just thinking about it, let alone being able to sustain being in [ms avonlea]’s presence for a period of time. it is not suitable for my mental health and wellbeing to be in the proximity of [ms avonlea]. i don’t know that i will ever be able to trust [ms avonlea] again after everything she has done. ... [mr daxton] and i have exercised our parental judgment and acted protectively of our children by not allowing [ms avonlea] to have unsupervised time with [x] and [y] due to our shared concerns for [ms avonlea]’s mental health, her escalating emotionally and psychologically abusive behaviour towards us and our family unit, including evidence of online communication and coercive controlling behaviour involving [b], and written evidence of [ms avonlea]’s intent to alienate and encourage our children to turn against us and to live with her (particularly [y]). we are concerned that if [ms avonlea] is provided unsupervised access to [x] and [y], [ms avonlea] will expose her negative views of [mr daxton] and i to the children, as she has done with [b], and try to justify her choices to the children. as already evidenced through [ms avonlea]’s boundaryless and destructive behaviour to our family unit, we fear [ms avonlea] is incapable of quarantining her feelings from the children. we have observed that [ms avonlea] has quite poor mental health, high levels of anxiety, low levels of selfesteem and difficulties in relationships. we believe these proceedings are driven by [ms avonlea]’s issues and unresolved relationship difficulties with her father with no consideration for her sibling’s wellbeing. i am acutely aware of the impact of ongoing proceedings on the children. i am deeply concerned if there is unsupervised contact between [ms avonlea] and the children it will likely have a significant and detrimental impact on my parenting capacity and my relationship with [mr daxton]. i am exhausted and struggling to cope due to my history of family violence and repeat trauma by ongoing proceedings and these proceedings have already had an impact on my emotional ability to be available to our children and my husband. i have been on stress leave from work since [mid]-2023 and now medicated with anti-depressants and sleeping tablets due to the repeat trauma and concurrent court proceedings for all three of my children: and ramifications of this dispute on me personally and my family unit. as already demonstrated, we will continue to facilitate this relationship between [ms avonlea] and the children in a safe way, without the need for orders. realistically, [ms avonlea] needs to be willing to engage with [mr daxton] in family therapy to try to heal and repair their relationship.
mr burns: thank you, your honour. my client took [ms avonlea] into her family, and her evidence is clear from [ms avonlea]’s own evidence she became a confidante, she treated her as a daughter and in the middle of other complications she was having with the former partner and that breakdown, [ms avonlea] totally betrayed her. i would submit that the reason – the underlying reason of [ms avonlea]’s behaviour was to get anybody she could to assist her in her fight against her father. it wasn’t just a brief spat. there was a contained and controlled program over some considerable time that was calculated, it was with malice against her father. everything she did was premeditated. no concern at all for any collateral damage that she might have caused to other people around and, i submit, that to date in ... her own evidence, there’s very little to suggest that she really does have a concern for that. she says she won’t do the things again, ... she says she regrets it, but i haven’t heard in her evidence, unless i was sleeping or deaf at the time, any suggestion of apology, any suggestion that she understands the harm she has caused to both my client and the father. she has removed my client from the position of loving and trust to someone who has totally – who was totally betrayed and cannot understand how [ms avonlea] could have done what she did. how [ms avonlea] could try to use her and her son as a wedge to separate her from her husband – now husband. i submit that [ms avonlea]’s behaviour ... with [b] was pure grooming. it was a program, not necessarily designed, but a program ... with an outcome ... desired to punish her father. for what? her own evidence in the witness box was, “he didn’t talk to me”. very little evidence about any harm that was done to her by her father to support her reaction in this way. it’s not as if she was a child. this sort of behaviour one might expect with a petulant 13-year-old. we’ve got an 18-year-old person[5] here who has taken it on herself to become a parent, or behaved like a parent, on behalf of two children – three children in this case, that her opinion is better than the parents’ opinion on how these children should be treated. no regard at all for the children’s parent belief on how they should manage their children. “my way is the best way”, was [ms avonlea]’s view, and i submit it still is. so as far as my client goes, and you’ve seen her in the witness box, you’ve seen her outside the witness box, she feels she has been completely betrayed, and that sense of betrayal cannot be overcome overnight, but as long as [ms avonlea] is involved with her children, that fear is going to be there for some time, and you’ve heard the report writer say the danger of that sort of emotional distress could have on the – not only just on the children, but the whole family unit. there’s evidence already that the distress caused by these events led to the father moving out for a while. that doesn’t – there’s not one word from [ms avonlea] about any concern that she had for that happening: not her problem. she may have caused the problem, but, “i’m not there to apologise to them. i regret what i did, but i haven’t really thought much about what i did to these people...”. and i echo what my learned friend for the father says, that [ms avonlea] has failed to demonstrate to an acceptable degree, that she has learned. it’s my submission what you heard from her is nothing more than lip service. the thing she had to say, because she knew if she said what she thought, then this case will not go in her favour at all. the family report is unequivocal. the recommendation is that the parents should be allowed to parent their own children. [ms avonlea] is not a parent. she is not a child. she’s not my client’s child, but she does have this relationship, and she says she’s entitled to a much better relationship with the two younger children. but she – and i’m not trying to minimise this, but she’s a half-sibling. she should be able to see some time, ... my client would not stop [ms avonlea] coming to spend time with the children with [their] father there. it’s [ms avonlea] saying, “no, i’m not going, because of dad”. it’s [ms avonlea] who’s, basically, rather than try it out, has put the parents through the trauma of having to come to court, go to the witness box, spend a fortune in trying to defend their need to parent their own children against [ms avonlea]’s view, “i have a right to see these children, but i’m not going to take the opportunity to see them, because ... i don’t like my father”. now, the report writer makes it quite clear she does not see that the father will be a risk to [ms avonlea], ... if he was there as a supervisor, for want [of a better] word. the report writer has indicated per your honour’s questions that her current profile, her personality – [ms avonlea]’s – well, i should say, current personality profile is reflected on her behaviour at the time that this breakdown occurred. it [is] reflected [in] her behaviour with [b] and reflected [in] her attitudes with the father. ... it’s my submission, your honour, her personality now is risky. it’s my submission, your honour, that there should be no orders made, the application should be dismissed. there’s more than enough material to suggest that any reparation – any repairs of relationship that needs to be done can be done within the parties themselves and there’s absolutely no need for any order that actually restricts the parents’ time and the parents’ choice and how the children spend their time in the interim. finally, ... it’s my submission [ms avonlea]’s argument, the reason she’s not seeing her father, she’s fearful: she’s not fearful, is my submission. in fact, it’s just a matter of control. she wants to be able to control the situation. when it comes to the situation between her and her father, so be it, but when it comes to the situation between her and the two children – the two other children, that’s a different thing altogether. i have nothing more to add, your honour, thank you.
evidence of ms gillies’ psychologist & employer  gillies] presented with symptoms consistent with high levels of stress and anxiety due to very complex family dynamics, with her ex-husband, her son (14) and her step-daughter [ms avonlea]. she stated that she had to deal with an abusive ex-husband and having to attend to court many times due to his manipulations of her son. now she and her current partner are having to deal with his ex-wife and their daughter (21). the daughter has been very abusive towards them. ... [ms gillies] continues to feel anxious due to her step daughter and now she and her partner have to go to court due to [[ms avonlea]]. this has caused her a lot of anxiety and distress. i have therefore suggested to [ms gillies] that it is important for her to continue with therapy and to return to you for a review.
for many months, i observed that her mental health was being progressively impacted by these legal issues as they dragged on. [in mid-]2023, [ms gillies], our departmental manager and i met at 9am at [k venue] to discuss [work] issues. no amount of makeup could hide the stress around her eyes, the lack of sleep and her brittle smile. after discussing a minor oversight on [ms gillies]’ part, she was in tears, which was highly uncharacteristic of [ms gillies]. i could see that she was no longer coping with the extraordinary stress of the court proceedings. concerned that she was experiencing a major mental health episode, i sent [ms gillies] home immediately and strongly recommended she see a doctor for a medical certificate for sick leave to address the mental health impact of the situation. not wanting to ‘let me down’, [ms gillies] felt that she would only need a few days leave, i knew that she would take a lot longer to recover. to date, [ms gillies] has been on personal leave for 6 weeks for which she has a medical certificate. [ms gillies] has my utmost support in her recovery, so she is able to successfully resume her full duties at [k venue] and hopefully with finalisation of these proceedings.
... since around mid-2021, i observed [ms avonlea] to become increasingly vocal and intrusive about her ideations and beliefs. for example, i recall her having a go at her dad because she felt we didn’t have enough kitchen cupboard space like at her mother’s house or buying the cheaper/inferior version of products compared to her mum. the biggest issue was her telling me to side with her against [mr daxton] in [late] 2021 and then with the dispute in [mid- 2022. i have been required to discuss my concerns with [mr daxton] and we agreed at various times that we would be required to remind [ms avonlea] to respect, or at least accept our personal boundaries and parenting of our children. this behaviour became more noticeable to me during the covid lockdowns in 2021 when [ms avonlea] was engaged in paid babysitting of the children over a 10-month period. in or around [late] 2021, when i was in the process of obtaining an intervention order for [b] protecting him from [[b]’s father], my relationship with [ms avonlea] started to fracture following [ms avonlea]’s criticism of me and [mr daxton] and our parenting of [b]. [ms avonlea] told me that i needed to “stand up” to [mr daxton] because i was “submissive” and [b] “wasn’t his child”. i was of the view that [ms avonlea] was wanting me to support [ms avonlea] in her argument with [mr daxton] drawing parallels with [ms avonlea]’s own relationship struggles with [mr daxton] as [b]’s lived experiences with his father. i disagreed with [ms avonlea]’s position about [mr daxton] and found her accusations concerning and out of line. as we were not able to reach common ground, we ‘agreed to disagree' with the understanding that [ms avonlea] would need to accept our parenting style which seemingly did not align with her views. from this date, [ms avonlea] continued to be involved in our family life but her behaviour towards both [mr daxton] and me had shifted. ... ... in about [late] 2022 i discovered the messages [ms avonlea] had been sending to [b] on the social media platform, [l] dating back as early as [late] 2021 (“the [l] messages”) in which she was manipulating [b] and negatively influencing [b] against me and [mr daxton]. ...
... in a message dated [late] 2021, after finding a lost toy, [ms gillies] wrote "only you can appreciate the trauma of this lol". ... in a message dated [early] 2022, [ms gillies] wrote about [y] "how cute is that. your own little moment together. she is very lucky to have you x".   [ms avonlea] created an elaborate and disturbing fake case study (“the fake case study”) about fictitious characters that were based on her allegations that [b] was being emotionally harmed by [mr daxton] and i allowing it to occur. within days of the dispute, [ms avonlea] sent the fake case study to my sister also a psychologist [[ms n]] and [mr daxton]’s sister [[ms j]] seeking their opinion which she pretended was an assignment for university. ... (b) in addition to [ms avonlea] making demands to spend time with [x] and [y] unsupervised, [mr daxton] was receiving abusive and threatening messages from [ms avonlea]’s mother ( [mr daxton]’s ex-wife), [[ms j]]. i read the messages [[ms j]] sent to [mr daxton] which contained threats of litigation and publicly defaming [mr daxton] if we didn’t ‘handover’ our children to [ms avonlea] and provide her with supervised access to our children. she also was insinuating that she would fund the litigation, (c) [ms avonlea] told me in a phone conversation that she did not want a relationship with us and that she would continue saying anything she wanted to [b] and that she wouldn’t be stopped. she was fixated on us handing over our children to her and didn’t appear interested in repairing her relationship with me and [mr daxton] (set out in greater detail later in my affidavit),   in addition to [ms avonlea] making demands to spend time with [x] and [y] unsupervised, [mr daxton] was receiving abusive and threatening messages from [ms avonlea]’s mother ( [mr daxton]’s ex-wife), [[ms j]]. i read the messages [[ms j]] sent to [mr daxton] which contained threats of litigation and publicly defaming [mr daxton] if we didn’t ‘handover’ our children to [ms avonlea] and provide her with supervised access to our children. she also was insinuating that she would fund the litigation, (c) [ms avonlea] told me in a phone conversation that she did not want a relationship with us and that she would continue saying anything she wanted to [b] and that she wouldn’t be stopped. she was fixated on us handing over our children to her and didn’t appear interested in repairing her relationship with me and [mr daxton] (set out in greater detail later in my affidavit),   [ms avonlea] told me in a phone conversation that she did not want a relationship with us and that she would continue saying anything she wanted to [b] and that she wouldn’t be stopped. she was fixated on us handing over our children to her and didn’t appear interested in repairing her relationship with me and [mr daxton] (set out in greater detail later in my affidavit),
... [in mid-]2022, i engaged a parenting coach [[ms p]] to assist with parenting issues of [b] involving [ms avonlea]. [[ms p]] reinforced the importance of unity between the adults in a child’s life and the detrimental impact of [ms avonlea]’s behaviour to actively undermine and discredit our parental authority, and she encouraged me discuss my concerns with [ms avonlea]. [in mid-]2022, i had a lengthy phone conversation with [ms avonlea] in an attempt to repair the relationship, however i was even more alarmed after our conversation when [ms avonlea] said she no longer wanted a relationship with [mr daxton] or me. further, [ms avonlea] told me that she was “upset, frustrated and disappointed” in me because i “defended” her father during our disagreement back in [late] 2021 and that she felt “betrayed” by me because she thought “we had something outside of my dad” and her relationship with me had “changed forever” and she could no longer confide in me. ... it was during this conversation [ms avonlea] said that she would be involving [b] and she deemed him mature and old enough to make his own informed decisions. i recall that [ms avonlea] said i couldn’t stop her involving [b] in her dissatisfaction with our parenting and she “wasn’t interested” to hear my point of view or “excuses” and she was passionate about her “fight for [b]” stating that [mr daxton] “doesn’t want the best for [b]” and that “[x] feels he is better”. i recall that she followed on to talk about her own difficulties with her childhood, describing it as “not peaceful” with a “lot of issues” between [mr daxton] and [ms j] and drawing parallels with the dispute involving [b]. [ms avonlea]’s final words to me were “i will not be silenced”, “i will never stop” and “i do not want a relationship with you or my dad”. this was extremely upsetting and concerning to me as i was hopeful that our family’s relationship with [ms avonlea] could be repaired. [in mid-]2022, i wrote a letter to [ms avonlea] following our conversation, summarising what [ms avonlea] and i had discussed [in mid-]2022 and confirming that both [mr daxton] and i would be prepared to engage family therapy with her. after discussing the letter with [mr daxton] and my sister [ms n] i decided not to send the letter as i did not think the letter would assist and would only inflame the situation. annexed and marked “-6” is a copy of the letter i wanted to send to [ms avonlea]. [in mid-]2022 [ms avonlea] privately messaged [b] on [l messages] “if you ever want to leave you tell me, ok” for which [b] responded with “i dont feel i need to leave” followed by [in mid-]2022 by [ms avonlea] “has mum or [mr daxton] said anything today?” ... i rely upon the [l] messages as evidence demonstrating the psychological harm inflicted by [ms avonlea] towards [b], and the need to protect our younger two children ([x] and [y]) from being subjected to this abuse by their half-sister. for example, [ms avonlea] wrote to my son words to the effect “your mum and [mr daxton] are disgusting parents ...and you will not be the last in the family to go through this” ([mid]-2022), “[y] is just angel. but she’ll turn on mum and [mr daxton]. she’s too similar to me . she’s fiery. yep cause he’s [mr daxton]’s son. [mr daxton]’s always wanted a son. i honestly will end up with you and [y] living with me i can see it now. because she’ll piss [mr daxton] off when she hits puberty she is a mini me. like 100% i’ve taught her well...you will but she’ll prob live with us too.. and i can handle [y]. [y] aint got nothing on me.” ([late] 2022). ... also during this period of time, [b] was also questioning my and [mr daxton]’s love for him and he would say to me that he was conflicted, wondering if [ms avonlea]’s love was stronger and if he should also separate himself from the family unit and live with her. we are now aware that at this time [ms avonlea] was actively telling [b] that he, and the children, could live with her, coaching [b] what to do and say when we attempted to discipline [b]. at one point, [b] left home for two nights to stay with [ms avonlea] after an argument about our rules and without my permission. [emphasis added]
expert evidence: the family report
given there was no dispute between [ms avonlea] and [mr daxton] and [ms gillies] regarding the nature of interactions between [ms avonlea] and [x] and [y], or between [x], [y], [mr daxton] and [ms gillies] (which were overall, described as positive by all parties), i chose not to conduct the observational interviews. further, the issues raised pertaining to [ms avonlea] and [x] and [ms gillies]’ interactions via on-line/electronic mediums would not be elicited in a face-to-face observational interview and hence this would not be instructive in the formation of a view about this family’s presenting difficulties.
... [ms avonlea] described a history of mental health difficulties, namely anxiety and panic attacks dating back to her childhood, in addition to anorexia nervosa and orthorexia nervosa (an eating disorder characterised by an excessive preoccupation with healthy food). ... she explained that she struggled to adjust to her father and [ms gillies] moving in together at that time, highlighting that she does not cope well with change. she added that she also felt abandoned by her father because she perceived that he began to spend less time with her. other triggers to her panic attacks included her father yelling at her and “grabbing” her on one occasion, as previously mentioned in this report. she stated that her panic attacks now occur irregularly, the last one taking place during covid19 in 2020. ... during the current assessment, when i asked [ms avonlea] about recent events referred to in her affidavits involving [mr daxton], [b] and [ms gillies] that led to a breakdown in her relationships with them, [ms avonlea] expressed a view that [b] confided in her regarding conflict he was having at home with [mr daxton]. she alleged that she had also witnessed [mr daxton] yelling at [b], “controlling” him and ignoring him and was concerned that her father was treating [b] in the same way that she perceived he treated her. she asserted that all of her actions and communications with [b] during this time period were driven by a desire to support and protect him. when asked why she asked [b]to delete some of their on-line communications, [ms avonlea] explained she did not want [b] to “get into trouble”. during the current interview, [ms avonlea] displayed insight regarding [mr daxton]’s concerns related to her spending time with [x] and [y] on her own, that being that she might “convince the kids he is not a good parent”. she reflected awareness that her commenting on her father’s parenting decisions and expressing her disagreement with these in the manner she did, as well as her venting to [b] about her own frustrations regarding her relationship with her father, has impacted [b] negatively. she acknowledged that it would have been confusing for [b] and likely impeded his decision-making. [ms avonlea] conceded that at the time she felt that she had someone (i.e., [b]) that understood what she “went through”, here, seemingly referring to her conflictual relationship with her father. she perceived that in the future she would keep her thoughts to herself and would not provide feedback if she disagreed with her father and [ms gillies]’ parenting decisions. [ms avonlea] was also able to identify that if [b], [x] or [y] ever raised concerns about their relationships with their parents with her in the future, she would direct them to speak to their school or a counsellor. ... [ms avonlea] expressed ambivalence about repairing her relationship with her father. when asked what would need to occur for to be able to rebuild this relationship, [ms avonlea] replied that it would be the passage of time and her having contact with her siblings. ... the millon clinical multiaxial inventory-fourth edition (mcmi-iv) was administered to [ms avonlea]. ... [ms avonlea]’s mcmi-iv clinical profile was reflective of her experiencing significant mental health difficulties, namely the presence of personality difficulties (commensurate with her history and presentation at interview). [ms avonlea]’s results profile was reflective of an individual who is energetic, ambitious and exudes optimism, however, this at times results in her disregarding healthy limits and boundaries in her interactions with others, leaving her and others vulnerable to experiencing distress and exhaustion. personality patterns identified from [ms avonlea]’s mcmi-iv profile include her having a passion for challenging endeavors and engaging in goal directed behaviours. she is also frequently able to coax others into doing things they would otherwise not do, and often, is successful in exciting their own wish fulfilment in the process. [ms avonlea]’s mcmi-iv profile is also suggestive of her self-awareness and reality testing against insurmountable challenges tending to be poor. this way of approaching her life and interacting with others can lead to relationship conflict. [ms avonlea] also has a tendency to view herself as meticulous, efficient, disciplined and industrious and has some perfectionistic qualities with regard to her appearance, and success in various domains of her life. also salient is her highly structured and organised life. [ms avonlea]’s response style was also suggestive of her experiencing significant depressive symptoms triggered by interpersonal and vocational setbacks and her feeling a sense of powerlessness. individuals with these characteristics are prone to experiencing intense humiliation and to fight against this by externalizing blame for their predicament onto others, as well as experiencing shame and guilt that they protect themselves from. [ms avonlea]’s mcmi-iv results profile is also suggestive of her experiencing significant anxiety symptoms, including physical symptoms. ... [ms avonlea] presents as a young woman who has suffered mental health difficulties stemming back to her adolescent years which appear to be occurring in the context of parental separation when she was a child, adjusting to both parents forming new relationships, as well as social difficulties at school and difficulties within both parental relationships at various stages in her life. [ms avonlea] reports that she has struggled with anxiety and depression, panic attacks and eating disorders in her adolescence. her personality is marked by features that include a fear of abandonment from those close to her and a sensitivity to rejection from others, as well as a passion and optimism for life. she also appears to be forthright in her views, struggles interpersonally and displays a proneness to overstepping boundaries in her interpersonal relationships. further to this, [ms avonlea] possesses a narrative that she has been largely rejected by her father and feels hurt by him, and continues to experience unresolved distress, alongside what appears to be anger and resentment, towards him. in my view, whilst it seems that [b] reached out to [ms avonlea] for support during conflict with his mother and step-father, amidst other issues he was grappling with, through the course of her involvement with [b], and perhaps genuine concern for him and a wish to support him, some of this anger and hurt she feels towards her father appears to have been projected onto, and influenced, her actions involving [b]. [emphasis added]
ms smallwood: yes. and you were given instructions by their parents that everything is fine with them in terms of their interpersonal relationship with their parents? [dr e]: their parents had observed that over the course of the last 12 months, they were displaying some, i guess, clinginess or reassurance – seeking reassurance that their parents loved them, so i think they were unsettled for a period of time, but both parents indicated that they, i guess, were coming out of that and settling and doing well in their school environments and socially and with their activities after school. ms smallwood: and did either of their parents or both of them indicate to you why – any reason why they – that they attached to this alleged unsettled state of the children – younger children for the last year? [dr e]: i think a combination of factors. i think the whole family unit being unsettled in terms of both parents’ mental health not being great during that time, conflict within the household with [b], and conflict with [ms avonlea], in terms of the interactions with b and how that has unfolded, i think took its toll on the whole family unit in different ways, and i think also other factors in terms of [ms gillies] dealing with [b]’s father and court processes there and difficult processes there. i think a lot of factors sort of intervening in terms of impacting on their mental health and – which is not, i guess, predicted in terms of how that impacts then on the children. ... [dr e]: that [ms avonlea] having no contact with [x] and [y] would impact their relationship. yes. ms smallwood: it would be a loss to [y] and [x]? [dr e]: yes, in terms of a relationship - - - ms smallwood: thank you? [dr e]: - - - with their sister. ms smallwood: exactly. and so whilst you say – so that would be a bad thing. correct – for [x] and [y]? [dr e]: a loss of the relationship to their sister, yes. ms smallwood: yes. and contrary to their welfare, wouldn’t it be? [dr e]: if that was a positive – yes, if that continued to be a positive relationship - - - ms smallwood: exactly. exactly? [dr e]: - - - ..... but, yes, as it stands.
... [ms gillies] indicated that she separated from [b]’s father when he was 12 months old. she also alleged that she was victim of domestic violence within this relationship. she confirmed that [b] has a current family violence intervention order in place against his father due to him expressing feeling unsafe in his father’s care, and her perception that his father has a history of being manipulative and controlling towards her and [b]. [ms gillies] indicated that [b]’s father sees [b] monthly for three hours in a public place, with this arrangement being stipulated in parenting orders made 1-2 years ago. [ms gillies] reported that [b] is vulnerable to being manipulated and taken advantage of by others and thus she is protective of him. [ms gillies] reported that her next significant intimate relationship following her separation from [b]’s father is with [mr daxton]. she described their relationship in positive terms, referring to him as her “rock”, him being very supportive of her, and a kind and caring partner. [ms gillies] also indicated that from what she has observed, [mr daxton] was a good father to [ms avonlea]. [ms gillies] spoke about her three children in a caring and warm manner and appeared focused on providing them with nurturance and safety. she also displayed sensitivity and responsiveness to their current needs, such as, for example, [x]’s learning needs and his self-confidence, and [y]’s need for predictability and reassurance. it appears from her descriptions (and voiced by the children and [mr daxton] when i met with each of them) that [x] and [y] are settled and progressing well at school, are engaged in many activities and have good friendship networks. it also appears that both [ms gillies] and [mr daxton] are actively involved in [x] and [y]’s lives and are supporting their development and associated needs. [ms gillies] also indicated that [b] is progressing well this year, has a new job and a girlfriend, and has received positive feedback from his teacher during a recent parent-teacher interview. ... when discussing her relationship with [ms avonlea], [ms gillies]’ narrative was marked by her feeling distressed and hurt by [ms avonlea]’s actions, as well as her feeling betrayed by [ms avonlea]. ... [ms gillies]’ also expressed concern regarding [ms avonlea] causing friction between her half-siblings by highlighting to [b] that [mr daxton] is not his father and accusing [mr daxton] of favouring [x]. [ms gillies] also disclosed that [ms avonlea] encouraged [b] to leave the family home and contacted his [sports club] to cancel his lesson without [mr daxton] and [ms gillies]’ permission, as well asking [b] for details of his independent children’s lawyer, visiting his school and advocating or a safety plan to be written for [b] to protect him from [mr daxton]. during her interview, [ms gillies] spoke about the detrimental impact [ms avonlea]’s actions have had on her family unit, including her relationship with [mr daxton], which at one stage last year deteriorated to such an extent that they considered whether it could “survive”. [ms gillies] reflected that she had previously provided significant support to [ms avonlea], and had welcomed her into her and her family of origin’s lives, and was incredulous regarding [ms avonlea]’s treatment of her. [ms gillies] also spoke of the decline to both her and [mr daxton]’s mental health in 2022, in addition to [b]’s mental health. further, whilst they have attempted to shield [x] and [y] from these events, [ms gillies] reported that she has noticed [y] has been, and continues to, display “clingy” behaviour, as well as evidencing an excessive need to tell them she loves them and seek their reassurance that they love her. [ms gillies] added that [x] has also engaged in a pattern of checking where his father is and seeking assurances that he is coming home. [x]’s behaviour has been triggered by [mr daxton] leaving the family home to seek respite at their investment property last year, sometimes for a few days at a time. [ms gillies] also indicated that [y] struggles to adjust to changes in her environment, and thus consistency and routine are important for her well-being and sense of safety. proposals [ms gillies] echoed the proposals [mr daxton] made during the current assessment, as well as the reasons driving these. she did not perceive that [ms avonlea]’s desire to impose legal orders relating to their children was necessary, nor is it aligned with [ms avonlea]’s claims of wanting to repair her relationship with [ms gillies]. [ms gillies] also expressed concern that these orders might be misused by [ms avonlea] and potentially cause all involved further distress. [emphasis added]
... ... [y] also described her relationship with [ms avonlea] in positive terms. she did not describe experiencing any worries, and impressed as having a positive self-esteem. as i was finishing the session i asked if there was anything else that she wanted to tell me. [y] identified that she would like to continue seeing [ms avonlea] with [x], however, she would like this to be her choice. she explained that she did not want to miss out on seeing her friends or going to a party if this conflicted with time [ms avonlea] wanted to spend with her. she also stated that she did not want to stay overnight at [ms avonlea]’s place because she “gets scared” being away from home, with this amplified due to [ms avonlea] living some distance from her home. [y] also volunteered that she preferred to meet with [ms avonlea] with her brother, [x], in her parent’s presence, as well as sometimes spending time with [ms avonlea] for “a little bit” when she wants to.
significant events and the l communications
late 2021: the start of big trouble
late 2021: the start of the l communications  avonlea]: is everything okay there? do you feel ok being there? [b]: yeah why are you asking this all of a sudden [ms avonlea]: because i worry...how you are treated isn’t normal ...i’m just saying if [mr daxton] ever cause any issues or hurts you please tell me [b]: nah it’s fine [mr daxton]: cause my mum will take you in instantly if you need be...my dad caused problems before... ...how you are treated by [mr daxton] and what [mr daxton] says to mum is not right [ms avonlea]: has mum been getting worse with you? like more angry and stuff? [b]: sorta not really [ms avonlea]: “how [mr daxton] treats isn’t right...so if he ever says anything, you don’t feel safe or he gets physical please tell me...how mum and [mr daxton] treat you so differently isn’t ok. you’ll realise more as you get older but i am here always....would you stay over at my place if i had like an extra bedroom and stuff? like i picked you up on a weekend you were with mum, with the littles ones to and you guys stayed at my place over a weekend...when i got a bigger house...would you and the kids, every couple of weekends, stay at my place for a night or two do you think?...if i had a bigger house would you want to stay over more?” ...   avonlea]: i’ve had arguments with him about how he treats you for over 3 years now [b]: yeah thankyou [ms avonlea]: don’t need to thank me buddy
how you are treated by [mr daxton] and what [mr daxton] says to mum [ms gillies] is not right : mmmm [ms avonlea]: what? [b]: yes [ms avonlea]: yes what? [b]: mmmm = yes ... [b]: because if i mess up he doesn’t listen to what happened [ms avonlea]: yeh, like with [x] and stuff? [b]: ? [ms avonlea]: like if you and [x] arguing or other stuff? [b]: yeah [x] doesn’t get the much in trouble but i would even if i didn’t do anything ... [ms avonlea]: does he ask the kids what happened? like does he listen to them and not you?
the 2022 wedding of the children’s parents
l messages from mid to late 2022
involvement of ms j, ms avonlea’s mother
hi [ms j], i am even more concerned with [ms avonlea’s] escalating behaviour and for her mental health. i’m going to make some calls this week to experts to see what help is available. [mr daxton]
you say move forward, what it is that [ms avonlea] wants and what do i need to do?
i have apologised on more than one occasion. [ms avonlea] has always been allowed to see the kids at the park with me there or come over and play with them here. what more am i supposed to do?
tread carefully engaging with me when i have kept your fucking of me without permission quiet. i keep your secret to this day... do not do this to our daughter because you can’t take a deep breath and accept she’s a firecracker... do not hold the kids from her ... ... do not drag my daughter into anything unnecessary ... just don’t. won’t be pleasant and i will never let it rest. you will find i have the stamina to go the distance and it will be the ugliest situation of your life if you hurt [ms avonlea] any more.
the end of the l communications  avonlea]: [late] 2022 do you want to come to mine cause they won’t let you see [x]? [b]: [late] 2022 yeah and cause i hate the rules here
is ms avonlea fearful of mr daxton?
hi dad, after out last conversation, i feel very stressed and uncomfortable spending time in your home. i don’t feel safe or welcome. i’m hurt by where we are at. i’m very sad that [ms gillies] screamed at me in what was my home, and neither of you can recognise that that is hurtful. i acknowledge that i raised my voice that night, however, i was only met with aggression, anger and attack so as so, i too got on the attack. she is only my stepmother....she doesn’t get to speak to me like that and it’s all ok. ...
mr combes: okay. you must have disliked him quite a bit? [ms avonlea]: i wouldn’t say i disliked him. i was incredibly hurt by him ... as a young child mr combes: yes. why were you hurt by him or what were the reasons for you being hurt by him? [ms avonlea]: my dad was very absent for a lot of my childhood. mr combes: yes. was that with work or - - - his honour: hang on. just let the witness answer the question, please. mr combes: i’m sorry. yes, your honour. the witness: he was absent for a lot of – many things in my life, even after – before and after my parents split. you know, there was – it always felt like the things he would do with me were to tick a box. for instance, going to the football 5 together, i’m naturally quite a chatty person and he wouldn’t talk to me the whole time we were there. he would basically tell me to be quiet and just to watch the game, and we never really had conversations whilst we were there or didn’t spend time actually connecting.
conclusion as to the l communications
section 60cc factors
meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents
the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm
i am deeply concerned if there is unsupervised contact between [ms avonlea] and the children it will likely have a significant and detrimental impact on my parenting capacity and my relationship with [mr daxton]. i am exhausted and struggling to cope due to my history of family violence and repeat trauma by ongoing proceedings and these proceedings have already had an impact on my emotional ability to be available to our children and my husband. i have been on stress leave from work since [mid-] 2023 and now medicated with anti-depressants and sleeping tablets due to the repeat trauma and concurrent court proceedings for all three of my children: and ramifications of this dispute on me personally and my family unit.
... prior to late 2021, [b] and i have had a close relationship and i have treated him as my son to the best of my abilities and attempted to have his best interests at the forefront, as i do for [x] and [y], of all decisions regarding our family. i observed a decline in [b]’s behaviour towards [ms gillies] and i from around late 2021 and particularly after the dispute in [mid]-2022. for example, [b] started avoiding me, he’d spend more time in his bedroom and started arguing with me or arguing with [ms gillies] in front of me. ... i am aware that there was a decline in [b]’s school grades and had become withdrawn and disengaged and had lost his “spark” with signs of depression and suicidal thoughts following a review conducted by the school’s mental health assessment. i recall that [b] commenced questioning my and [ms gillies’] love for him, and he would tell me and [ms gillies] that he was conflicted as to whether [ms avonlea]’s love was stronger and if he should also separate himself from the family unit and live with her. as a consequence of the ongoing communication between [b] and [ms avonlea], i observed that [b] started to lose his emotional connection with us, and his sense of self. he became dismissive and evasive towards me. i was (as was [ms gillies]) worried for [b] and for his mental health. [b] also started saying that we favoured [x] over him, and we noticed that [b] started deliberately ignoring [x] or leaving him out of games with [y], which we are now aware was due to [ms avonlea]’s influence. [x] started noticing and saying words to the effect, "[b] hates me" and then he retreated from [b] saying, "i hate [b] ". ... i have seen a dramatic improvement in [b]’s wellbeing and happiness since november 2022 when [b] stopped communicating with [ms avonlea]. ... my relationship with [ms avonlea] has now declined to a position where i feel emotionally psychologically abused by her in an attempt to ostracise me and [ms gillies] from our close family, [b], each other and ultimately undermine my relationship with them. the ongoing disputes has not only taken an enormous toll on my relationship with [ms gillies], but also on my and [ms gillies’] emotional and psychological wellbeing.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship with each of the child’s parents and other persons
courts are often reluctant to separate siblings based upon the presumption that children benefit from growing up with brothers and sisters and should remain together. further, to separate them would mean that they would grow up as strangers and "create a household divided against itself". a marital break-up is a traumatic event to all members involved and is experienced by siblings individually and also together as a unit. ... for this reason, split custody seems undesirable because it not only breaks the continuity of a relationship with an adult but also breaks the continuity of a relationship with a sibling.
capacity of parents & ms avonlea to provide for children’s emotional and intellectual needs
maturity, background and culture of the children
family violence involving a member of the child’s family
final or interim orders
any other fact or circumstance
conclusion
costs
associate: dated: 26 october 2023
dated: 26 october 2023
appendix
examples of the l communication from annexure 1 of ms gillies’ trial affidavit  : [mid]-2022 [mr daxton] has gone pyscho [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 why?? ... you ok? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ... im at school atm ... but [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 what’s going on [b]: [mid]-2022 i accidentally left a glass of milk out and some chocolate wrappers out and [mr daxton] went phsyco and took a photo and sent it to mum when she was asleep and then printed out a bunch of papers that said [m] and stuck them everywhere in the house ... in the bathroom ... kitchen ... living room [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 oh god [b]: [mid]-2022 about 50 papers ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 like this isn’t ok ... i understand getting shitty and pissed off at you but this isn’t ok [b]: [mid]-2022 mhm (yeah) [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you’re also only 14 ... you’re not an adult ... and they expect you to behave like one [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 ok well i can’t help if all you give me is yeah [b]: [mid]-2022 idk what to say ... but im agreeing with u [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 well what else has mum said ... has he done anything else? have you seen or spoken to him? ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 cause this is really bad [b]: [mid]-2022 i dont really want to [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 or what about your lawyer? could you talk to her? [b]: [mid]-2022 is it really that bad? [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 it’s not about that. it’s hard to explain in text [b]: [mid]-2022 oh ok ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 they’re being abusive ... very abusive ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 she is your parent ... this abuse and she is letting this happen ... buddy this is not normal, ok or right. this will lead you down a very bad path ... and will only end up with you doing more naughty things because what’s the point of not doing them if you get in trouble either way ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’ve asked various different adults over the weekend ... some i’ve told it’s about you and others i’ve posed as a uni scenario and changed it to get advice so they wouldn’t know it’s about you ... one of those is [ms n], [ms gillies’] sister] ... so ... this is not ok [b]: [mid]-2022 it came up in conversation last night, that i said "im trying will that not be good enough" and she said "no, try harder" i said "i am trying" and mum said "well trying harder" ... and she also said that whoever you speak to no one can change my mind [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 that is disgusting behaviour ... and i called your mum out on it and she stormed off and didn’t give me any explanation just yelled at me... so ... if i never speak to your mum again this is partly why. she treated me awfully on friday night. awfully. ... she was beyond disrespectful to me and was very nasty ... i want you to know that when i say what i say to you it doesn’t come from a place of trying to get back at your mum and [mr daxton]. it’s comes from a place of genuine concern for you because i’ve been through something similar and i know the type of person my dad was to my mum ... i want you to know that everything i say to you is considered and well thought out and i seek advice from numerous sources and isn’t just me being a rude kid. it is the advice from numerous adults. one being a school teacher in a catholic school, one being a psychologist, and one being an objective point of view. ... after today i will have spoken to 6 different adults about this. ... 6 ... so know that whatever your mum and [mr daxton] say is not gospel and is not correct ... every single person i have spoken to is worried about you and tell me that this is not normal nor is it ok ... and you will not be the last in the family to go through this. [y] will be next. [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ... i will probs just message the teacher through microsoft teams through text [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i am on your side forever. your mum and [mr daxton] are disgusting parents. this is not good parenting. it does not respect you as a human and does not take into account your feelings. this is not ok. ... [b]: [mid]-2022 could you give some examples of whats happened because i have forgotten most of them [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 yes. that is a symptom of domestic abuse by the way ... i have the same problem ... and they make you feel like what you think is wrong. like if you feel the behaviour isn’t right they will make you think it isn’t significant and so you compartmentalise and forget it ... list of things... brother treats you as less than him already and he is 7... yelled at for every small thing you do when [x] doesn’t have that ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you are not alone no matter what ... there is an army around you to support you x ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 delete all messages on [l messaging] if ya can pls ... or change your privacy settings and lock everything with a new password no one knows ... and turn all your notifications off for all devices when you get them back ...that way they can never see them ... and put in my mobile number ... not yours ... cause they have access to yours ... i’m moving across to my mums plan so they won’t be able to get mine ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and you ask her if she thinks what you're going through is normal and ok ... and you just tell her the things mum and [mr daxton] have said and done [b]: [mid]-2022 idk.. [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 or if you want to organise a time with her if you'd prefer i was there or you can say can i have my sister on speaker phone or something ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 has anything happened? ... [b]: [mid]-2022 nope [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i guess that’s good ... how are you feeling? [b]: [mid]-2022 idk ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 how are you feelings towards mum and [mr daxton]? ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’ve been saying for about 8-10 years now that something is wrong and they way you are treated isn’t right [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ... i have to do the dishes ... brb ... mrs has asked whats the problem what exactly do i say? [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you say what you think you should tell her or what you want to tell her and ask for help ... things a long the lines of i’m having issues with my mum and step dad... [ellipses in original] [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and go from there ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you can tell them to talk to me too if you need or want x i don’t mind can [b]: [mid]-2022 ok xx ... [[b] uploads school safety plan to [l messaging] to show [ms avonlea] - and she is listed as his safe person] ... miss made this [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 ok that’s good ... that’s very good ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 hahhaha nah i’ll just kms ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 also would you be ok if i maybe spoke to the counsellor myself? just to introduce myself and show them i’m not tainting or hurting you ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 are you still coming sunday?? [b]: [mid]-2022 im not sure :/ [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 how come? [b]: [mid]-2022 because mum hasnt agreed ... idk ... ill ask again [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 just ask ... i’ll pick you up and everything ... what’d she say ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 if you ever want to leave you tell me, ok [b]: [mid]-2022 ok i will x [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 no matter what [b]: [mid]-2022 i dont feel i need to leave ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 has anyone said anything today? [b]: [mid]-2022 mum said v breifly that we need to have a chat bought [ms avonlea] ... no tho [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 are you going to ask her what about? [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 mum spoken to you? ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’m not on speaking terms with your mum or [mr daxton] so how am i meant to see you or the kids ... i have no relationship with my own father and your mum keeps talking shit about me ... it’s not exactly easy. i’m being painted out to be a bad person when i’m really not [b]: [mid]-2022 i will convice them [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i don’t need you to ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i just don’t have anything in me left for them. they’ve beaten me down ... that kills me more than anything ... but if you’re not there then neither of us see them ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 how’s it been this weekend/ this week? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah fine [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 anything been said? [b]: [mid]-2022 no [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 can i speak to the kids through you on [l messaging] this week/weekend? [b]: [mid]-2022 sure ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 makes me cry [b]: [mid]-2022 please dont cry [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i do pre much everyday but it’s ok [b]: [mid]-2022 no ... stop ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you all good?? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ... oh yeah mum had a big talk to me and she doesn’t want me to talk about u and [mr daxton]... don’t mention anything about that to them ... please [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 wdym she doesn’t want to talk about me and [mr daxton]? ... bro i don’t have any contact with either of them [b]: [mid]-2022 she doesnt want me to say to anything about mum and [mr daxton] [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 she doesn’t want you to talk to me about them? [b]: [mid]-2022 yep [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 of course she doesn’t ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i gain nothing. nothing. [b]: [mid]-2022 they say they are hurting [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i go to bed crying myself to sleep ... how do they say they are hurting? ... in what way are they? [b]: [mid]-2022 idk ... please stop crying [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i can’t i am being made to be someone im not. i am not the person your mum says i am. i am not. i just want to have my family, my siblings. ... did mum say how they were hurting? [b]: [mid]-2022 its breaking the family and [mr daxton] doesnt feel safe in his own home [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 he doesn’t feel safe ... are you kidding [b]: [mid]-2022 kinda gay [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 in what way do i make him unsafe ... i’m a fucjing midget ... like fuck off ... he doesn’t feel safe. ... what about you? what about you not feeling safe? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 what do you think? ... what do you think about what she says? [b]: [mid]-2022 idk ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 thank you for letting me speak to the kids x ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 can i talk to the kids today?? [b]: [mid]-2022 i’m not sure ... i’ll try [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 ok can you call them to your room whilst you’re playing games if they’re home ? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah sure i’ll try ... [b]: [mid]-2022 i think if u start talking to them again ... mum and [mr daxton] ... u will be able to see them [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 they haven’t reached out to me ... i don’t have anything to say to them ... they’ve been awful to me ... i’m heartbroken [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah just say i thought u would like to know have covid ... or something like that [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 they actually don’t deserve to know ... they don’t care about me buddy ... i don’t think you realise that ... they actually don’t care about me ... my own dad doesn’t care about me at all ... and your mum couldn’t care less about me ... i’m nothing to them ... nothing ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and soon enough [y] and [x] will probably forget who i am and you guys will be happy harmonious united family without me ... and that’s sad for me ... because i have none of you ... i don’t have your mums family ... i don’t have [mr daxton]’s family ... and i don’t have my own siblings ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 but that’s how mum and [mr daxton] are spinning it to themselves and to everyone else ... i’m basically just waiting for [y] and [x] to get their own phones so i can talk to them [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 because i have no communication with them unless it’s through you [b]: [mid]-2022 i’m year 4/they will [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and mum and [mr daxton] are using my love for them as their upper hand ... because they think i will reach out first so i can talk to them ... that’s why i’m asking you ... because i’m not going to bullied and manipulated anymore ... i’m sick of being hurt. i am depressed, anxious and exhausted because of them. i never ever talked shit about them to you yet that’s what they’ve believed. i’m not going to be quiet about it anymore. [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah it sucks [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’m sick of this harmonious unity family shit. if that was the case i wouldn’t be at my own home with no contact with any of them ... it’s actually not ok and it’s quite ridiculous [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah it is [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 they are not the victim in any of this. i have done nothing to them. not a single thing except question they’re abusive behaviour. i asked a question. and now i am here. by myself. ... so whatever way they spin it is wrong ... they are not the victims at all ... never have been [b]: [mid]-2022 yea [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 my dad has never been a victim. he perpetrates. he abuses and he manipulates and he charms and he gets away with it ... it is the reason i will not make contact [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i will not talk to a rapist who refuses to behave like an adult and talk to his own daughter ... i am broken. ... i am hurt [b]: [mid]-2022 please don’t be hurt [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and i cannot forgive their behaviour. your mum has offended and hurt me at the deepest level because she has said and told you things about me that are not true whatsoever. she has tried to manipulate you and that is not ok. [b]: [mid]-2022 i know it’s hard ... yeah i will always have to ask if it’s true ... which ik it’s not [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 wdym ask if what’s true? [b]: [mid]-2022 when mum is saying stuff that’s not true [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 oh right ... anything they say about is nearly 100% not true ... me* ... as you can quite literally see i have gained nothing from speaking up, trying to protect my siblings. nothing. ... so whatever she says is bullshit and i’d call her out on it if i could ... because this is hurtful, teenage behaviour from her ... she has hurt me just as much as my dad has because i trusted her more ... and i didn’t expect it from her ... so i will not let her have her pretty picture anymore that she has done nothing wrong [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 because if that’s what you think she is and then she says shit about me it makes it easier to believe and i’m just not a bad person at all. i am not. [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 this has destroyed me entirely [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah i bet it has [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 my sister is literally my best friend and i haven’t been able to speak to her in almost a month. it kills me. she is like my other half. i can’t even explain what it feels like to have that ripped away ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 because im being ostracised for no reason [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 your mum is making me out to be a bad person ... and i wont have it ... so i will fix it myself ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 at the moment, the things your mum and [mr daxton] are saying to me are awful and are gaslighting and abusive. i would make sure you analyse what they say to you before completely believing it is true. i have just gotten a text from your mum that has absolutely hurt me to the core. i’m not trying to destroy or ruin your relationship with your mum at all but i think that [mr daxton] has completely tainted her and destroyed the good parts of her that i appreciated. [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ... do i wanna know the messga ... also mum said ask her before u can meet the kids like how u ask me to call with the kids [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 it won’t make much sense to you because it doesn’t seem like much but she has dismissed who i am entirely as a person ... she has just gaslighted the fuck out of me ... for fuck sake [b]: [mid]-2022 thats gay [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i have nothing left bro. you know i love you and the kids more than anything. i wouldn’t do anything to hurt you guys at all or hurt your relationship with them [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah ik that ... and we love you too [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 this is truly killing me and i can’t just watch abuse ... because right now me standing my ground and calling out is ensuring they aren’t doing it again to you atm ... i’m being deadset honest ... they’ll be careful for as long as i am doing this because they know you’ll come to me and [mr daxton] knows i can tear it apart in seconds ... your mum has no idea but i could genuinely turn shit upside down ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 have your mum or [mr daxton] said anything recently? ... or have you overheard anything? [b]: [mid]-2022 nope ... i’m not at school [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 everything all good?? [b]: [mid]-2022 cause sick ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 if this doesn’t get resolved soon i’ll be going to court ... i have a legal right to see them ... not you but them i do [b]: [mid]-2022 oh damn [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 they’re fucking w the wrong person ... and being horrible ... they’re being really really awful ... and the whole family refuses to say anything ... i have genuinely just lost 3 families forever [b]: [mid]-2022 do the [gillies] family not want to talk to u? [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 nope. [ms n] refused to talk to me [b]: [mid]-2022 oh shit [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 mum and [mr daxton] have changed the narrative so that i’ve done the wrong thing ... i hope you believe i haven’t [b]: [mid]-2022 ik u havnt [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 ok ... everyone is just trying to turn a blind eye ... it’s really fucking hurtful [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah i bet it. is ... im not sure how to fix it tbh [ms avonlea]: [mid]-/2022 i haven’t ever done anything inappropriate to you or the kids so the only reason they’re withholding them is because i have a differing opinion ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and [mr daxton] fucked himself over by messaging my mum ... so he will be pissed probs [b]: [mid]-2022 what exactly did he say [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 hi [t],
just letting you know that i am very concerned with [ms avonlea]’s behaviour at the moment and in particular for her well being. [mr daxton] : [mid]-2022 oh damn [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 he stuffed up ... he big time fucked up ... tell me when you’ve read them and imma delete them from chat [b]: [mid]-2022 damn yeah ... ok ... done [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 he effectively just threatened my mum ... his ex wife [b]: [mid]-2022 that’s not good [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 he fucked up ... it’s a long story ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 how do you feel about you relationships with each of them? [b]: [mid]-2022 got more distant with mum [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 in what way? [b]: [mid]-2022 just she has been more angry ... she didn’t used to be ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 are you upset that your relationship with mum isn’t as good? ... does it upset you that mums let [mr daxton] treat you this way and now she’s doing the same? ... i’m not going to say anything. just trying to understand. this is just between you and me ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 mum and [mr daxton] will probs be telling [ms r] everything [b]: [mid]- 2022 doubt [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 i don’t ... they’ll also blame any future problems you have w them on me [b]: [mid]- 2022 that’s stupid [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 yes but they will do just be aware [b]: [mid]- 2022 ok [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 im not trying to poison you or cause problems just educate and let you know [b]: [mid]- 2022 ik that [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 and i know they will because they’ve done it to me, mainly [mr daxton]... i know but they will manipulate it and spin it until you don’t believe it [b]: [mid]- 2022 ok ... i will be prepared [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 you kind of just have to second guess everything they say unfortunately ... and you never ever have to agree with a decision they make. you are your own person. just remember that. you have a voice and you’re allowed to use it ... [b]: [mid]- 2022 i probs don’t have anything on one of these days [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 it’s up to you. i’ll be going to the farm probs this weekend and if you really wanted to come ... all up to you ... also fucking funny ... he said i won’t be told how to parent my children in my house. these are my children ... and i said ... i’ve never commented on how you parent your children ... this started because it wasn’t your child ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 have mum or [mr daxton] said anything to you recently? or have you overheard anything? [b]: [mid]- 2022 no ... why [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 curious i guess ... i have no contact w anyone ... just feels shit tbh ... none of my families will talk to me on that side ... and i can’t speak to [x] and [y]... it’s not great ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 your mum loves everyone until they disagree w her tbh ... true doe ... learnt it the hard way ... [b]: [mid]- 2022 sorry for not calling with u yesterday ... i feel rlly bad now ... i’m so sorry [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 it wasn’t very nice ... but i appreciate your apology, it means a lot [b]: [mid]- 2022 yeah it probably wasn’t the nicest ... thankyou for accepting my apology ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 are you talking to [t], [b]’s girlfriend] or smthn [b]: [mid]- 2022 no [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 well you’ve been giving shitty replies and not talking to me recently ... it’s starting to piss me off honestly [b]: [mid]- 2022 how do u want me to replie ... reply [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 just talk to me outside of when you need something ... or see me ... i don’t just exist when you need or want something [b]: [mid]- 2022 ik i’m sorry [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 sometimes i’d actually like to see my brother ... and not be blown off all the time [b]: [mid]- 2022 ok i’m not sure if i have something on [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 your friends are your first priority [b]: [mid]- 2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 lit reply [b]: [mid]- 2022 bruh i dunno what else to say ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 ---> i am serious [b]. you are being incredibly selfish recently and it is hurtful behaviour. incredibly hurtful. think back to the conversation we had at the farm. you are treading a very fine line ... did you just drop off the face of the earth [b]: [mid]- 2022 no ... alr i said to [s], [b]’s friend] lets go out tmr [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 it’s not about that ... it’s the fact that you are hurting people [b]: [mid]- 2022 how? [ms avonlea]: [mid]- 2022 really badly ... you have been awful to me recently. ignoring me. blowing me off. not seeing me. not talking to me. not doing anything with me. it’s rude ... and you are seriously hurting [s], [b]’s friend] ... you have effectively abandoned him for his ex [b]: [mid]-2022 i havnt been blowing u off [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 it’s not ok. you are choosing girls over those that truly care about you ... yes you do blow me off. get as pissed as you want but that’s what you have done. i have asked numerous times to see you and if you wanted to come over or anything but you always say no and blow me off. ... it’s hurtful. ... all you care about is having a girlfriend and not being a decent human. having a girlfriend and hanging out with girls is not a personality trait and is not nice. it’s incredibly selfish, rude, hurtful and i am sick of just accepting a half arsed relationship from you. ... i have put my arse on the line and have defended you for almost two months now. and honestly, the reason home has been good for you recently is because of me. that is the honest truth. i don’t expect you to get it but i am extremely upset. i am hurt. [b]: [mid]-2022 i am sorry, i know this wont cut it, but i am sorry. i have not realized how my actions have hurt you. i also thankyou for defending me and looking after me. as i said before, i know this wont cut it, but i am sorry. ... could i come over to your place on saturday? [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i accept your apology but it’s only words until there is action and your behaviour changes. ... i have a lunch but afterwards if you want, yes [b]: [mid]-2022 ok that would be nice [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 are mum and [mr daxton] home [b]: [mid]-2022 yes, i think [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 [mr daxton]’s ignoring me then [b]: [mid]-2022 what did u ask him [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 if i could take the kids to the park or [shopping] on sunday [b]: [mid]-2022 mum told me u asked that and that she said no [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 why’d she say no [b]: [mid]-2022 idk ... but she said ur welcome to come over her ... here [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i don’t want to go over and told [mr daxton] that [b]: [mid]-2022 fair enoughj [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’m literally having panic attacks about it [b]: [mid]-2022 oh shit ... about coming over here? [ms avonlea]: [mid-] 2022 because that means i have to kiss, touch and hug them ... i’m quite literally being abused and manipulated atm ... it’s not great [b]: [mid]-2022 just hug them, nothing else [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 and apparently mums not even going to be there sunday so why does she care ... i can’t hug them dude ... i will fucking have a panic attack [b]: [mid]-2022 idk ... where will she be ... shit thats not goofd ... good [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 that’s what [mr daxton] said [b]: [mid]-2022 oh damn [ms avonlea]: [mid-]2022 and i cannot touch mum or [mr daxton] otherwise i will be sick ... i have been abused and am still being abused. this abusive behaviour. [b]: [mid]-2022 this is not good ... i dont want to say this ... but i dont think the kids will be allowed to go out with u ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i wish you lived with me sometimes ... and the kids ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 my mum is the most supportive loving caring person in the world ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i did something he didn’t like and he’s turned on me [b]: [mid]-2022 and he also said that he is not the bad person cause [t] left him [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 yeah cause he raped her ... and kept all her money from her ... and hit her ... [b]: [mid]-2022 im tempted to stay at urs for a little ... ik this is a small thing ... but mum wont let me keep my phone in my room even if its my own phone [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 what why ... you’re more than welcome to stay ... you know that [b]: [mid]-2022 and when i said y cant i she got really angry etc [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 why’d she get angry? ... you’re 14 ... and it’s important you stay in contact with your friends ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 you could ask mum if the kids could come to the movies and we could watch [a movie]! ... if they’re so confused why they can’t see me ... they can!!! [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah i can ask ... but i know the answer [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 yeah same but it’s good to have in writing [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 cause they’re keeping the kids from me ... and it’s really hurtful ... so if she puts in writing then i know for sure ... will you ask her over text? [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah sure ... i asked ... she said ... [ms avonlea] needs to talk to her dad about this ... oh yeah when me and mum were arguying she brought up how u didnt say happy brithday to [mr daxton] [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 what did you argue about?? ... reply ... why would she talk to someone who doesn’t care whether she feels safe or not [b]: [mid]-2022 oh it was about going to the movies [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 oh right ... what does me saying happy birthday to him have anything to do with you [b]: [mid]-2022 i dont want to say that, because mum will know it came from u ... idk [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 he’s not your dad ffs ... no she’ll know i told you that ... word it your own way ... but do something along those lines ... you can be like ... she didn’t want to say happy birthday ... because he said he doesn’t care if she doesn’t feel safe ... like in your own way ... make it known that you know ... take back power ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i asked [mr daxton]... and i said you could ask mum ... i didn’t make you [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah :/ [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i can’t change it or anything ... but it still hurts [b]: [mid]-2022 ooo nice u got it changed [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 yeah i changed it but had to wait for it to be official! [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah!! [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’m really upset that they won’t let me see the kids at all [b]: [mid]-2022 yeah they said ur still welcome to come over [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 wtf ... so i’m not allowed to see them out the front of the house ... but i can come over ... they’re using the kids as leverage to get what they want ... but even though i don’t feel safe in the house that doesn’t matter ... wtaf ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i have a questionnnnnnn ... do the kids think i’m a bad person now? like do mum and [mr daxton] talk shit about me to them? do they miss me at all do you think? [b]: [mid]-2022 ik they do miss u because the keep on talking about you and saying when can you see us next. [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i miss them so much but am worried that they don’t miss me and that mum and [mr daxton] are just telling them how bad i am [b]: [mid]-2022 they are but also they arnt ... they don’t bring you up ... (mum and [mr daxton]) [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 ok ... i think they will have received a letter about mediation now ... [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 i’m so over this shit ... your mum is treating me so horribly ... [b]: [mid]-2022 i asked if i can stay at yours ... adn mum siad now ... no [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 did you ask why [b]: [mid]-2022 she said because things arnt going well rn ... between u and [mr daxton] and her [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 yeah and she’s making it worse for [mr daxton] trust me [b]: [mid]-2022 why [ms avonlea]: [mid]-2022 she’s walking on a very line ... because my mum sent [mr daxton] a message and he won’t have shown your mum it ... so she’s really playing with fire right now ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 i genuinely hate him with my entire being [b]: [late] 2022 fair enough ... he has done some pretty nasty shit [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 literally this is what i’m dealing with ... um very nasty shit ... mum said anything to you recently? ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 no i can pick you up x [b]: [late] 2022 could u not come to the front door because i don’t want a big thing again [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 no i’m not going to. i don’t want to see or speak to mum or [mr daxton] ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 they only won’t let me see the kids because they don’t want me to tell them anything or say anything to them ... and they’re using the kids to try and get me to apologise and be on their side and shit ... and it’s backfiring because i’m actually taking them to court now ... idiots ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 don’t say that one cause he doesn’t know i know that so therefore you’re not meant to know it ... but you can say something like [b]: [late] 2022 oh ok [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 don’t talk to me about manning up when you ignore [ms avonlea] and go running to [ms j] when she says something you don’t like. don’t talk to me about manning up when you can’t even own your own shitty actions against me and against [ms avonlea]. don’t talk to me about manning up when you’re scared about your image that you guilt trip and try to manipulate me and [ms avonlea] into shutting up. i can take being told to man up from other people but certainly not you because you’ll never be the man i want to be. what will make me a man is being a good person who doesn’t have such a fragile masculinity that my own family has to shoot fluff up my ass [b]: [late] 2022 wow ... thats a good one ... damn ... im not gonna remember all of that tho ... but ill say some of those [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 just say bits that you want to ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 and if mum says to you about trust just say it right back to her ... and say ... if you don’t trust me that’s fine cause i actually don’t trust you. you broke that trust when you refused to stand up to [mr daxton] when he grabbed me, when he yelled and swore in my face and when you made me write his name out on a piece of paper for who i owe my life too. you broke my trust when you came to my room and told me to either block [ms avonlea] or move out. you broke my trust along time ago so sorry if i stopped giving a shit whether you trusted me or not [b]: [late] 2022 oh damn ... yeah thats a good one ... [b]: [late] 2022 sometimes i wish yk i could stop it all but then i realize i have [t, b’s girlfriend] [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 don’t kill yourself ... you have the option to move out ... that’s an option [b]: [late] 2022 ik [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 so don’t kill yourself [b]: [late] 2022 i wont cause of [y], [ms gillies]], [t], [ms avonlea] [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 good ... i love how [x] isn’t in there ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 [y] is just angel ... but she’ll turn on mum and [mr daxton]... she’s too similar to me [b]: [late] 2022 mum protects [x] no matter what, like ill say dont do that and mum and [mr daxton] both get rlly angry at me for telling him off [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 she’s fiery... and sassy [b]: [late] 2022 lmao yes [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 yes cause he’s [mr daxton]’s son ... [mr daxton]’s always wanted a son [b]: [late] 2022 yep [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 i honestly will end up with you and [y] living with me ... i can see it now ... because she’ll piss [mr daxton] off when she hits puberty ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 everything ok?? x [b]: [late] 2022 me and mum are having the convo tmr [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 how’d it go w mum? [b]: [late] 2022 we still havnt had the talk [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 oh lol [b]: [late] 2022 yeah [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 did you end up having convo?? [b]: [late] 2022 yes and i wanna kms ... they didnt let me go to fucking lseep for 1 hour ... they wanted to know what shit u have been talking about [mr daxton]... and [mr daxton] and mum keept on swearing and asking if i thought [mr daxton] was a rapist [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 wtf ... what were they swearing about? ... and what did you say?? ... [b]: [late] 2022 about me not following the rules and stuff [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 how’s that got# anything to do with you leaving [b]: [late] 2022 because i leave cause i dont like them and their rules [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 well you leave cause they’re abusive ffs ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 are you ok? [b]: [late] 2022 but she said she will be back in a hour and a half so if u wanna go to [ms avonlea] tell (either move, or stay for a little) me and i will give u ur phone back ... apart from mum barging into my room and open the blinds at 9nsaying “i’m sick of this” [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 why is she saying that? [b]: [late] 2022 cause of what i said yesterday ... and then she went into her room and started crying ... ig i’m still in shock [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 well maybe she shouldn’t treat you the way she does? ... shock about what? [b]: [late] 2022 mum bargain in ... it was so unexpected [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 oh right ... that’s fair ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 make sure your password to your ipad is changed to a new word one not a pin ... and turn notifications off ... and delete all of my logins and stuff once you’re done please ... [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 r u ok? [b]: [late] 2022 no i just want to go to urs [ms avonlea]: [late] 2022 i know bud but i’m trying to do this the right way cause it’s going to get bad when you go back if you do come ... we need to make sure your safe [b]: [late] 2022 yeah :/
[1] the term “half-sister” is a recognised and formal way to describe relationships, see for example donnell & dovey [2010] famcafc 15; (2010) flc 93-428 at [3] and in the headnote. [2] senior counsel’s emphasis.[3] wacando v the commonwealth [1981] hca 60; (1981) 148 clr 1 (‘wacando’).[4] this is the only reference in ms avonlea’s affidavit of evidence in chief to the l communications. [5] ms avonlea was 19 years old at the time of the late 2021 conversation with ms gillies and 20 years old at the time of the m sign confrontation. [6] see annexure 13 to her trial affidavit. [7] page 212 of 213. [8] [9] these were the earlier or interim affidavits that, i infer, were consistent with the trial material. [10] described at [37] and text like messages annexed at -2 pages 154-167 of ms gillies trial affidavit filed 30 august 2023.[11] from [33] of mr daxton’s trial affidavit. ms avonlea responded to this paragraph at [18] of her reply affidavit and issue was taken with the specific times of care, and ms avonlea asserted she never asked for payment, but no issue was taken with the passage recited. i accept that part of mr daxton’s evidence.[12] ms gillies affidavit at [28][13] ms avonlea at [18] of her reply affidavit.[14] see ms gillies affidavit at [37] and the text messages at annexure 2.[15] see annexure 6 to ms avonlea’s affidavit of evidence in chief.[16] annexure 6, page 53 of 88.[17] see mr daxton’s trial affidavit at annexure 5. [18] at [21] of dr e’s report.[19] see annexure 2 to mr daxton’s trial affidavit[20] ms avonlea’s mother, ms j, in her long late 2022 text message to mr daxton refers to ms avonlea raising her voice on this occasion and i am satisfied that ms avonlea had truthfully told ms j that she had done so. [21] adopted in muggeridge and anor & moller [2019] famca 727. [22] lori kaplan, linda ade-ritter and charles b. hennon, ‘issues of split custody; siblings separated by divorce’ (1991) 16(3/4) journal of divorce and remarriage 253, 254 – 255.[23] see hannam j in linnane & linnane [2022] fedcfamc1f 461 at [164].