last updated: 5 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
everhardt & algeron [2023] fedcfamc2f 1412
orders
the court orders that:  from 5.00pm friday until before school monday each alternate week commencing friday 29 september 2023 and such time to be suspended during school holiday periods with before school changeover occurring at the children’s school and/or daycare, (i) where time as specified in order 3(a) occurs on a weekend which has a gazetted public holiday adjacent to the weekend day the following occur: where the friday is a gazetted public holiday from 5.00pm thursday until before school monday, and where the monday is a gazetted public holiday from 5.00pm friday until before school tuesday. (b) for the autumn, winter and spring short school holidays: (i) in 2023 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the second saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the last saturday of the holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the second saturday of the holidays. (c) in the long summer holidays as follows: (i) as agreed between the parents to be times that equate to half of the long school holidays. (d) at all other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   where time as specified in order 3(a) occurs on a weekend which has a gazetted public holiday adjacent to the weekend day the following occur: where the friday is a gazetted public holiday from 5.00pm thursday until before school monday, and where the monday is a gazetted public holiday from 5.00pm friday until before school tuesday.   for the autumn, winter and spring short school holidays: (i) in 2023 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the second saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the last saturday of the holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the second saturday of the holidays. (c) in the long summer holidays as follows: (i) as agreed between the parents to be times that equate to half of the long school holidays. (d) at all other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   in 2023 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the second saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the last saturday of the holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the second saturday of the holidays.  ) in 2024 and each alternate year there from 5.00pm on the first saturday of the school holidays until 5.00pm on the second saturday of the holidays.   in the long summer holidays as follows: (i) as agreed between the parents to be times that equate to half of the long school holidays. (d) at all other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   as agreed between the parents to be times that equate to half of the long school holidays.   at all other times as agreed in writing between the parents.   each tuesday and thursday at 5.30pm for a period not exceeding thirty minutes, (b) at reasonable times as requested by the children, and (c) at all other times as agreed between the parents.   at reasonable times as requested by the children, and (c) at all other times as agreed between the parents.   at all other times as agreed between the parents.   for birthdays each year the parent who does not have the children already in their care pursuant to the preceding orders shall spend time with the children as follows: (i) on a week day: from afterschool or 3.30pm on a non school day until 7.00pm, (ii) on a weekend: from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   on a week day: from afterschool or 3.30pm on a non school day until 7.00pm, (ii) on a weekend: from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.  ) on a weekend: from 3.00pm until 7.00pm.   with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day in 2023 and alternating each year thereafter. (b) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and alternating each year thereafter.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and alternating each year thereafter.   be permitted to attend all school and childcare functions and events to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports carnivals, parent teacher interviews and any other similar occasion. (b) to receive copies of all documents normally provided to parents including but not limited to newsletters, photographs, school reports and any other similar document. (c) to discuss the children with their educators at any time. (d) each parent be permitted to attend all extracurricular events and functions relevant to the children and each parent keep the other advised as to such events and provide no less than 72 hours notice thereof.   to receive copies of all documents normally provided to parents including but not limited to newsletters, photographs, school reports and any other similar document. (c) to discuss the children with their educators at any time. (d) each parent be permitted to attend all extracurricular events and functions relevant to the children and each parent keep the other advised as to such events and provide no less than 72 hours notice thereof.   to discuss the children with their educators at any time. (d) each parent be permitted to attend all extracurricular events and functions relevant to the children and each parent keep the other advised as to such events and provide no less than 72 hours notice thereof.   each parent be permitted to attend all extracurricular events and functions relevant to the children and each parent keep the other advised as to such events and provide no less than 72 hours notice thereof.   keep the other advised at all times of any medical or health condition affecting the children or either of them. (b) be permitted to attend any medical appointment in relation to the children and keep the other parent advised as to the same. (c) ensure that each parent has copies of all prescriptions and medical information relevant to the children so as to ensure the children can receive any treatment reasonably and directed for them. (d) each parent keep the other advised as to any medical health issue concerning the children and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the children's treating practitioners about the same.   be permitted to attend any medical appointment in relation to the children and keep the other parent advised as to the same. (c) ensure that each parent has copies of all prescriptions and medical information relevant to the children so as to ensure the children can receive any treatment reasonably and directed for them. (d) each parent keep the other advised as to any medical health issue concerning the children and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the children's treating practitioners about the same.   ensure that each parent has copies of all prescriptions and medical information relevant to the children so as to ensure the children can receive any treatment reasonably and directed for them. (d) each parent keep the other advised as to any medical health issue concerning the children and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the children's treating practitioners about the same.   each parent keep the other advised as to any medical health issue concerning the children and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the children's treating practitioners about the same.   exposing the child to family violence or any criminal activity, (b) exposing the child to any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol, (c) posting information as to the other parent, the parenting dispute or allegations raised herein on any social media or allowing any other person to do so, (d) denigrating the other parent or any members of their family to the child or in the presence of the child.   exposing the child to any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol, (c) posting information as to the other parent, the parenting dispute or allegations raised herein on any social media or allowing any other person to do so, (d) denigrating the other parent or any members of their family to the child or in the presence of the child.   posting information as to the other parent, the parenting dispute or allegations raised herein on any social media or allowing any other person to do so, (d) denigrating the other parent or any members of their family to the child or in the presence of the child.   denigrating the other parent or any members of their family to the child or in the presence of the child.
the court orders by consent that:  the mother and father are required to maintain their head hair at a length of not less than four (4) centimetres, neither head hair nor body hair is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of these orders, the mother and father are required to make an appointment with awdts by telephoning ... for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes, (c) each party and their legal representatives is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders, (d) the mother and father are to attend at an awdts clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother and father at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes from the other party or their legal representatives, (e) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes may be sent to the each party care of their solicitor’s email address and shall be deemed to have been received by the party at the date and time it is sent via email. (f) the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of these orders, the mother and father are required to make an appointment with awdts by telephoning ... for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes, (c) each party and their legal representatives is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders, (d) the mother and father are to attend at an awdts clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother and father at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes from the other party or their legal representatives, (e) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes may be sent to the each party care of their solicitor’s email address and shall be deemed to have been received by the party at the date and time it is sent via email. (f) the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   each party and their legal representatives is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders, (d) the mother and father are to attend at an awdts clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother and father at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes from the other party or their legal representatives, (e) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes may be sent to the each party care of their solicitor’s email address and shall be deemed to have been received by the party at the date and time it is sent via email. (f) the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   the mother and father are to attend at an awdts clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother and father at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes from the other party or their legal representatives, (e) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes may be sent to the each party care of their solicitor’s email address and shall be deemed to have been received by the party at the date and time it is sent via email. (f) the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes may be sent to the each party care of their solicitor’s email address and shall be deemed to have been received by the party at the date and time it is sent via email. (f) the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   the mother and father are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and a copy of these orders. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol, etg and prescription and non-prescription drugs of abuse including illicit drugs, cannabis and metabolites, (h) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug and alcohol testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, costs and time required for results to be made available, and (i) all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   all costs associated with any hair drug and alcohol testing shall be met by the father. (j) these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.   these orders hereby authorise awdts (or nominee) to provide the results of each test directly to both parents (and any legal representative of the parents or either of them) and any independent children’s lawyer or family report writer.
reasons for judgment
judge j young:
introduction
facts
the parties’ relationship
parenting arrangements post-separation
the mother’s unilateral relocation
the father’s case  amended application for final and interlocutory orders filed 20 october 2023, and (2) consolidated affidavit of the father filed 20 october 2023.   consolidated affidavit of the father filed 20 october 2023.
the mother’s case  response to initiating application filed 24 october 2023, (2) affidavit of the mother filed 24 october 2023, and (3) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 24 october 2023.   affidavit of the mother filed 24 october 2023, and (3) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 24 october 2023.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 24 october 2023.
issues in dispute  the relocation of the mother, (2) the time the children spend with the father, (3) frequency of contact with the children by the non-custodial parent.   the time the children spend with the father, (3) frequency of contact with the children by the non-custodial parent.   frequency of contact with the children by the non-custodial parent.
summary
family violence
mother’s unilateral relocation
drug and alcohol use
the children
dffh response
consideration  the benefit of the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect, or family violence.
whether the orders sought by the parties allow for a meaningful relationship
whether there is a need to protect the children from harm
whether the mother should relocate with the children to the f school area ] ...it is worthwhile recalling the statements of principle proscribing the power to make orders which are, in effect, mandatory injunctions, forcing parents to live in places against their will so as to fulfil the statutory mandate to accord paramount importance to the children’s best interests. [27] there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children’s ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207-208, 210). the tension at the intersection of those conflicting interests is even greater when an order is sought, not just to restrain one parent’s move further away, but to compel the parent who has already moved away to return and establish a new residence closer to the other parent. [28] while the children’s interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”) at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232, sampson and hartnett (no.10) [2007] famca 1365, (2007) flc 93-350, zanda & zanda [2014] famcafc 173, (2014) flc 93-607 at [132]- [136]). only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests (see u v u at 262).  ] it may be accepted, as it was in this case, that the court has power to make a coercive order. importantly though, it is well established that the proper exercise of that power is “at the extreme end of the discretionary range” and there should exist “rare” or “extreme” factors that warrant the court exercising its discretion to make a coercive order requiring a parent to relocate so as to continue to perform the role of primary caregiver of children. citations omitted.
conclusion
associate: dated: 2 november 2023
dated: 2 november 2023