last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
elsner & elsner [2023] fedcfamc2f 1419
orders
the court orders that:
suburb c proceeds  $760,836 to the wife, (b) $748,495 to the husband, and (c) of any balance then remaining it being noted interest is continuing to accrue on the balance held in trust: (i) 50% to the wife, and (ii) 50% to the husband.   $748,495 to the husband, and (c) of any balance then remaining it being noted interest is continuing to accrue on the balance held in trust: (i) 50% to the wife, and (ii) 50% to the husband.   of any balance then remaining it being noted interest is continuing to accrue on the balance held in trust: (i) 50% to the wife, and (ii) 50% to the husband.   50% to the wife, and (ii) 50% to the husband.  ) 50% to the husband.
share transfers  d company shares, and (b) e company shares.   e company shares.
retention of assets  the bank accounts in her name, (b) her f company and g company shareholding, and (c) her motor vehicle 1.   her f company and g company shareholding, and (c) her motor vehicle 1.   her motor vehicle 1.   the bank accounts in his sole name, (b) his f company and g company shareholding, (c) his e company and d company shareholding (save for the shares transferred to the wife pursuant to order 2), (d) the l company policies in his name, and (e) his motor vehicle 2.   his f company and g company shareholding, (c) his e company and d company shareholding (save for the shares transferred to the wife pursuant to order 2), (d) the l company policies in his name, and (e) his motor vehicle 2.   his e company and d company shareholding (save for the shares transferred to the wife pursuant to order 2), (d) the l company policies in his name, and (e) his motor vehicle 2.   the l company policies in his name, and (e) his motor vehicle 2.   his motor vehicle 2.
liabilities
superannuation  the establishment of a separate account in the name of the wife in the fund, or (b) the transfer or ‘rolling over’ into another superannuation fund of the superannuation account of the payment split created by order 9, or (c) the wife satisfies a condition of release and is paid the payment split which was created by order 9, or (d) the wife executing a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90zxa of the act in relation to the payment split created by order 9 hereof,   the transfer or ‘rolling over’ into another superannuation fund of the superannuation account of the payment split created by order 9, or (c) the wife satisfies a condition of release and is paid the payment split which was created by order 9, or (d) the wife executing a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90zxa of the act in relation to the payment split created by order 9 hereof,   the wife satisfies a condition of release and is paid the payment split which was created by order 9, or (d) the wife executing a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90zxa of the act in relation to the payment split created by order 9 hereof,   the wife executing a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90zxa of the act in relation to the payment split created by order 9 hereof,
the husband be and is hereby restrained by himself, his servants or agents from executing a death benefit nomination in favour of any person or doing any other act or things which would render any part of his interest in the fund a “not splittable payment” within the meaning of regulations 12 or 13 of the superannuation regulations.
other   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of the making of these orders, (b) money standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account is to be divided equally between the parties and the account is to thereafter to be closed, (c) each party foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, save for the superannuation splitting orders contained herein, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for any credit card in their respective names as at the date of these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   money standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account is to be divided equally between the parties and the account is to thereafter to be closed, (c) each party foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, save for the superannuation splitting orders contained herein, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for any credit card in their respective names as at the date of these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party foregoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, save for the superannuation splitting orders contained herein, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for any credit card in their respective names as at the date of these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for any credit card in their respective names as at the date of these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for any credit card in their respective names as at the date of these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
procedural orders
and the court notes:
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
background
parties’ positions
the wife
the husband
the issues  assessment of contributions, with particular consideration given to: (i) the assets held by the husband at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, in particular suburb c, and (ii) the inheritance received by the wife in 2016 and her application of those monies, and (b) assessment of relevant section 75(2) factors, including particularly the parties’ income and capacity to earn income.   the assets held by the husband at the commencement of cohabitation and the use of those assets during the parties’ relationship, in particular suburb c, and (ii) the inheritance received by the wife in 2016 and her application of those monies, and  ) the inheritance received by the wife in 2016 and her application of those monies, and   assessment of relevant section 75(2) factors, including particularly the parties’ income and capacity to earn income.
the evidence
objections to evidence
b. treatment of initial contributions brought by the applicant, and c. treatment of the applicant’s receipt of an in inheritance in 2016.
the in-principle agreement
between june 2022 and january 2023, my previous solicitors and [the husband’s] lawyers undertook negotiations regarding our property matter. as part of these negotiations we agreed to sell [suburb c] as soon as possible.
around 9 november 2022, [the husband’s] lawyers and my previous solicitors reached what was an in-principle agreement regarding our property settlement based on our without prejudice communication. around 9 november 2022, my previous solicitor drafted and provided to [the husband’s] lawyers a draft minute of consent orders. around 23 november 2022, my previous solicitor received a response from [the husband’s] lawyers regarding the draft proposed minute of consent orders. [...]
in [late] 2022, after [the husband] and i had agreed to place [suburb c] on the market for sale and for the sale to occur as soon as possible. i relocated and moved into rental accommodation. i wanted to remain in the property, however, i was under the impression that i needed to relocate before it was placed on the market and once the intervention order expired. despite moving out of the property, i continued to pay for the outgoings and utilities of the property and continued to be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep. i prepared the house for the sale and maintained the gardens in preparing it for sale.
the draft settlement documents prepared by [the husband’s] lawyers and my previous solicitors were draft versions only. they were never signed by [the husband] or i nor filed with this honourable court. on 16 february 2023, i instructed my new lawyers [...] to write to [the husband’s] lawyers to confirm that i withdrew all of the previous offers. i wanted to continue with negotiations after obtaining new legal advice.
part performance of the agreement in pursuance of the agreement: the former home was formally placed on the market on or about [early] 2023 and subsequently sold. the agent was appointed by [the wife] and the sale was pretty much coordinated by her in conjunction with the agent. on the advice of the agent, and in order to maximise the sale price of the former home, i painted the interior of the home and. i spent 14 days undertaking that work. [...] the sale of the former home settled [in mid-] 2023 and the net proceeds of sale, now being $1,[300,000], after some jointly agreed withdrawals, are currently held in a controlled monies account...
if it had not been for that agreement, i would not have expended as much time and energy preparing the property for sale or, indeed, agreed to it being then put up for sale.
... i disagree that there was part performance of any agreement. we both agreed neither could afford to buy the other out and retain the property. agreement was reached that the property be sold. i was living in the property at the time and paying the outgoings. i had to secure alternative rental accommodation as a consequence of selling the property.   he acknowledged, as conveyed via his lawyers’ correspondence of 7 march 2023, the wife’s right to “walk away” before the agreement was “enshrined in court orders”, (b) he acknowledged via his counsel, only a financial agreement made under the act could be binding, and (c) his counsel confirmed the husband sought an alteration of property interests between the parties and was not seeking to rely on the asserted agreement to contend that it was not just and equitable for there to be an alteration of property interests pursuant to section 79(2).   he acknowledged via his counsel, only a financial agreement made under the act could be binding, and (c) his counsel confirmed the husband sought an alteration of property interests between the parties and was not seeking to rely on the asserted agreement to contend that it was not just and equitable for there to be an alteration of property interests pursuant to section 79(2).   his counsel confirmed the husband sought an alteration of property interests between the parties and was not seeking to rely on the asserted agreement to contend that it was not just and equitable for there to be an alteration of property interests pursuant to section 79(2).
it is only possible to oust the jurisdiction of the court by final order or a qualifying financial agreement (and previously by approved maintenance agreement), an agreement other than a financial agreement will be relevant as evidence of what the parties intended and of the financial arrangements in place at the time and subsequently, in that sense any agreement is relevant but not in and of itself determinative.
in determining s 79 applications in circumstances where there has been an earlier agreement, it will often be necessary to consider what was the value of the parties’ assets at the time of the agreement, what their various contributions were to that time, and what might have been an appropriate s 75(2) adjustment. a consideration of these matters might well be necessary in order to provide a background to the parties’ understanding of what was a just and equitable settlement at the time. however, and perhaps more significantly, it would generally be necessary for the court to acquaint itself with changes in the composition and value of the property pool, so that post-separation contributions can be assessed.
legal principles
exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiations (1) evidence is not to be adduced of: (a) a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute, or (b) a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.   a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute, or (b) a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.   a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.   the substance of the evidence has been partly disclosed with the express or implied consent of the persons in dispute, and full disclosure of the evidence is reasonably necessary to enable a proper understanding of the other evidence that has already been adduced, or
... (f) the proceeding in which it is sought to adduce the evidence is a proceeding to enforce an agreement between the persons in dispute to settle the dispute, or a proceeding in which the making of such an agreement is in issue, or (g) evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence, or   the proceeding in which it is sought to adduce the evidence is a proceeding to enforce an agreement between the persons in dispute to settle the dispute, or a proceeding in which the making of such an agreement is in issue, or (g) evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence, or   evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence, or   emphasised the policy underpinning the protection of without prejudice negotiations and the importance of encouraging parties to explore settlements, (b) submitted different principles apply to family law matters than contract law, (c) submitted the parties had agreed the property was to be sold and submitted the wife had not misled the court, and (d) contended if the husband has “seller’s remorse on selling the home... that is frankly his problem”.   submitted different principles apply to family law matters than contract law, (c) submitted the parties had agreed the property was to be sold and submitted the wife had not misled the court, and (d) contended if the husband has “seller’s remorse on selling the home... that is frankly his problem”.   submitted the parties had agreed the property was to be sold and submitted the wife had not misled the court, and (d) contended if the husband has “seller’s remorse on selling the home... that is frankly his problem”.   contended if the husband has “seller’s remorse on selling the home... that is frankly his problem”.
determination   the evidence given by the wife in her trial affidavit of an “in-principle agreement” reached between the parties in november 2022 and of their agreement to sell the house as soon as possible, (b) the husband’s evidence which had not been objected to, that he had relied on the agreement to undertake work to the home and to sell the home, (c) the submissions of counsel for the husband that it was necessary for the court to see the terms that had been agreed to provide a complete picture of what had been agreed in november 2022 and to put into context the parties’ contributions and financial circumstances from that point on, and (d) the absence of any submission as to prejudice that would be suffered by the wife if the terms of the in-principle agreement were admitted into evidence.   the husband’s evidence which had not been objected to, that he had relied on the agreement to undertake work to the home and to sell the home, (c) the submissions of counsel for the husband that it was necessary for the court to see the terms that had been agreed to provide a complete picture of what had been agreed in november 2022 and to put into context the parties’ contributions and financial circumstances from that point on, and (d) the absence of any submission as to prejudice that would be suffered by the wife if the terms of the in-principle agreement were admitted into evidence.   the submissions of counsel for the husband that it was necessary for the court to see the terms that had been agreed to provide a complete picture of what had been agreed in november 2022 and to put into context the parties’ contributions and financial circumstances from that point on, and (d) the absence of any submission as to prejudice that would be suffered by the wife if the terms of the in-principle agreement were admitted into evidence.   the absence of any submission as to prejudice that would be suffered by the wife if the terms of the in-principle agreement were admitted into evidence.   paragraph 28(e) of the husband’s trial affidavit, (b) the first two pages of annexure e3 to the husband’s trial affidavit, and (c) annexure e6 of the husband’s trial affidavit.   the first two pages of annexure e3 to the husband’s trial affidavit, and (c) annexure e6 of the husband’s trial affidavit.   annexure e6 of the husband’s trial affidavit.   paragraphs 20 to 27 of the husband’s trial affidavit, (b) paragraphs 29 to 32 of the husband’s trial affidavit, (c) annexures e1 to e4 of the husband’s trial affidavit, save for the first two pages of e-3, and (d) the affidavit of the husband’s lawyer peter gigliotti filed 6 october 2023 and the annexures to that affidavit.   paragraphs 29 to 32 of the husband’s trial affidavit, (c) annexures e1 to e4 of the husband’s trial affidavit, save for the first two pages of e-3, and (d) the affidavit of the husband’s lawyer peter gigliotti filed 6 october 2023 and the annexures to that affidavit.   annexures e1 to e4 of the husband’s trial affidavit, save for the first two pages of e-3, and (d) the affidavit of the husband’s lawyer peter gigliotti filed 6 october 2023 and the annexures to that affidavit.   the affidavit of the husband’s lawyer peter gigliotti filed 6 october 2023 and the annexures to that affidavit.
consideration of the evidence  the first two pages of annexure e3 to the husband’s trial affidavit sets out, in a letter from the wife’s former solicitors to the husband’s solicitors, an asserted summary of assets and liabilities as at august 2022. that summary included the assets identified by the parties in the joint balance sheet at the final hearing, albeit with different values. counsel for the husband did not make any submissions at the conclusion of the hearing as to how this evidence had any bearing on my determination of the issues in dispute, (b) paragraph 28(e) of the husband’s trial affidavit deposed to procedural fairness being afforded to the trustee of the husband’s superannuation fund. that paragraph referred to annexure e6 which consists of a letter dated 6 december 2022 sent to the trustee of the husband’s superannuation fund and an enclosed minute of proposed orders which the letter advised had been agreed between the parties, (c) the minute of proposed orders annexed at e6 contemplated (among other things) the sale of suburb c, the terms and conditions of sale and for the net proceeds of sale to be divided between the parties. the minute provided for the wife to have the sole right to occupy the home pending settlement, that she meet the expenses relating to the home and that she keep the home in a clean and tidy condition. the minute also provided for a transfer of shares and a superannuation split. when read in conjunction with the asserted summary of assets in e3, the transfer of shares and superannuation split would have achieved the equalisation of the parties’ shareholdings and superannuation, and (d) there was nothing in the minute that was inconsistent with the wife’s evidence or which shed light on the conduct of the parties after separation beyond what had been deposed to by each of them. notwithstanding the submissions made at the outset of the hearing, counsel for the husband did not make any submissions at the conclusion of the hearing as to precisely how the terms of the purported agreement had any bearing on the issues requiring determination.   paragraph 28(e) of the husband’s trial affidavit deposed to procedural fairness being afforded to the trustee of the husband’s superannuation fund. that paragraph referred to annexure e6 which consists of a letter dated 6 december 2022 sent to the trustee of the husband’s superannuation fund and an enclosed minute of proposed orders which the letter advised had been agreed between the parties, (c) the minute of proposed orders annexed at e6 contemplated (among other things) the sale of suburb c, the terms and conditions of sale and for the net proceeds of sale to be divided between the parties. the minute provided for the wife to have the sole right to occupy the home pending settlement, that she meet the expenses relating to the home and that she keep the home in a clean and tidy condition. the minute also provided for a transfer of shares and a superannuation split. when read in conjunction with the asserted summary of assets in e3, the transfer of shares and superannuation split would have achieved the equalisation of the parties’ shareholdings and superannuation, and (d) there was nothing in the minute that was inconsistent with the wife’s evidence or which shed light on the conduct of the parties after separation beyond what had been deposed to by each of them. notwithstanding the submissions made at the outset of the hearing, counsel for the husband did not make any submissions at the conclusion of the hearing as to precisely how the terms of the purported agreement had any bearing on the issues requiring determination.   the minute of proposed orders annexed at e6 contemplated (among other things) the sale of suburb c, the terms and conditions of sale and for the net proceeds of sale to be divided between the parties. the minute provided for the wife to have the sole right to occupy the home pending settlement, that she meet the expenses relating to the home and that she keep the home in a clean and tidy condition. the minute also provided for a transfer of shares and a superannuation split. when read in conjunction with the asserted summary of assets in e3, the transfer of shares and superannuation split would have achieved the equalisation of the parties’ shareholdings and superannuation, and (d) there was nothing in the minute that was inconsistent with the wife’s evidence or which shed light on the conduct of the parties after separation beyond what had been deposed to by each of them. notwithstanding the submissions made at the outset of the hearing, counsel for the husband did not make any submissions at the conclusion of the hearing as to precisely how the terms of the purported agreement had any bearing on the issues requiring determination.   there was nothing in the minute that was inconsistent with the wife’s evidence or which shed light on the conduct of the parties after separation beyond what had been deposed to by each of them. notwithstanding the submissions made at the outset of the hearing, counsel for the husband did not make any submissions at the conclusion of the hearing as to precisely how the terms of the purported agreement had any bearing on the issues requiring determination.
the witnesses
legal principles
parties’ property interests
assets & liabilities
superannuation
financial resources
is it just and equitable to make an order?
contributions  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage ... to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ..., including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker ...
the task of assessing contributions under s 79 of the act is an holistic one, what is required is to evaluate the extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties in the context of their particular relationship (dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154). as was also said by the full court in lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, at paragraphs 40 and 41 such an evaluation “inevitably involves value judgments and matters of impression”, and accordingly it cannot be treated as “a mathematical exercise”.
and by counsel for the wife referring to full court’s decision in horrigan & horrigan:[13]
it is well established that an assessment of contributions is not a mathematical exercise, but rather involves the identification and assessment of all of the parties’ respective contributions, in a holistic way across the course of the relationship and in the post separation period to the point of assessment.   replacing all guttering, (b) replacing and cleaning fascia boards, (c) replacing six windows, (d) repointing the roof, (e) replacing damaged tiles, (f) gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   replacing and cleaning fascia boards, (c) replacing six windows, (d) repointing the roof, (e) replacing damaged tiles, (f) gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   replacing six windows, (d) repointing the roof, (e) replacing damaged tiles, (f) gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   repointing the roof, (e) replacing damaged tiles, (f) gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   replacing damaged tiles, (f) gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   gutting the hall, master bedroom, bathroom, second bedroom, living room and dining room, (g) adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   adding three built-in cupboards, (h) shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   shifting two doorways, (i) extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   extending the bathroom, (j) rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   rewiring and plumbing, (k) hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   hanging of plaster board, (l) installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   installing a new bath, shower and vanity, (m) tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   tiling and painting, (n) making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   making and installing new cupboard shelves, (o) brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   brickwork for a new fireplace mantel, (p) installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   installing a new wood heater and chimney, (q) painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   painting the living room and dining room, (r) removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   removing and making a new front veranda, (s) installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   installing galvanised sheet roofing, plumbing, guttering and flashing, and (t) various work to the garage.   various work to the garage.
as with much of the relationship... she only put a small portion of her earnings towards household expenses... i have no idea what she did with the rest, save for purchasing her [f company] shares, frequent extravagant and unnecessary upgrades of her cars, at least 12 return trips to new zealand and otherwise spending it on herself.   she gifted $11,000 to each of the parties’ children ($22,000 in total), (b) she applied $17,000 towards the purchase of the motor vehicle 1 she continues to drive, trading in her previous motor vehicle, (c) approximately $17,000 was applied towards the new fence and driveway installed at suburb c in 2020 and 2021, (d) the wife deposed some monies were applied to family expenses. in response, the husband deposed that “little or nothing found its way into household expenses.” however, the husband also gave evidence he did not know the details of the wife’s inheritance or how it was applied and the wife was not cross-examined in respect of her evidence that she applied it in part to family expenses. accordingly, i accept the wife’s evidence it was in part applied to family expenses, and (e) the balance was retained as savings in her bank account.   she applied $17,000 towards the purchase of the motor vehicle 1 she continues to drive, trading in her previous motor vehicle, (c) approximately $17,000 was applied towards the new fence and driveway installed at suburb c in 2020 and 2021, (d) the wife deposed some monies were applied to family expenses. in response, the husband deposed that “little or nothing found its way into household expenses.” however, the husband also gave evidence he did not know the details of the wife’s inheritance or how it was applied and the wife was not cross-examined in respect of her evidence that she applied it in part to family expenses. accordingly, i accept the wife’s evidence it was in part applied to family expenses, and (e) the balance was retained as savings in her bank account.   approximately $17,000 was applied towards the new fence and driveway installed at suburb c in 2020 and 2021, (d) the wife deposed some monies were applied to family expenses. in response, the husband deposed that “little or nothing found its way into household expenses.” however, the husband also gave evidence he did not know the details of the wife’s inheritance or how it was applied and the wife was not cross-examined in respect of her evidence that she applied it in part to family expenses. accordingly, i accept the wife’s evidence it was in part applied to family expenses, and (e) the balance was retained as savings in her bank account.   the wife deposed some monies were applied to family expenses. in response, the husband deposed that “little or nothing found its way into household expenses.” however, the husband also gave evidence he did not know the details of the wife’s inheritance or how it was applied and the wife was not cross-examined in respect of her evidence that she applied it in part to family expenses. accordingly, i accept the wife’s evidence it was in part applied to family expenses, and (e) the balance was retained as savings in her bank account.   the balance was retained as savings in her bank account.   replacing canvas awnings, (b) removing trees, (c) pressure cleaning the roof, (d) installing a water tank, (e) repairs to a wood heater, fly wire doors, wood rot on the front veranda and a roof leak in the garage, (f) replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   removing trees, (c) pressure cleaning the roof, (d) installing a water tank, (e) repairs to a wood heater, fly wire doors, wood rot on the front veranda and a roof leak in the garage, (f) replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   pressure cleaning the roof, (d) installing a water tank, (e) repairs to a wood heater, fly wire doors, wood rot on the front veranda and a roof leak in the garage, (f) replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   installing a water tank, (e) repairs to a wood heater, fly wire doors, wood rot on the front veranda and a roof leak in the garage, (f) replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   repairs to a wood heater, fly wire doors, wood rot on the front veranda and a roof leak in the garage, (f) replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   replacing 30 weatherboards, (g) exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   exterior painting and preparation work for the painting, (h) straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   straightening fenceposts, (i) a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   a new front fence, gate frames and gates, and (j) moving a front tap.   moving a front tap.
assessment of contributions
...it is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other relevant contributions of both the husband and the wife. in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution.
in our view, talk of “erosion” of the early capital contribution obscures the issue rather than illuminates it. however, it can be taken as well settled that the length of the relationship has a significant impact on how early significant capital contributions should be viewed in assessing the totality of the parties’ contributions. for example, the full court has said:
the longer the duration of the marriage, depending on the quality and extent of her contribution, the more the proportionality of the original contribution is reduced.
and
the longer the marriage the more likely it is that there will be later factors of significance, and in the ultimate the exercise is to weigh the original contribution with all other, later, factors and those later factors, whether equal or not, may in the circumstances of the individual case reduce the significance of the original contribution.  ferences omitted]
it will be clear from the passages that we have referred to that his honour rejected an argument that there was a particular type of contribution that related to “special skills” or “special talents”, with the result that such a finding “is productive of a particular finding, or range of findings in respect of contribution”. full court decisions have supported that view (see kane & kane [2013] famcafc 205, hoffman & hoffman [2014] famcafc 92) and the jurisprudence can be fairly said to be settled.
section 79(4)(d)
matters relevant pursuant to section 75(2)
superannuation
conclusion  motor vehicle 1 registered in her name: $15,000 (b) f company shares held in her name: $6,973 (c) g company shares held in her name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in the husband’s name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in the husband’s name: $35,446 (f) monies held in her bank accounts: $342   f company shares held in her name: $6,973 (c) g company shares held in her name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in the husband’s name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in the husband’s name: $35,446 (f) monies held in her bank accounts: $342   g company shares held in her name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in the husband’s name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in the husband’s name: $35,446 (f) monies held in her bank accounts: $342   50% of the d company shares held in the husband’s name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in the husband’s name: $35,446 (f) monies held in her bank accounts: $342   50% of the e company shares held in the husband’s name: $35,446 (f) monies held in her bank accounts: $342   monies held in her bank accounts: $342
total: $122,482   motor vehicle 2 registered in her name: $1,500 (b) f company shares held in his name: $6,973 (c) g company shares held in his name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in his name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in his name: $35,447 (f) monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   f company shares held in his name: $6,973 (c) g company shares held in his name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in his name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in his name: $35,447 (f) monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   g company shares held in his name: $13,833 (d) 50% of the d company shares held in his name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in his name: $35,447 (f) monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   50% of the d company shares held in his name: $50,888 (e) 50% of the e company shares held in his name: $35,447 (f) monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   50% of the e company shares held in his name: $35,447 (f) monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   monies held in his bank accounts: $69,969 (g) two l company whole life policies: $29,822   two l company whole life policies: $29,822
total: $208,432
order
associate: dated: 3 november 2023
dated: 3 november 2023
[1] (1997) flc 92–739; [1997] famca 5.[2] (2005) flc 93–217; [2005] famca 161.[3] (2013) 49 fam lr 387; [2013] famcafc 116.[4] (2023) flc 94–145; [2023] fedcfamc1a 87.[5] at [32].[6] at [40].[7] (2019) flc 93–887; [2019] famcafc 17.[8] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52 (“stanford”).[9] held in an investment account and with interest accruing.[10] as reflected in the handwritten amendments recorded in exhibit d.[11] babett & falconer [2015] famcafc 124; (2015) flc 98-067 at [44]; cited with approval in perrin & perrin (no 2) [2018] famcafc 122 at [57]–[58] referring in turn to dickons & dickons (2012) 50 fam lr 244. [12] [2013] famcafc 15; (2013) 49 fam lr 116 at [49].[13] [2020] famcafc 25 and specifically paragraph [35].[14] dickons & dickons (2012) 50 fam lr 244 at [21].[15] norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17; (1986) 161 clr 513 at [524].[16] (2017) flc 93–759; [2017] famcafc 14.[17] (1999) flc 92–844; [1998] famca 74.[18] (2019) flc 93–898; [2019] famfafc 78 at [55] (“jabour”). [19] wallis & manning (2017) flc 93–759; [2017] famcafc 14 at [106] (“wallis & manning”) referring to fogarty j in waters & jurek [1995] famca 101; (1995) flc 92-635, at [82,379] and at[107] referring to the high court of australia’s analysis in stanford.[20] at [116][21] [2023] fedcfamc1a 104 at [92], citing and referring to bachman & self [2023] fedcfamc1a 50 at [125]–[127], hurst & hurst [2018] famcafc 146; (2018) flc 93-851 at [26]; whiton & dagne [2019] famcafc 192; (2019) flc 93-923 at [34]; jabour at [44]–[47] and [84]; barnell & barnell [2020] famcafc 102; (2020) flc 93-961 at [41]–[42][22] (2015) flc 93–638; [2015] famcafc 57.[23] at [42].[24] jabour at [73]–[87]; benson & drury [2020] famfafc 303 at [35].[25] (2018) flc 93–851; [2018] famcafc 146.[26] (2020) flc 93–961; [2020] famcafc 102.[27] being the updated figure provided in the amended joint balance sheet at the conclusion of the final hearing.