last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
renner & renner [2023] fedcfamc2f 1499
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
and it is noted that an amended schedule of costs is annexed, along with a calculation of costs on scale
respondent’s orders sought
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
background this is an application in a proceeding for costs, pursuant to rule 10.03 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (fcfcoa rules) and filed within 28 days of the father discontinuing his application for interim and final parenting orders. the father's initiating application filed on 3 november 2022 was discontinued on 22 may 2023, but that notice of discontinuance was not served, and as at the date of these submissions, has never been served. orders were made by [the] judicial registrar [...], in chambers, for the father's application to be dismissed on 24 may 2023 following his notice of discontinuance being filed, but without prior notice to the mother nor her solicitors. the orders sought by the applicant father in the discontinued proceedings sought to discharge final parenting orders made by consent on 25 june 2020 (the 2020 orders), and replace them with new orders which were substantially the same as the 2020 orders, with two key differences being: 2.1 that instead of the mother holding the children's passports, that the father hold the children's passports (see order 7 of initiating application filed 3 november 2022 "initiating application"), and 2.2 that the father have "primary parental responsibility for the children" whereas the 2020 orders provide for equal shared parental responsibility (see order 1 of initiating application). submissions in relation to costs whilst the general principle is that each party bears their own costs, this is a matter where the mother submits the court should deviate from that principle pursuant to section 117(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth). the factors in section 117 which are relevant to these proceedings are: section 117(2a)(c) and (d) – the conduct of the parties and failure to comply with previous orders of the court: the initiating application filed by the father was wholly unnecessary. the 2020 orders provide for the mother to hold the passports. the mother made it very clear that she was prepared to provide the father with the children's passports, which pursuant to order 26(a) of the 2020 orders, was "the last changeover prior to international travel". this would have been [late] 2022 (see paragraph 18 of the mother's affidavit). his demand the passports be provided to him earlier was contrary to the 2020 orders. prior to the hearing on 16 november 2022, the father was invited to collect the passports at an earlier time from the mother's solicitors' office, notwithstanding that it was earlier than was required by the 2020 orders (see paragraph 23 of mother's affidavit and affidavit of [ms j]). he elected not to do so. section 117(2a)(e) and (f) – whether any party has been wholly unsuccessful, and any offers made: orders were not made altering the 2020 orders as sought by the father. effectively the orders made on 16 november 2022 were in accordance with what was proposed by the mother by way of correspondence on 11 november 2022. the father was wholly unsuccessful in his interim application, which was for the mother to post the passports to him and that "upon the father's receipt of the children's passports he will become the custodian" (order 3 of interim orders sought in his initiating application). notably the father gives evidence that the 2020 orders had to be amended because his lawyers at [b lawyers] considered them problematic. the 2020 orders were drafted whilst he was represented by [b lawyers] and the mother by [c lawyers]. there is no evidence that those orders are improperly drafted nor defective. indeed the father discontinued the initiating application and the 2020 orders remain in full force and effect. no additional variations are now proposed save for that the court retain custody of the children's passports. this application is contrary to the rules and is dealt with below. section 117(2a)(a) – the financial circumstances of the parties: the mother submits that the father has the capacity to pay the costs ordered, and that her financial circumstances are far inferior to the father's. according to his financial statement, the father has assets, exclusive of superannuation, of over $1 million. the mother has assets, exclusive of superannuation of approximately $300,000. the father earns $4,720.30 per week gross. the mother earns $2,032 per week gross. the mother has borrowed $15,000 from her mother to pay legal costs in relation to these proceedings and family violence proceedings commenced by the father (see mother's financial statement). it is acknowledged that indemnity costs are only granted in exceptional circumstances. the principles in colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd, as noted by neville j in manuel & pinner (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1235 at [228] is regularly cited authority for relevant principles regarding the awarding of indemnity costs. justice sheppard in colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536 at [5], sets out examples where indemnity costs might be warranted:
i instance the making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (both referred to by woodward j in fountain and also by gummow j in thors v weekes, evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the court and to other parties (french j in tetijo), the fact that the proceedings were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (davies j in ragata) or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (woodward j in fountain and french j in j-corp), the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (davies j in ragata), an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg messiter v hutchinson, maitland hospital v fisher (no 2), crisp v kent) and an award of costs on an indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg megarry v-c in emi records). [citations of cases listed omitted, underlines added] these proceedings were commenced as a consequence of the father's refusal to comply with existing final orders. he refused to accept the children's passports from the mother at the last changeover before his international travel, and from the mother's solicitors at an earlier time when invited to do so. the court might infer from his final orders sought that his motive was his wish to control the children's passports and agitate for sole parental responsibility, notwithstanding these issues having been dealt with in the 2020 orders. even now, after discontinuing his proceedings to vary the final orders, he reagitates and prolongs this matter by seeking orders in relation to the passports. this is a matter which falls squarely within several examples of where there is an exceptional circumstance which would warrant an order for indemnity costs, both in relation to the substantive proceedings and this application in a proceeding for costs.
submissions in relation to order 2of the father’s response to an application in a proceeding the father seeks as order 2 of his response in an application in a proceeding dated 25 august 2023 (response), that "the children's passports are to remain with the court registrar [...] and be made available to either party upon written notice to the other." the mother seeks that order of the response be dismissed and that the father pay the mother's costs to respond to that order on an indemnity basis. the passports are no longer held with the court, and the court has indicated to the mother via the passport register that the passports are "not be returned as per orders 25/6/20 on cac 2318/2018 (order 25)". the father is on notice of this fact, as the court's passport register was served upon him on 29 august 2023. notwithstanding that, he presses his application. there is no substantive initiating application on foot in relation to parenting orders, as the father's previous initiating application has been dismissed. orders in relation to passports cannot be sought by way of a response to an application in a proceeding, where the only application in foot is in relation to costs. the fcfcoa rules deals with specific restraints on interlocutory applications: rule 5.02(2) states: "a person may apply for an interlocutory order only if the order sought relates to a current proceeding, unless the person is seeking: (a) permission to start a proceeding or extend a time limit to start a proceeding, or (b) to be appointed as a litigation guardian for a person under rule 3.15, or (c) an order for costs." rule 2.01 states: "(3) a person must not file an application for an interlocutory order unless: (a) an application for final orders is current in the proceeding, or (b) the application includes an application for final orders." table 2.1 at item 1(h) includes that an application seeking final orders, for example an "order relating to a passport", is to be filed by way of an initiating application (family law). if the father wishes to relitigate the issue of who holds the children's passports, the process for doing so is by filing a fresh initiating application and satisfy the court as to the test in rice and asplund. however, prior to that occurring, he will need to comply with the pre-action procedures. on the basis that there is no jurisdiction to hear order 2 of the response without substantive parenting proceedings on foot, the mother seeks that the following paragraphs of the father's affidavit filed on 25 august 2023 (uploaded to comcourts on 28 august 2023) be struck out or not read, as those paragraphs appear to relate to order 2 of his response, or are not relevant to these costs proceedings: paragraphs 24-29, the second sentence in paragraph 48, paragraphs 49‑67 of the affidavit of [mr renner] filed on 25 august 2023. if the above paragraphs are read, or the court determines that it will hear the father's application regarding the children's passports, as a matter of procedural fairness to the mother, she will need the opportunity to file an affidavit in reply prior to any determination being made. the mother contends that the allegations contained in the above paragraphs are irrelevant, misleading and/or inadmissible. given the father's non-compliance with the rules and attempt to reopen proceedings he has just discontinued, the mother seeks that this application in a proceeding regarding costs also be paid on an indemnity basis. her application in a proceeding has been amended accordingly and filed at the same time as these submissions. the writer who has temporary carriage of this file, has identified overlaps with costs claimed in the fvo proceedings, and has corrected the amount sought accordingly. if the court is not minded to order costs on an indemnity basis in a fixed amount, rather than the extra time and expense of taxing the mother's costs, the mother proposes in the alternative that costs be fixed at two-thirds of the total costs, or in the alternative in accordance to the scale. the father was put on notice via letter on 29 august 2023 (see tender bundle) that if he persisted in further orders regarding passports, further costs would be added to the mother's application. a ledger and schedule of costs calculated at two-thirds of indemnity costs and on scale is annexed to the mother's amended application in a proceeding.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
outline of principle ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discover, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with the previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discover, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with the previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discover, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with the previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discover, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with the previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with the previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.  ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
an order for costs may be made on an indemnity basis, subject to a judicial determination capable of being made that there ought to be a departure from the usual basis that costs be payable on the party and party basis. for a discussion of the jurisdiction to order indemnity costs and its exercise see colgate palmolive co and another v cussons pty ltd (1993) 118 alr 248 per sheppard j at 256-257 and nmfm property pty ltd and others v citibank ltd (no 2) (court’s “nmfm” judgment no 11) [2011] fca 480, (2001) 109 fcr 77 per lindgren j at [53] to [90].
it seems to me that the following principles or guidelines can be distilled out of the authorities to which i have referred:-
1. the problem arises in adversary litigation, i.e. litigation as between parties at arm's length. different considerations apply where parties may be found to be entitled to the payment of their costs out of a fund or assets being administered by or under the control of a trustee, liquidator, receiver or person in a like position, eg. a government agency or statutory authority. 2. the ordinary rule is that, where the court orders the costs of one party to litigation to be paid by another party, the order is for payment of those costs on the party and party basis. in this court the provisions of order 62, rules 12 and 19, and the second schedule to the rules will apply to the taxation. in many cases the result will be that the amount recovered by the successful party under the order will fall short of (in many cases well short of) a complete indemnity. 3. this has been the settled practice for centuries in england. it is a practice which is entrenched in australia. either legislation (perhaps in the form of an amendment to rules of court) or a decision of an intermediate court of appeal or of the high court would be required to alter it. no doubt any consideration of whether there should be any change in the practice would require the resolution of the competing considerations mentioned by devlin lj in berry v. british transport commission and handley ja in cachia v. hanes on the one hand and by rogers j in qantas on the other. the relevant passages from the respective judgments have been earlier referred to. 4. in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course. that has been the view of all judges dealing with applications for payment of costs on the indemnity or some other basis whether here or in england. the tests have been variously put. the court of appeal in andrews v. barnes (39 ch d at 141) said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as between solicitor and client "as and when the justice of the case might so require." woodward j in fountain selected meats appears to have adopted what was said by brandon lj (as he was) in preston v. preston ((1982) 1 all er at 58) namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to justify the court in departing from the ordinary practice. most judges dealing with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with the circumstances of that case and finding in it the presence or absence of factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure from the usual rule. but as french j said (at 8) in tetijo, "the categories in which the discretion may be exercised are not closed". davies j expressed (at 6) similar views in ragata. 5. notwithstanding the fact that that is so, it is useful to note some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the exercise of the discretion. i instance the making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (both referred to by woodward j in fountain and also by gummow j in thors v. weekes (1989) 92 alr 131 at 152, evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the court and to other parties (french j in tetijo), the fact that the proceedings were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (davies j in ragata) or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (woodward j in fountain and french j in j-corp), the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (davies j in ragata), an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg messiter v. hutchinson (1987) 10 nswlr 525, maitland hospital v. fisher (no. 2) (1992) 27 nswlr 721at 724 (court of appeal), crisp v. keng (supreme court of new south wales, 27 september 1993, unreported, court of appeal)and an award of costs on an indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg megarry v-c in emi records). other categories of cases are to be found in the reports. yet others to arise in the future will have different features about them which may justify an order for costs on the indemnity basis. the question must always be whether the particular facts and circumstances of the case in question warrant the making of an order for payment of costs other than on a party and party basis. 6. it remains to say that the existence of particular facts and circumstances capable of warranting the making of an order for payment of costs, for instance, on the indemnity basis, does not mean that judges are necessarily obliged to exercise their discretion to make such an order. the costs are always in the discretion of the trial judge. provided that discretion is exercised having regard to the applicable principles and the particular circumstances of the instant case its exercise will not be found to have miscarried unless it appears that the order which has been made involves a manifest error or injustice.
consideration & disposition
associate: dated: 14 november 2023
dated: 14 november 2023
[1] the reasons that follow were initially delivered orally. they have been revised from the transcript.[2] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.[3] colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd (1993) 46 fcr 225.[4] see 46 fcr at 232-234. [5] penfold v penfold (1980) 144 clr 311.[6] see candlewood navigation corporation ltd v mitsui osk lines ltd [1984] ukpc 17; [1985] 1 ac 1.[7] see here the comments by megarry v-c in emi records ltd v ian cameron wallace ltd [1983] 1 ch 59 at 63 and 71. the vice-chancellor’s comments were endorsed by the court of appeal of new south wales in bouras v grandelis (2005) 65 nswlr 314 at [96] and [118] (santow ja; giles and basten jja concurring). the comments of megarry v-c recorded here were also noted and endorsed by sheppard j in colgate-palmolive at 46 fcr at 234.[8] see the relevant entries in, for example, liddell & scott’s intermediate greek-english lexicon (oxford: clarendon press 1987).[9] also see the entry in c. lewis, lewis and short – a latin dictionary (oxford; clarendon press, 1879) at p. 1973.