last updated: 9 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ling & yahui (no 3) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1568
orders
the court orders that:
until further order:  residential address, (b) mobile phone number, and (c) email address   mobile phone number, and (c) email address   email address
changeover
schooling  consult with teachers and request to obtain information regarding the child’s education at their own expense, (b) attend upon school events that parents are usually invited to attend.   attend upon school events that parents are usually invited to attend.
section 102na
property
appointment of the independent children’s lawyer  x, born in 2016
family report  any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the child and upon the child’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the child and upon child’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the child and upon the child’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the child and upon child’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact upon the child and upon the child’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the child and upon child’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   the impact upon the child and upon child’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.   any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child.
restrains by injunction   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other, (b) discussing these proceedings, (c) physically disciplining x, and (d) informing or sharing with x their opinion of the nature of the relationship of the parents at any time prior to separation and any alleged incidents of family violence.   discussing these proceedings, (c) physically disciplining x, and (d) informing or sharing with x their opinion of the nature of the relationship of the parents at any time prior to separation and any alleged incidents of family violence.   physically disciplining x, and (d) informing or sharing with x their opinion of the nature of the relationship of the parents at any time prior to separation and any alleged incidents of family violence.   informing or sharing with x their opinion of the nature of the relationship of the parents at any time prior to separation and any alleged incidents of family violence.
final hearing
and the court notes that:  there are allegations of physical, sexual or psychological abuse which apparently have been reported to the state welfare authorities and the police.
reasons for ex tempore judgment
... the affidavit material that the parties had filed dealt in some detail with the allegations of violence that had occurred during the relationship. neither party provided any evidence as to how the time that was ordered on 14 august 2023 had proceeded. order 16 of orders 14 august 2023 are: the children spend time and communicate with the father each friday from the conclusion of school (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 8:00pm that day with such time to be effected as follows: (a) the father shall collect the school if a school day, or from the mother’s residence if a non-school day, (b) the father will return the child to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, (c) the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property. (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father shall collect the school if a school day, or from the mother’s residence if a non-school day, (b) the father will return the child to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, (c) the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property. (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father will return the child to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time, (c) the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property. (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father is restrained from remaining out the front of the property after the child is collected/returned or from entering the mother’s property. (d) the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   the father is to send a text message to the mother once the child is out the front of the mother’s house for return.   did not indicate that he had any fears of spending time with his father and is clearly at an early stage of re-establishing a relationship with his father. [mr ling] appears to be supportive of [x] having a relationship with both parents. although [ms yahui] stated she was supportive of [x] having a relationship with [mr ling], her primary narrative was about the alleged past family violence by [mr ling] towards her, and his inability to regulate his emotions, particularly in relation to parenting [x]. [mr ling] acknowledged that he had inappropriately used physical discipline with [x] in the past and took responsibility for his actions and stated he would not use physical discipline in the future.
should the court determine there is no risk to [x] spending time with [mr ling], he would benefit from increased time with [mr ling] in order to continue progressing his relationship with his father. it will be important and necessary for [ms yahui] to not either directly or inadvertently communicate adult issues or discuss her own past alleged experience of family violence by [mr ling] with [x]. if [x] continues to be exposed to parental conflict there is a risk that a resist/refuse dynamic may arise when [x] becomes increasingly resistant to wanting to spend time with [mr ling] as a means to extricate himself from parental conflict.
... it must be acknowledged that section 102na is a draconian and drastic restriction upon the time honoured right of a party to cross-examine another party or witness giving evidence contrary to him. the section 102na scheme is, as discussed in the decisions cited, for the protection of victims of alleged family violence, and to prevent the re-traumatisation of the alleged victim by the cross-examination process when it is being carried out personally by the other party. hand in hand with that draconian restriction is the generous scheme when a party is prevented from cross-examining. parliament has set aside a separate bucket of money to be administered by state legal aid bodies for the purpose of ensuring the representation of the restricted party. in this way, the other party can be cross-examined, but not by the litigant in person but by a lawyer. this has the collateral benefit that, inevitably, the otherwise unrepresented party obtains the benefit of the legal advice of the lawyer that would be undertaking the cross-examination. further, certainly in victoria, the scheme being administered by victoria legal aid has imposed conditions upon that grant of aid such that the lawyer appointed under the scheme effectively has the responsibility of the conduct of the entire case, not just the cross-examination of the other party. that comes with real advantaged and disadvantages. a litigant in person has at first been excited about the prospect of having a lawyer appointed for them at public expense, only to be profoundly disappointed when the lawyer has provided legal advice that runs contrary to what the person wanted or expected to hear. ... if section 102na mandatorily applies there is no discretion: the parties cannot cross examine each other and the resources of the section 102na cross examination scheme are made available and not means tested...
associate: dated: 5 december 2023
dated: 5 december 2023