last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rowlinson & bradford [2023] fedcfamc2f 1484
orders
the court orders that:
parenting:
parental responsibility:
children live with mother:
children spend time with father:
stage 1:  for a period of two (2) months from the date of the final orders, the children spend supervised time with the father on one (1) occasion a fortnight for two (2) hours on a day and time available to the father and the b contact service or another registered contact service agreed to by the mother. such time is to occur after school or on the weekend (providing that it does not occur when the children have extra-curricular activities).
stage 2:   at the expiration of order 4(a) and continuing until the commencement of nsw school term 2 in 2024 (including during school holiday periods): (i) the first sunday of each month from 10am until 5pm supervised by the paternal aunt ms c at a location determined by ms c and the father, (ii) the third sunday of each month from 10am until 4pm supervised by the paternal aunt ms c in the region d area, (iii) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if the birthdays fall on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children, supervised by ms c, (iv) on 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, supervised by ms c.   the first sunday of each month from 10am until 5pm supervised by the paternal aunt ms c at a location determined by ms c and the father, (ii) the third sunday of each month from 10am until 4pm supervised by the paternal aunt ms c in the region d area, (iii) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if the birthdays fall on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children, supervised by ms c, (iv) on 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, supervised by ms c.  ) the third sunday of each month from 10am until 4pm supervised by the paternal aunt ms c in the region d area, (iii) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if the birthdays fall on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children, supervised by ms c, (iv) on 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, supervised by ms c.  i) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if the birthdays fall on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children, supervised by ms c, (iv) on 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, supervised by ms c.  ) on 24 december 2023 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, supervised by ms c.
in the event that ms c is unavailable to supervise any of the above visits, then the father’s time is to be supervised by another person as agreed in writing between the parents and failing agreement by a professional supervisor (or organisation) with the father to be responsible for the supervision costs.
stage 3:  upon the commencement of nsw school term 2 in 2024, the children spend unsupervised time with the father as follows and providing that the father has satisfied the conditions set out in order 7: (i) during school term – each alternate sunday from 10am until 7pm, commencing the first sunday in terms 1 and 4, and in term 2 commencing on the sunday which avoids a clash with mother’s day, and in term 3 commencing on the sunday which aligns with father’s day, (ii) on 24 december 2024 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, (iii) during the end of term 1, end of term 2 and end of term 3 nsw school holiday periods, the father’s weekend time with the children in order 4(c)(i) will be extended such that the children spend time with the father from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday on that weekend, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time, (iv) during the end of term 4 nsw school holiday period, order 4(c)(i) is suspended and the children will spend time with the father on the first weekend of the school holidays and then the second weekend of january each year from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time. the children will also spend time with the father from 10am until 5pm on the last sunday before school recommences, (v) on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.   during school term – each alternate sunday from 10am until 7pm, commencing the first sunday in terms 1 and 4, and in term 2 commencing on the sunday which avoids a clash with mother’s day, and in term 3 commencing on the sunday which aligns with father’s day, (ii) on 24 december 2024 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, (iii) during the end of term 1, end of term 2 and end of term 3 nsw school holiday periods, the father’s weekend time with the children in order 4(c)(i) will be extended such that the children spend time with the father from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday on that weekend, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time, (iv) during the end of term 4 nsw school holiday period, order 4(c)(i) is suspended and the children will spend time with the father on the first weekend of the school holidays and then the second weekend of january each year from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time. the children will also spend time with the father from 10am until 5pm on the last sunday before school recommences, (v) on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  ) on 24 december 2024 (christmas eve) from 10am until 7pm, (iii) during the end of term 1, end of term 2 and end of term 3 nsw school holiday periods, the father’s weekend time with the children in order 4(c)(i) will be extended such that the children spend time with the father from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday on that weekend, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time, (iv) during the end of term 4 nsw school holiday period, order 4(c)(i) is suspended and the children will spend time with the father on the first weekend of the school holidays and then the second weekend of january each year from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time. the children will also spend time with the father from 10am until 5pm on the last sunday before school recommences, (v) on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  i) during the end of term 1, end of term 2 and end of term 3 nsw school holiday periods, the father’s weekend time with the children in order 4(c)(i) will be extended such that the children spend time with the father from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday on that weekend, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time, (iv) during the end of term 4 nsw school holiday period, order 4(c)(i) is suspended and the children will spend time with the father on the first weekend of the school holidays and then the second weekend of january each year from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time. the children will also spend time with the father from 10am until 5pm on the last sunday before school recommences, (v) on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  ) during the end of term 4 nsw school holiday period, order 4(c)(i) is suspended and the children will spend time with the father on the first weekend of the school holidays and then the second weekend of january each year from 5pm friday until 7pm sunday, providing the children stay at ms c’s residence overnight or that ms c stays overnight at the location of the children for that period of time. the children will also spend time with the father from 10am until 5pm on the last sunday before school recommences, (v) on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.   on christmas day from 3pm until 7pm in even numbered years and from 10am until 7pm in odd numbered years, (vi) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  ) on each of the children’s birthdays, if the birthday falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children then from 3pm (or immediately after school if a school day) until 6pm. (vii) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  i) at other times as determined by the mother at her sole discretion, (viii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.  ii) for the purposes of orders 4(c)(iii) and 4(c)(iv), “overnight” is defined as commencing at 7.30pm and concluding at 7.30am.   the father is to pay all associated costs with the supervision except for any requested reports, (b) should either parent seek any reports from the contact service that parent is responsible for payment for those reports requested, (c) the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow the reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at the supervised contact service.   should either parent seek any reports from the contact service that parent is responsible for payment for those reports requested, (c) the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow the reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at the supervised contact service.   the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow the reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at the supervised contact service.
changeovers:  when it is supervised by the contact service - as directed by that contact service, (b) when it is supervised by ms c, she will collect the children from suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e or at another place agreed to between she and the mother, (c) for the purposes of order 4(c)(vi) – at the children’s school/s, (d) and all other times by the mother delivering the children to the playground at suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e and the father collecting the children from the playground at suburb e mcdonalds unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, (e) at any other places as agreed by the parents in writing by either sms messages or email or other forms of written communication.   when it is supervised by ms c, she will collect the children from suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e or at another place agreed to between she and the mother, (c) for the purposes of order 4(c)(vi) – at the children’s school/s, (d) and all other times by the mother delivering the children to the playground at suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e and the father collecting the children from the playground at suburb e mcdonalds unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, (e) at any other places as agreed by the parents in writing by either sms messages or email or other forms of written communication.   for the purposes of order 4(c)(vi) – at the children’s school/s, (d) and all other times by the mother delivering the children to the playground at suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e and the father collecting the children from the playground at suburb e mcdonalds unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, (e) at any other places as agreed by the parents in writing by either sms messages or email or other forms of written communication.   and all other times by the mother delivering the children to the playground at suburb e mcdonalds, f street, suburb e and the father collecting the children from the playground at suburb e mcdonalds unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties, (e) at any other places as agreed by the parents in writing by either sms messages or email or other forms of written communication.   at any other places as agreed by the parents in writing by either sms messages or email or other forms of written communication.
preconditions to the operation of order 7:  the father first undertakes a hair strand test for illicit substances and alcohol to cover a period of six (6) months usage. the test is to be conducted by an australian workplace testing clinic or such other testing organisation/service and such test must show a negative result for all illicit substances and a result for alcohol showing a moderate consumption (or less). this order provides authority for australian workplace testing clinic or such other testing organisation/service to provide a copy of the results of the hair strand test directly to the mother’s email address, (b) there has been no final avo made against the father, (c) the father has not been charged with any criminal offence/s after the date of these orders.   there has been no final avo made against the father, (c) the father has not been charged with any criminal offence/s after the date of these orders.   the father has not been charged with any criminal offence/s after the date of these orders.
education and extra-curricular activities  upon the commencement of unsupervised time, attend the events the parents are usually invited to attend and to approach the children and have contact with the children with permission of the school principal. (b) attend parent/teacher interviews providing that the father attend a separate parent/teacher interview to the mother. (c) at the commencement of unsupervised time, attend end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother.   attend parent/teacher interviews providing that the father attend a separate parent/teacher interview to the mother. (c) at the commencement of unsupervised time, attend end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother.   at the commencement of unsupervised time, attend end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother.   only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother.
communication:  the communication is in relation to the children as a result of any issue that has arisen during the time he is spending with them, and (b) such communication is to be by sms message only unless in an emergency in which case it can occur by telephone call.   such communication is to be by sms message only unless in an emergency in which case it can occur by telephone call.
contact details:
health:
g program:
restraints:  spending time or communicating with the children except as provided for in these orders, (b) communicating with the mother except as provided for in order 13, (c) approaching the mother at changeovers, (d) removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided for in these orders, (e) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the mother’s home, (f) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   communicating with the mother except as provided for in order 13, (c) approaching the mother at changeovers, (d) removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided for in these orders, (e) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the mother’s home, (f) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   approaching the mother at changeovers, (d) removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided for in these orders, (e) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the mother’s home, (f) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided for in these orders, (e) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the mother’s home, (f) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the mother’s home, (f) approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   approaching, attending or remaining within one hundred (100) metres of the children’s schools – subject to orders 4(c)(vi), 6(c) and 9 herein, (g) consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   consuming or being in any way affected by alcohol when he is spending time with the children, (h) consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs when he is spending time with the children.   while the children are in her care - consuming alcohol to such extent that she could not lawfully drive a motor vehicle, (b) while the children are in her care - consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs, (c) allowing the children to remain in the care of her brother mr j, unless she or another adult is personally present at all times.   while the children are in her care - consuming, possessing or being in any way affected by illicit drugs, (c) allowing the children to remain in the care of her brother mr j, unless she or another adult is personally present at all times.   allowing the children to remain in the care of her brother mr j, unless she or another adult is personally present at all times.   behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (b) physically disciplining the children, (c) denigrating the other parent, or a member of the other parent’s household or family, while in the presence or hearing of either child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, (d) discussing with the children, or with any other person in the children’s presence or hearing - these court proceedings or any family law issues (including the children’s views as to the parenting arrangements), (e) consuming any illicit substance while the children are spending time with them, or in the twelve (12) hours prior.   physically disciplining the children, (c) denigrating the other parent, or a member of the other parent’s household or family, while in the presence or hearing of either child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, (d) discussing with the children, or with any other person in the children’s presence or hearing - these court proceedings or any family law issues (including the children’s views as to the parenting arrangements), (e) consuming any illicit substance while the children are spending time with them, or in the twelve (12) hours prior.   denigrating the other parent, or a member of the other parent’s household or family, while in the presence or hearing of either child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person engaged in such denigration, (d) discussing with the children, or with any other person in the children’s presence or hearing - these court proceedings or any family law issues (including the children’s views as to the parenting arrangements), (e) consuming any illicit substance while the children are spending time with them, or in the twelve (12) hours prior.   discussing with the children, or with any other person in the children’s presence or hearing - these court proceedings or any family law issues (including the children’s views as to the parenting arrangements), (e) consuming any illicit substance while the children are spending time with them, or in the twelve (12) hours prior.   consuming any illicit substance while the children are spending time with them, or in the twelve (12) hours prior.
suspension of time:  on one occasion each year, if the mother provides fourteen (14) days’ notice by sms message or email to the father that she intends to take the children on a holiday and in that event she will provide make up time on another occasion for the same period of time on a date nominated by the mother within a month of the children and mother returning from the holiday. (b) on the mother’s day weekend, (c) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if it falls on a day that the mother is not already spending time with the children.   on the mother’s day weekend, (c) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if it falls on a day that the mother is not already spending time with the children.   on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 4pm until 6pm if it falls on a day that the mother is not already spending time with the children.
international travel & passport orders:
costs:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction:
the hearing & material relied upon:  case outline document filed 23/09/22, (b) amended initiating application filed 23/09/22, (c) husband’s trial affidavit filed 16/09/22, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 26/09/22, (e) affidavit of the husband’s sister ms c filed 23/09/22, (f) affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   amended initiating application filed 23/09/22, (c) husband’s trial affidavit filed 16/09/22, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 26/09/22, (e) affidavit of the husband’s sister ms c filed 23/09/22, (f) affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   husband’s trial affidavit filed 16/09/22, (d) husband’s financial statement filed 26/09/22, (e) affidavit of the husband’s sister ms c filed 23/09/22, (f) affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   husband’s financial statement filed 26/09/22, (e) affidavit of the husband’s sister ms c filed 23/09/22, (f) affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   affidavit of the husband’s sister ms c filed 23/09/22, (f) affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms m filed 23/09/22.   case outline document filed 23/09/22, (b) amended response filed 06/09/22, (c) wife’s trial affidavit filed 06/09/22, (d) wife’s ‘response’ affidavit filed 21/09/22, (e) wife’s financial statement filed 06/09/22. [1]   amended response filed 06/09/22, (c) wife’s trial affidavit filed 06/09/22, (d) wife’s ‘response’ affidavit filed 21/09/22, (e) wife’s financial statement filed 06/09/22. [1]   wife’s trial affidavit filed 06/09/22, (d) wife’s ‘response’ affidavit filed 21/09/22, (e) wife’s financial statement filed 06/09/22. [1]   wife’s ‘response’ affidavit filed 21/09/22, (e) wife’s financial statement filed 06/09/22. [1]   wife’s financial statement filed 06/09/22. [1]   case outline document filed 21/09/22, (b) family report prepared by family consultant ms n on 11/10/21, [2] (c) updated family report by ms n on 24/03/23. [3]   family report prepared by family consultant ms n on 11/10/21, [2] (c) updated family report by ms n on 24/03/23. [3]   updated family report by ms n on 24/03/23. [3]
chronology & relevant findings of fact:
the parties:
the relationship:
more than anything in this world i would love to be secure in the knowledge that you love me and we are a team. i would love to know we can live happily ever after, i would love to have a family. i am not happy with the person i have become. i am not happy with the way i handle my emotions, and i’m not happy with things that have happened that make me feel like this. i know i am an amazing person inside and could make a great mother and wife one day. i am upset with myself for the way i have treated you. no matter what i may think you are like or what you may have done, there is no excuse for my behaviour. i think that is what hurts the most. i am sorry for the hurt and issues i have caused. i think there is too much water under the bridge to resurrect our once loving and beautiful relationship. i am sure you carry much resentment and dislike for me to ever get back to what we had. that is what hurts a lot and makes me so disappointed because i did this. i’m sorry. i will always love you, i’m sorry. [ms bradford] xxx
the children:
mr j:
further violence:
mr l:  the wife was crying in the kitchen and mr l came out of his room to get himself a cup of water. he saw her there and asked her why she was upset. she told him not to worry and then stepped outside, (b) the husband then “had a go” at mr l, telling him he had made the parents argue, that it was his fault and to go to his room, (c) mr l responded by telling the husband: “don’t blame it on me, i’m only a 13 year old kid and you’re an adult. take responsibility”, (d) the husband was infuriated by this, storming into mr l’s room behind him. mr l asked the husband what he wanted and the husband pushed mr l down onto the bed, causing mr l to spill some of the water. the husband asked mr l “what are you going to do, tell your friends i hit you again?”, (e) mr l replied “bloody oath i am” at which point the husband grabbed mr l’s cup off him. mr l tried to punch the husband who was able to subdue him by holding his arms tight and pinning him down on the bed. in the ensuing struggle mr l got a hand free and managed to hit the husband before again being subdued – this time the husband grabbing mr l’s arm and twisting it painfully, (f) in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   the husband then “had a go” at mr l, telling him he had made the parents argue, that it was his fault and to go to his room, (c) mr l responded by telling the husband: “don’t blame it on me, i’m only a 13 year old kid and you’re an adult. take responsibility”, (d) the husband was infuriated by this, storming into mr l’s room behind him. mr l asked the husband what he wanted and the husband pushed mr l down onto the bed, causing mr l to spill some of the water. the husband asked mr l “what are you going to do, tell your friends i hit you again?”, (e) mr l replied “bloody oath i am” at which point the husband grabbed mr l’s cup off him. mr l tried to punch the husband who was able to subdue him by holding his arms tight and pinning him down on the bed. in the ensuing struggle mr l got a hand free and managed to hit the husband before again being subdued – this time the husband grabbing mr l’s arm and twisting it painfully, (f) in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   mr l responded by telling the husband: “don’t blame it on me, i’m only a 13 year old kid and you’re an adult. take responsibility”, (d) the husband was infuriated by this, storming into mr l’s room behind him. mr l asked the husband what he wanted and the husband pushed mr l down onto the bed, causing mr l to spill some of the water. the husband asked mr l “what are you going to do, tell your friends i hit you again?”, (e) mr l replied “bloody oath i am” at which point the husband grabbed mr l’s cup off him. mr l tried to punch the husband who was able to subdue him by holding his arms tight and pinning him down on the bed. in the ensuing struggle mr l got a hand free and managed to hit the husband before again being subdued – this time the husband grabbing mr l’s arm and twisting it painfully, (f) in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   the husband was infuriated by this, storming into mr l’s room behind him. mr l asked the husband what he wanted and the husband pushed mr l down onto the bed, causing mr l to spill some of the water. the husband asked mr l “what are you going to do, tell your friends i hit you again?”, (e) mr l replied “bloody oath i am” at which point the husband grabbed mr l’s cup off him. mr l tried to punch the husband who was able to subdue him by holding his arms tight and pinning him down on the bed. in the ensuing struggle mr l got a hand free and managed to hit the husband before again being subdued – this time the husband grabbing mr l’s arm and twisting it painfully, (f) in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   mr l replied “bloody oath i am” at which point the husband grabbed mr l’s cup off him. mr l tried to punch the husband who was able to subdue him by holding his arms tight and pinning him down on the bed. in the ensuing struggle mr l got a hand free and managed to hit the husband before again being subdued – this time the husband grabbing mr l’s arm and twisting it painfully, (f) in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   in response to the commotion, the wife had come into the room and she got between them and told the husband to get off mr l, (g) as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]   as the husband moved away from mr l, who again picked up his cup. the husband pushed the wife aside and grabbed mr l again, asking if he was “trying to fucking glass me or something, look at the scars [...], i’ve already been scarred by a dickhead like you [...].” mr l replied “i don’t really fucking care.” the husband then left the room, the wife was crying. [8]
the parents’ relationship continues to be toxic:
had to tell both parties to stop arguing.  phasis added)
she ignored police and walked out the front door to put the child in the car.
contained at pages 9 – 12 of annexure “a” are photographs i took of my hair that [mr rowlinson] had pulled out and the items thrown by [mr rowlinson]. a neighbour asked me the next morning if i was okay, as they had heard a lot of noise from our house. i said i was fine but started crying. my neighbour nodded and said: “if you ever need anything let me know.”
spiralling towards final separation:
final separation:
events leading up to these proceedings:
these proceedings:
interim orders of 24 august 2021:
family report:
leadup to the final hearing:
interim consent orders of 17 february 2023:
supervised visits:
the law
primary considerations   the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
additional considerations   additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
best interests
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 20 november 2023
dated: 20 november 2023
[1] the wife had also filed an affidavit on 12/09/22 objecting to the lateness of the husband’s trial material. the affidavit does not address any substantive issues. [2] exhibit 1[3] exhibit 14[4] husband’s trial affidavit, annexure “a”[5] exhibit 5[6] exhibit 20[7] exhibit 7[8] see exhibit 10[9] exhibit 19[10] wife’s affidavit, annexure “b”. [11] exhibit 16.[12] exhibit 18. [13] exhibit 12. [14] exhibit 4. [15] exhibit 15.[16] see the decision of the full court in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc 1a 97.[17] such as s 60cc(3)(ca) for example[18] see also paragraph 44 of the family report (exhibit 1)