last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gapp & waldren [2023] fedcfamc2f 1688
orders
the court orders that:  affidavit of mr gapp dated 6 august 2018, (b) affidavit of ms b filed 17 august 2018, (c) child dispute conference memorandum to court of family consultant c dated 17 may 2018, (d) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018, and (e) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 20 august 2018 (‘documents’).   affidavit of ms b filed 17 august 2018, (c) child dispute conference memorandum to court of family consultant c dated 17 may 2018, (d) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018, and (e) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 20 august 2018 (‘documents’).   child dispute conference memorandum to court of family consultant c dated 17 may 2018, (d) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018, and (e) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 20 august 2018 (‘documents’).   affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018, and (e) affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 20 august 2018 (‘documents’).   affidavit of ms d, e family services, filed 20 august 2018 (‘documents’).   in the above identified proceedings and any superior court to which these proceedings may be referred, and (b) to any practitioner/s assisting or advising the applicant in relation to those proceedings.   to any practitioner/s assisting or advising the applicant in relation to those proceedings.   sending a copy of these orders by pre-paid registered post to the respondent’s residential address at f street, suburb g, and (b) sending a copy of these orders to the respondent’s last known email address.   sending a copy of these orders to the respondent’s last known email address.
and the court notes that:  she makes such an application within 28 days of service upon her of these orders, and (b) she files an affidavit setting out the basis of the application and explaining her non-attendance at court today.   she files an affidavit setting out the basis of the application and explaining her non-attendance at court today.
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge j young:
current proceedings  affidavit of mr gapp dated 6 august 2018, (2) affidavit of ms b filed 17 august 2018, (3) child dispute conference memorandums to court of family consultant c dated 15 june 2016 and 17 may 2018, (4) affidavits of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018 and 20 august 2018, and (5) affidavit of ms h filed 20 september 2016 (‘documents’).   affidavit of ms b filed 17 august 2018, (3) child dispute conference memorandums to court of family consultant c dated 15 june 2016 and 17 may 2018, (4) affidavits of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018 and 20 august 2018, and (5) affidavit of ms h filed 20 september 2016 (‘documents’).   child dispute conference memorandums to court of family consultant c dated 15 june 2016 and 17 may 2018, (4) affidavits of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018 and 20 august 2018, and (5) affidavit of ms h filed 20 september 2016 (‘documents’).   affidavits of ms d, e family services, filed 16 may 2018 and 20 august 2018, and (5) affidavit of ms h filed 20 september 2016 (‘documents’).   affidavit of ms h filed 20 september 2016 (‘documents’).
undefended hearing
father’s submissions
relevant legal principles
where one party to litigation is compelled either by reason of a rule of court or by reason of a specific order of the court or otherwise to disclose documents or information, the party obtaining disclosure cannot, without the leave of the court, use it for any purpose other than that for which it was given unless it is received into evidence. the types of material disclosed or to which this principle applies include: documents inspected after discovery, answers to interrogatories, documents produced on subpoena, documents produced for the purposes taxation of costs, documents produced pursuant to a direction from an arbitrator, documents seized pursuant to an anton piller order, witness statements served pursuant to a judicial direction and affidavits.
... for “special circumstances” to exist it is enough that there is a special feature of the case which affords a reason for modifying or releasing the undertaking and is not usually present. the matter then becomes one of the proper exercise of the court's discretion, many factors being relevant. it is neither possible nor desirable to propound an exhaustive list of those factors.   the nature of the document, (b) the circumstances under which it came into existence, (c) the attitude of the author of the document, (d) any prejudice to the author, (e) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, (f) the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   the circumstances under which it came into existence, (c) the attitude of the author of the document, (d) any prejudice to the author, (e) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, (f) the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   the attitude of the author of the document, (d) any prejudice to the author, (e) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, (f) the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   any prejudice to the author, (e) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, (f) the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, (f) the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   the nature of the information in the document, in particular, whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive information, (g) the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, and (h) perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.   perhaps most importantly of all, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice.
there is a statutory presumption in favour of the privacy of persons involved in family law litigation that may be particularly significant in relation to children who are not active litigants. although not a parenting order, a decision to grant leave for documents to be filed should, where appropriate, take into account the best interests of the children.
consideration
associate: dated: 27 november 2023
dated: 27 november 2023