last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
clovis & huff [2023] fedcfamc2f 1147
orders
noting that the court has made findings that the child has been given to the second and third respondent in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices
the court orders that:
live with
spend time with  attempting to contact the child either directly or via a third party including at his school, on social media or at any events that the child may attend. (b) approaching the child at any location including but not limited to his home, day-care, pre-school, school or extracurricular activities.   approaching the child at any location including but not limited to his home, day-care, pre-school, school or extracurricular activities.
change of name
passport
procedural orders
notations
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
the child’s name
past & current living arrangements
procedural history
cultural identity of the parties
torres strait islander child rearing practice (also known as cultural adoption, traditional adoption and kupai omasker)
how the child came into the care of the cultural parents
the applicant biological father’s mental health  he had been diagnosed with a variety of mental health issues, including depression, anxiety, and other mental illnesses. (b) by a mental illness, he meant that when he loses his temper he is not himself, that he becomes a different person. (c) he had made long-term efforts to manage his mental health issues. he had done “everything” over the years including medication and counselling. (d) he had engaged with y centre about six months prior to the trial, having enrolled for a 6 to 8 week one-on-one program, but had continued to attend on a weekly basis.   by a mental illness, he meant that when he loses his temper he is not himself, that he becomes a different person. (c) he had made long-term efforts to manage his mental health issues. he had done “everything” over the years including medication and counselling. (d) he had engaged with y centre about six months prior to the trial, having enrolled for a 6 to 8 week one-on-one program, but had continued to attend on a weekly basis.   he had made long-term efforts to manage his mental health issues. he had done “everything” over the years including medication and counselling. (d) he had engaged with y centre about six months prior to the trial, having enrolled for a 6 to 8 week one-on-one program, but had continued to attend on a weekly basis.   he had engaged with y centre about six months prior to the trial, having enrolled for a 6 to 8 week one-on-one program, but had continued to attend on a weekly basis.
... the fact that he did not suffer from a severe and enduring mental health problem[5], he did not use alcohol or illicit drugs, he had regularly sought support when in distress, and had been engaging with such support on an ongoing basis especially [aa service]. he had stable accommodation, he had a purpose in life, he had been trying to seek alternative qualification, and he had sought stable accommodation and had no financial concerns.[6]
he did not appear to be a risk to his children, if anything from his history it appeared that he was extremely protective of his son [b]. although he did not appear to be a direct risk to his children, his propensity for violence could lead to him getting into trouble with the justice system and hence jeopardising the care of his children.[7]   that he had a long history of self-harming behaviours. (b) that he had been unable to consistently address his mental health diagnoses through therapy or medication. (c) that he had wanted to collect the child from the cultural parents and that he was told by the police that he could do so but that it would be at his own risk. however, he had thought that the biological mother’s family would fight him and that could cause problems for him. he acknowledged that it would also have been bad for the child but gave evidence that he was not thinking straight at the time and “just wanted my son back”.   that he had been unable to consistently address his mental health diagnoses through therapy or medication. (c) that he had wanted to collect the child from the cultural parents and that he was told by the police that he could do so but that it would be at his own risk. however, he had thought that the biological mother’s family would fight him and that could cause problems for him. he acknowledged that it would also have been bad for the child but gave evidence that he was not thinking straight at the time and “just wanted my son back”.   that he had wanted to collect the child from the cultural parents and that he was told by the police that he could do so but that it would be at his own risk. however, he had thought that the biological mother’s family would fight him and that could cause problems for him. he acknowledged that it would also have been bad for the child but gave evidence that he was not thinking straight at the time and “just wanted my son back”.
the applicant biological father’s anger issues  that his sister got upset about something b had done, the father said he could not do it anymore and wanted to leave. (b) his sister blocked the doorway to prevent him from leaving so he shoved her. (c) she then bit him in the centre of his chest and he punched her in the jaw so that she would let go. when challenged about his conduct he said words to the effect "i’m not going to let her take a chunk out of my chest for nothing". he then said that it wasn’t a hard punch, just enough to get her to let go – as if that made it alright.   his sister blocked the doorway to prevent him from leaving so he shoved her. (c) she then bit him in the centre of his chest and he punched her in the jaw so that she would let go. when challenged about his conduct he said words to the effect "i’m not going to let her take a chunk out of my chest for nothing". he then said that it wasn’t a hard punch, just enough to get her to let go – as if that made it alright.   she then bit him in the centre of his chest and he punched her in the jaw so that she would let go. when challenged about his conduct he said words to the effect "i’m not going to let her take a chunk out of my chest for nothing". he then said that it wasn’t a hard punch, just enough to get her to let go – as if that made it alright.
domestic violence orders
proposals
the applicant biological father’s proposal  a s 65l order for the child to be introduced to the father and have the interim orders explained to him by a court child expert, noting that the child was only four years old at that time, (b) supervised time to occur twice a month for a period of six months, alternating between town g and city m, (c) the father to do all acts and things to enrol in and complete seven different sets of courses and counselling, and (d) the father undertake dialectical behaviour therapy as recommended by the single expert psychiatrist.   supervised time to occur twice a month for a period of six months, alternating between town g and city m, (c) the father to do all acts and things to enrol in and complete seven different sets of courses and counselling, and (d) the father undertake dialectical behaviour therapy as recommended by the single expert psychiatrist.   the father to do all acts and things to enrol in and complete seven different sets of courses and counselling, and (d) the father undertake dialectical behaviour therapy as recommended by the single expert psychiatrist.   the father undertake dialectical behaviour therapy as recommended by the single expert psychiatrist.
the first respondent biological mother’s proposal
the second respondent cultural mother’s proposal
the third respondent cultural father’s proposal
the independent children’s lawyer’s proposal
the issues for determination  did the biological father perpetrate family violence against the biological mother? (b) do the biological father’s mental health issues and/or family violence and/or anger management issues cause him to be a risk of unacceptable harm to the child? (c) does the biological father have the capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the biological mother and/or the cultural parents? (d) what is the appropriate legislative pathway in the event that the court makes orders in favour of the cultural parents, noting that they are non-parents? (e) does this court have the power to make a finding that what took place is a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices? (f) if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   do the biological father’s mental health issues and/or family violence and/or anger management issues cause him to be a risk of unacceptable harm to the child? (c) does the biological father have the capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the biological mother and/or the cultural parents? (d) what is the appropriate legislative pathway in the event that the court makes orders in favour of the cultural parents, noting that they are non-parents? (e) does this court have the power to make a finding that what took place is a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices? (f) if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   does the biological father have the capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the biological mother and/or the cultural parents? (d) what is the appropriate legislative pathway in the event that the court makes orders in favour of the cultural parents, noting that they are non-parents? (e) does this court have the power to make a finding that what took place is a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices? (f) if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   what is the appropriate legislative pathway in the event that the court makes orders in favour of the cultural parents, noting that they are non-parents? (e) does this court have the power to make a finding that what took place is a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices? (f) if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   does this court have the power to make a finding that what took place is a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices? (f) if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   if so, was what occurred on this occasion a cultural adoption and does the court need to or is it appropriate to make such a finding?   with whom the child should live, (b) how much if any time the child should spend with the other parties, (c) how much time the child should spend with his siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   how much if any time the child should spend with the other parties, (c) how much time the child should spend with his siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   how much time the child should spend with his siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   related child focused issues.
the evidence  notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 24 december 2020, (b) affidavit of himself filed on 24 october 2022, (c) second further amended initiating application filed on 31 october 2022, and (d) affidavit of himself filed on 4 november 2022.   affidavit of himself filed on 24 october 2022, (c) second further amended initiating application filed on 31 october 2022, and (d) affidavit of himself filed on 4 november 2022.   second further amended initiating application filed on 31 october 2022, and (d) affidavit of himself filed on 4 november 2022.   affidavit of himself filed on 4 november 2022.   response to application for final orders filed on 22 april 2021, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 22 april 2021, (c) affidavit of herself filed on 22 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 november 2022.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 22 april 2021, (c) affidavit of herself filed on 22 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 november 2022.   affidavit of herself filed on 22 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 november 2022.   affidavit of herself filed on 8 november 2022.   further amended response filed on 31 october 2022, (b) affidavit of herself filed on 31 october 2022, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 8 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 april 2021.   affidavit of herself filed on 31 october 2022, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 8 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 april 2021.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed on 8 april 2021, (d) affidavit of herself filed on 8 april 2021.   affidavit of herself filed on 8 april 2021.   family report of ms cc filed on 8 september 2021, (b) updated family report of ms cc filed on 24 october 2022, (c) affidavit of ms u filed on 26 may 2022, (d) tender bundle of icl, (e) affidavit and psychiatric assessment by dr z filed on 6 march 2023, and (f) addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.   updated family report of ms cc filed on 24 october 2022, (c) affidavit of ms u filed on 26 may 2022, (d) tender bundle of icl, (e) affidavit and psychiatric assessment by dr z filed on 6 march 2023, and (f) addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.   affidavit of ms u filed on 26 may 2022, (d) tender bundle of icl, (e) affidavit and psychiatric assessment by dr z filed on 6 march 2023, and (f) addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.   tender bundle of icl, (e) affidavit and psychiatric assessment by dr z filed on 6 march 2023, and (f) addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.   affidavit and psychiatric assessment by dr z filed on 6 march 2023, and (f) addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.   addendum family report of ms cc dated 11 april 2023.
exhibit no
description of exhibit
tendered by:
icl1
icl tender bundle
icl
c1
transcript from 14/11/2022
court
icl 2
updated tender bundle – tender bundle 2
f1
final orders sought by father
father applicant
rcm1
text messages between ms dd and mr clovis
cultural mother
rbm1
town t hospital and health services – information records
biological mother
rcm2
text messages from ms e on 15 september
the witnesses
the applicant biological father
the first respondent biological mother  that she had lied to the biological father in text messages when she told him that she was not pregnant with his child, (b) that she had been violent towards the biological father, that there was a family violence order made against her and that she had a violent side, (c) that the police statement alleging the biological father had hit her with a weapon was incorrect, though she was adamant that he had assaulted her, (d) that she was prepared to tell lies when it suited her, (e) that she had considered giving the child to another family member, being her sister in law (in islander terms), (f) that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had been violent towards the biological father, that there was a family violence order made against her and that she had a violent side, (c) that the police statement alleging the biological father had hit her with a weapon was incorrect, though she was adamant that he had assaulted her, (d) that she was prepared to tell lies when it suited her, (e) that she had considered giving the child to another family member, being her sister in law (in islander terms), (f) that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that the police statement alleging the biological father had hit her with a weapon was incorrect, though she was adamant that he had assaulted her, (d) that she was prepared to tell lies when it suited her, (e) that she had considered giving the child to another family member, being her sister in law (in islander terms), (f) that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she was prepared to tell lies when it suited her, (e) that she had considered giving the child to another family member, being her sister in law (in islander terms), (f) that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had considered giving the child to another family member, being her sister in law (in islander terms), (f) that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that prior to the birth she had threatened to kill the child if the second respondent did not take him, though she said that she did not mean it, (g) that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had been in a car driving past the biological father’s house but denied the alleged obscene hand gestures. she agreed that some of the other behaviour alleged to have been perpetrated by herself and leading to the current family violence order could have happened, (h) that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had previously regretted the giving of the child and tried to get the child back, (i) that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that at the biological father’s request she sent a text and an email in support of him becoming the child’s primary carer, (j) that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she understands the biological father’s anguish, (k) that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had agreed to the registration of the child’s birth using a name other than that chosen by the cultural parents, (l) that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that the decision to give the child in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practices was due to her anger with the father, (m) that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she did not know exactly where the child was living after she had given him to the cultural parents, (n) that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she had not obtained the biological father’s consent to give the child in this way, and (o) that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.   that she and the biological father had got back together after the child had been given to the cultural parents.
the second respondent cultural mother
the third respondent cultural father
mr v & ms w - the cultural paternal grandparents
ms e - the cultural maternal grandmother
ms u - the cultural expert
ms cc - the family report writer
dr z – single expert psychiatrist  events where the child b was present at least in part or where protecting b was the trigger for the father’s violence, and (b) that the father has heard voices that said “kill kill”, noting that dr z said that he had read it, but the father did not tell him. he noted that hearing voices can be quite common in people with a mental condition.   that the father has heard voices that said “kill kill”, noting that dr z said that he had read it, but the father did not tell him. he noted that hearing voices can be quite common in people with a mental condition.
findings
the applicant biological father’s trial affidavits
the applicant biological father’s mental health.
the applicant biological father’s anger issues
the law
the real question was not one about the father’s tendency, but rather whether or not there was an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, which entails a forecast. it is not a fact capable of empirical proof. any evidence which is relevant to and influential in that predictive inquiry is admissible and should be taken into account (presuming it survives any other applicable rules of evidence), regardless of whether it meets the definition of and the threshold requirements for admissibility under the tendency rule.
... [w]hen dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible (see u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, (2002) flc 93-112 and bolitho v cohen [2005] famca 458, (2005) flc 93-224).
application of the law to this matter
did the applicant biological father perpetrate family violence against the biological mother?
does the applicant biological father’s mental health and /or family violence and/or anger management cause him to be a risk of unacceptable harm to the child?
does the applicant biological father have the capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth mother and the cultural parents and extended cultural family?
do the parties have the capacity to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections?
the appropriate legislative pathway noting that the first respondent is a non-parent
do cultural parents fall within the definition of “parents” “according to law”?
69va declarations of parentage
as well as deciding, after receiving evidence, the issue of the parentage of a child for the purposes of proceedings, the court may also issue a declaration of parentage that is conclusive evidence of parentage for the purposes of all laws of the commonwealth.
meaning of parent
parent, when used in part vii in relation to a child who has been adopted, means an adoptive parent of the child.
adopted, in relation to a child, means adopted under the law of any place (whether in or out of australia) relating to the adoption of children.
26 parentage presumption arising from court finding   a person is presumed to be a child’s parent if, while the person is alive— (a) a court of the commonwealth, a state or a prescribed overseas jurisdiction (a prescribed court) expressly finds that the person is the child’s parent, and   a court of the commonwealth, a state or a prescribed overseas jurisdiction (a prescribed court) expressly finds that the person is the child’s parent, and  the finding is not altered, set aside or reversed.  the presumption in subsection (1) is irrebuttable. (3) a person is presumed to have been a child’s parent if, after the person dies— (a) a prescribed court expressly finds that the person was the child’s parent, and   a prescribed court expressly finds that the person was the child’s parent, and   the presumption in subsection (3) is rebuttable. (5) in this section, a reference to a court finding includes the following—  a declaration under section 10 of this act, (b) an order under the maintenance act 1965, section 14 or 16, (c) another court declaration or order that a stated person is a stated child’s parent.   another court declaration or order that a stated person is a stated child’s parent.
the court shall not make or revoke a declaration under this section unless the court is satisfied that, so far as is reasonably practicable, all persons whose interests are or may be affected by the declaration or revocation are represented before or have been given the opportunity of making representations to the court upon the subject matter of the proceedings. (emphasis added)
1.a. a person who is one of the progenitors of a child, a father or mother. also, in extended use: a woman or man who takes on parental responsibilities towards a child, e.g. a stepmother, an adoptive father.
a person from whom another is descended, an ancestor, a forefather, a parent.
meaning of law
a law is an obligatory rule of conduct. the commands of him or them that have coercive power (hobbes). a law is a rule of conduct imposed and enforced by the sovereign (austin). but the law is the body of principles recognised and applied by the state in the administration of justice (salmond). blackstone, however, maintain that a rule of law made on a pre-existing custom exists as a positive law apart from legislator or judge, and maine pointed out that there is law in primitive societies. savigny regarded law as itself subject to evolution, and as no arbitrary expression of the will of the law giver. ihering found the end of law in the “delimitation of interests”, and vinogradoff saw law as a set of rules imposed and enforced by a society with regard to the attribution and exercise of power over persons and things. de montmorency regarded law ultimately as the rules which bind men together in society in its struggle against natural environment: “adaptation to environment is the condition of survival. custom was the method by which man adapted himself to environment. to break custom was to face death. coercion is a weapon of law which law has forged, but it is not the basis of law”. anson disposed of the difficulties of austin thus: "when the state has attained to regularity in definition and enforcement of rules of conduct, then we get the positive law with which austin delighted to torment himself, and his readers.”
i. a rule of conduct imposed by authority.
i.i. human law.
i.i.1.a. the body of rules, whether proceeding from formal enactment or from custom, which a particular state or community recognizes as binding on its members or subjects. (in this sense usually the law.) †also, in early use, a code or system of rules of this kind. phasis added)
in conclusion
the pathway for non- parents
whether this court has the power to make a finding that what occurred did or did not fulfil the definition of a cultural adoption in accordance with torres strait islander child rearing practice and if answered in the affirmative: (a) should such a finding be made in this case, and (b) if that question is answered in the affirmative then does this arrangement fulfil the criteria of a cultural adoption
council does not agree with the proposed amendment to s 61c given: (i) the difficulty with deciding just who has parental responsibility under the proposed amendment, and (ii) that it is not clear, even if it were possible to determine fairly easily who, other than the biological parent, had parental responsibility, whether that parental responsibility would include the whole bundle of parental responsibilities envisaged under the common law and reflected in the family law act and other acts. this conclusion was reached notwithstanding that council was sympathetic to, and agreed in principle with the intention of the proposed amendment. in the end, council simply could not satisfy itself that there was a practicable way of amending s 61c so as to avoid uncertainty and preclude unintended consequences. however, council suggests that a new s 61f along similar lines to that envisaged by the out of the maze recommendation, might be inserted at the end of div 2 of pt vii of the family law act, without attracting the adverse consequences attaching to the proposal as it stands. while of undoubted symbolic importance, council concluded that such an amendment would not of itself provide the functional recognition in the many spheres of government with which aboriginal and torres strait islander families must deal. further investigation is required into how this functional recognition of kinship arrangements can be provided by the various arms and tiers of government. it will be seen that s 61f, in the form ultimately enacted, applies to all cases involving an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. in proceedings under part vii relating to such a child, the court must have regard to the child-rearing practices of the relevant aboriginal or torres strait islander culture. failure to take account of that provision would, in our view, ordinarily amount to appealable error. (for an illustration of a case in which s 61f was properly treated as an “integral” part of the decision making process see the judgment of young j in davis v davis [2007] famca 1149, (2008) 38 fam lr 671.) section 61f does not say that the outcome will be determined by application of the relevant kinship obligations and child-rearing practices, but the court must have regard to them. in our view, this can only be seen to be done if findings are made regarding those obligations/practices and adequate reasons are given to explain why a decision has been made that either follows or departs from them. we accept this can be done without the court making express reference to s 61f, but we consider it would be desirable that the section is at least mentioned, if not discussed.
importantly it is not the court, but the parties and the community that determine that a traditional adoption has taken place. as i see it, the court’s role is simply to recognise that fact to make orders accordingly in the best interests of the child or the children concerned.
on reflection i think that this view was only partially correct. it was correct in the sense that it is the traditional community that originally determines whether there should be a customary adoption and puts that process into effect. it now seems to me that if there is a dispute as to whether a traditional adoption has occurred in the context of a family law case where the best interests principle is to be applied, it is a relevant matter for the judge to determine this as an issue of fact as part of the process of determining what order would be in the child’s best interests. it would not be determinative of that issue but might be highly relevant to it. this would not however be the case if customary adoptions were to be recognised by law. in such a case, a court might well be called upon to determine whether a customary adoption has taken place without regard to the best interests principle, as has occurred in canada. i continued with the judgment in a way that seems to reflect that view when i said:
“an understanding of torres strait island custom, and particularly the practice of kupai omaskir, is nevertheless relevant to the determination of this case and in assessing the actions of the people involved. in particular it explains why the giving of a child by his/her biological parents to another couple is much more acceptable in a torres strait island context than it would be in the wider community.”
... as i indicated a number of occasions during the course of the trial, in my view it would be entirely inappropriate for a judge in the particular circumstances of this case to make a finding as to whether or not a traditional adoption has taken place. the issue is an extremely complex one and the varying practices and nuances that apply are such that it would more appropriately be a matter for the relevant elders to determine.[32] (emphasis added)
on the information provided, i am satisfied that the child was given by mr whitby and ms marlow to mr and mrs beck according to torres strait islander cultural practice of traditional adoption (kupai omasker). ...[33]   whether i am satisfied on the evidence that the child is the subject of a torres strait islander child rearing practice, and following from that (b) whether it is appropriate for that finding to be made.   whether it is appropriate for that finding to be made.
s 60cc(2) the primary considerations are:
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents  because the child does not know the biological father, (b) because the father has exposed his son b to violence and may do the same to the child. this is compounded by the father’s failure to see the issue with his conduct – even at times denying that he has perpetrated violence, (c) because the father concedes that the orders he seeks are likely to cause harm to the child but he pursues them anyway, and (d) because the father’s impulsivity means that he may be unable to follow advice from the experts about when and how to tell the child that he is the biological parent.   because the father has exposed his son b to violence and may do the same to the child. this is compounded by the father’s failure to see the issue with his conduct – even at times denying that he has perpetrated violence, (c) because the father concedes that the orders he seeks are likely to cause harm to the child but he pursues them anyway, and (d) because the father’s impulsivity means that he may be unable to follow advice from the experts about when and how to tell the child that he is the biological parent.   because the father concedes that the orders he seeks are likely to cause harm to the child but he pursues them anyway, and (d) because the father’s impulsivity means that he may be unable to follow advice from the experts about when and how to tell the child that he is the biological parent.   because the father’s impulsivity means that he may be unable to follow advice from the experts about when and how to tell the child that he is the biological parent.
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
s 60cc(3) the additional considerations are:
s 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child
s 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons (including grandparents or other relative of the child)
s 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child
s 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
s 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances
s 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
s 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
s 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
s 60cc(3)(h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture) and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
a) the child will be removed from his home in region hh and torres strait areas, b) the child will be removed from the cultural parents and his extended cultural family, and c) the child’s connection to that culture and those people will be lost or at the very least significantly damaged due to the father’s limited capacity to meet those cultural needs and his determination to bring the child’s relationship with those people, his cultural extended family, to a complete end.
b) the child will be removed from the cultural parents and his extended cultural family, and c) the child’s connection to that culture and those people will be lost or at the very least significantly damaged due to the father’s limited capacity to meet those cultural needs and his determination to bring the child’s relationship with those people, his cultural extended family, to a complete end.
c) the child’s connection to that culture and those people will be lost or at the very least significantly damaged due to the father’s limited capacity to meet those cultural needs and his determination to bring the child’s relationship with those people, his cultural extended family, to a complete end.
s 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
s 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family and s 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
s 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
s.60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
determination
interlocutory orders  this matter has been on foot since 24 december 2020 – more than two and a half years ago. it is time to make an order that finalises this matter and avoids further litigation. (b) the child is only four years old and yet for the majority of his young life there have been court proceedings on foot. (c) the father has had ample time to work on his mental health. he has a long history of failing to follow through.[35] the material tendered during the trial reflected the father’s attempts to address his issues. whilst i accept that it is not easy to obtain services from community mental health, i also note the records tendered reflect that at times the father has disengaged rather than been frustrated by a lack of services. (d) i am not persuaded that the father does wish to change his behaviours and beliefs. as i noted earlier he is unashamed, almost proud, of his violent reactions where he sees himself as having been protective of his son.   the child is only four years old and yet for the majority of his young life there have been court proceedings on foot. (c) the father has had ample time to work on his mental health. he has a long history of failing to follow through.[35] the material tendered during the trial reflected the father’s attempts to address his issues. whilst i accept that it is not easy to obtain services from community mental health, i also note the records tendered reflect that at times the father has disengaged rather than been frustrated by a lack of services. (d) i am not persuaded that the father does wish to change his behaviours and beliefs. as i noted earlier he is unashamed, almost proud, of his violent reactions where he sees himself as having been protective of his son.   the father has had ample time to work on his mental health. he has a long history of failing to follow through.[35] the material tendered during the trial reflected the father’s attempts to address his issues. whilst i accept that it is not easy to obtain services from community mental health, i also note the records tendered reflect that at times the father has disengaged rather than been frustrated by a lack of services. (d) i am not persuaded that the father does wish to change his behaviours and beliefs. as i noted earlier he is unashamed, almost proud, of his violent reactions where he sees himself as having been protective of his son.   i am not persuaded that the father does wish to change his behaviours and beliefs. as i noted earlier he is unashamed, almost proud, of his violent reactions where he sees himself as having been protective of his son.
living arrangements  if the child were to live with the father in accordance with his proposed orders, the child would be separated from the only family he had ever known. i accept the opinion of the family report writer that the child would be highly likely to suffer trauma as a consequence of that. (b) the father’s impulsivity, anger and violence. while it may not be directed towards the child i am of the view that he is highly likely to be exposed to it – just as b has been. i have in mind the father’s own evidence about “hulking up”, losing it, beating someone to a bloody pulp, and being unable to contain his rage even in the presence of the police. coming from his highly protected background, this behaviour would present a further and high level risk of physical and emotional harm to the child. (c) the sheer relentless nature of the father’s determination to win this case at any cost, regardless of the damage that may be caused to the child, rings alarm bells.   the father’s impulsivity, anger and violence. while it may not be directed towards the child i am of the view that he is highly likely to be exposed to it – just as b has been. i have in mind the father’s own evidence about “hulking up”, losing it, beating someone to a bloody pulp, and being unable to contain his rage even in the presence of the police. coming from his highly protected background, this behaviour would present a further and high level risk of physical and emotional harm to the child. (c) the sheer relentless nature of the father’s determination to win this case at any cost, regardless of the damage that may be caused to the child, rings alarm bells.   the sheer relentless nature of the father’s determination to win this case at any cost, regardless of the damage that may be caused to the child, rings alarm bells.
restraint
parental responsibility
conclusion
associate: dated: 29 november 2023
dated: 29 november 2023
[1] affidavit of biological mother dated 22 april 2021, paragraph 4[2] meriba omasker kaziw kazipa (torres strait islander traditional child rearing practice) act 2020 (qld) came into force 1 july 2021.[3] affidavit of ms e filed on 31 october 2022.[4] affidavit of mr v and ms w filed on 2 november 2022.[5] clarified under cross-examination to mean that the father did not have diagnoses such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.[6] affidavit of dr z filed 6 march 2023, p.29.[7] affidavit of dr z filed 6 march 2023 p.30. [8] icl tender bundle, pages 129-131.[9] affidavit of ms e filed on 31 october 2022, paragraph 43.[10] affidavit of ms u filed 26 may 2022, p.6[11] family report dated 8 september 2011 and released on 12 september 2021.[12] evaluation at paragraphs 113–127.[13] paragraph 121.[14] paragraph 124.[15] evaluation at 113–133.[16] paragraph 125.[17] paragraph 131.[18] paragraph 114.[19] addendum family report released on 12 april 2023, paragraph 13.[20] affidavit of dr z filed 6 march 2023, p.31[21] affidavit of dr z filed 6 march 2023, p.31.[22] icl tender bundle, p.230[23] kent j in blaze v grady [2015] famca 1064; (2015) 54 fam lr 172, particularly at [122].[24] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) flc 94-092 at [7].[25] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) flc 94-092 at [104] and [105].[26] births, deaths and marriages registration act 1995 (nsw) s 28.[27] affidavit of second respondent filed 8 april 2021, paragraph 25.[28] status of children act 1978 (qld) s 25[29] blaze v grady [2015] famca 1064; (2015) 54 fam lr 172.[30] the honourable alastair nicholson, “the law of customary adoption: a comparison of australian and canadian approaches to its legal recognition”, presented at the world congress on family law and children’s rights, halifax, nova scotia, canada, 24 august 2009.[31] at [44].[32] at p.24. [33] at [74].[34] affidavit of applicant filed 24 october 2022, annexure c2.[35] icl tender bundle .