last updated: 27 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gainer & millen [2023] fedcfamc2f 1305
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility   advise the other parent of the nature of the child’s condition including any diagnosis, treatment and prognosis, (b) advise the other parenting of the full name and contact details for any health care practitioner or facility the child may attend upon for assessment or treatment. (c) authorise the health care practitioner or facility to contact the other parent in relation to the child’s diagnosis, treatment and prognosis and provide to the practitioner or facility with the other parent’s contact telephone number and email address to facilitate the same.   advise the other parenting of the full name and contact details for any health care practitioner or facility the child may attend upon for assessment or treatment. (c) authorise the health care practitioner or facility to contact the other parent in relation to the child’s diagnosis, treatment and prognosis and provide to the practitioner or facility with the other parent’s contact telephone number and email address to facilitate the same.   authorise the health care practitioner or facility to contact the other parent in relation to the child’s diagnosis, treatment and prognosis and provide to the practitioner or facility with the other parent’s contact telephone number and email address to facilitate the same.
live with
time with  contact the supervising service within seven (7) days to arrange an appointment for assessment for suitability, (b) attend the assessment, (c) comply with any appointment made by the supervising service, (d) comply with all reasonable rules of the supervising service, and (e) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the supervising service.   attend the assessment, (c) comply with any appointment made by the supervising service, (d) comply with all reasonable rules of the supervising service, and (e) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the supervising service.   comply with any appointment made by the supervising service, (d) comply with all reasonable rules of the supervising service, and (e) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the supervising service.   comply with all reasonable rules of the supervising service, and (e) comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the supervising service.   comply with all reasonable requests or directions of the staff of the supervising service.   for a period of three (3) months – from 10:00am to 2:00pm, (b) at the conclusion of compliance by the father with order 8(a), the first half of every school holidays in even years and the second half of every school holidays in odd years.   at the conclusion of compliance by the father with order 8(a), the first half of every school holidays in even years and the second half of every school holidays in odd years.   the father has completed the circle of security parenting program and provided a certificate of completion to the mother, and (b) there have been a minimum of six (6) supervised visits undertaken between the father and the children in accordance with order 6.   there have been a minimum of six (6) supervised visits undertaken between the father and the children in accordance with order 6.
changeover
video communication
special occasions  each child’s birthday, (b) father’s day, (c) christmas day, and (d) easter sunday.   father’s day, (c) christmas day, and (d) easter sunday.   christmas day, and (d) easter sunday.   easter sunday.
support for mother
school reports
mother to have communication with children whilst in the father’s care
restraints  physically disciplining the children, (b) denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall remove the children from the presence or hearing of any third party who does so, (c) discussing these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, and each parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party discusses these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, (d) consuming alcohol to excess or illicit substances within 24 hours of coming into contact with the children, and (e) from attending upon the other parent’s home or workplace.   denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall remove the children from the presence or hearing of any third party who does so, (c) discussing these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, and each parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party discusses these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, (d) consuming alcohol to excess or illicit substances within 24 hours of coming into contact with the children, and (e) from attending upon the other parent’s home or workplace.   discussing these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, and each parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party discusses these proceedings within the presence or hearing of the children, (d) consuming alcohol to excess or illicit substances within 24 hours of coming into contact with the children, and (e) from attending upon the other parent’s home or workplace.   consuming alcohol to excess or illicit substances within 24 hours of coming into contact with the children, and (e) from attending upon the other parent’s home or workplace.   from attending upon the other parent’s home or workplace.
reasons for judgment
judge street
introduction
documents admitted into evidence  affidavit of mr gainer dated 10 february 2020, (2) affidavit of mr gainer dated 24 august 2020, (3) affidavit of mr gainer dated 21 june 2021, (4) affidavit of ms millen dated 6 may 2020, (5) affidavit of ms millen dated 11 august 2022, (6) affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   affidavit of mr gainer dated 24 august 2020, (3) affidavit of mr gainer dated 21 june 2021, (4) affidavit of ms millen dated 6 may 2020, (5) affidavit of ms millen dated 11 august 2022, (6) affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   affidavit of mr gainer dated 21 june 2021, (4) affidavit of ms millen dated 6 may 2020, (5) affidavit of ms millen dated 11 august 2022, (6) affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   affidavit of ms millen dated 6 may 2020, (5) affidavit of ms millen dated 11 august 2022, (6) affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   affidavit of ms millen dated 11 august 2022, (6) affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   affidavit of ms millen dated 12 july 2023.   exhibit a: family report prepared by ms f dated 13 july 2021, (2) exhibit b: pre-employment urinalysis report of the applicant father dated mid-2023, (3) exhibit c: certificate of parenting after separation course completed by the applicant father dated 19 april 2022, (4) exhibit d: icl minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (5) exhibit e: applicant father’s minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (6) exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.   exhibit b: pre-employment urinalysis report of the applicant father dated mid-2023, (3) exhibit c: certificate of parenting after separation course completed by the applicant father dated 19 april 2022, (4) exhibit d: icl minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (5) exhibit e: applicant father’s minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (6) exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.   exhibit c: certificate of parenting after separation course completed by the applicant father dated 19 april 2022, (4) exhibit d: icl minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (5) exhibit e: applicant father’s minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (6) exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.   exhibit d: icl minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (5) exhibit e: applicant father’s minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (6) exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.   exhibit e: applicant father’s minute of order dated 14 july 2023, (6) exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.   exhibit f: icl updated minute of order dated 14 july 2023.
chronology
applicant’s evidence
respondent’s evidence
evidence of the family report writer
parenting proceedings – legal principles  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child
...no doubt in the majority of cases, there will be a positive benefit for the child having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent, if this would not be in the child’s best interests.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child. (emphasis added)
and that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful relationship, which is beneficial to the child. it is not, in other words, a question of contact for contact sake. if there is a situation where contact with a parent is, on balance, likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this court making orders for such contact. that does not detract from the desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility of a meaningful relationship must first exist. (emphasis added)
issue of risk
138. the assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings about past events, the contemplation of risk entails the foresight of possible harm. it is an oddity to expect that the mere possibility of future harm can or should be proven as a probability, as has been implied before (potter and potter [2007] famca 350, (2007) flc 93-326 at [110], [129]). risks of harm must be heeded even if they are improbable eventualities. 139. speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of expressing the chance of it happening. the concept of chance lies along a continuum, encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly probable and remotely possible, assuming the polar extremes of certainty are ignored. in the current context, the higher the chance of the children’s sexual abuse, the greater the risk of their physical or psychological harm. at some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable. ... 142. as was recognised by hale lj (as her ladyship then was) in re c and b (children) (care order: future harm) [2001] 1 f.l.r 611 at [28], in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can justify action, while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might not. it could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a child to the risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence to be probable. requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a probability would pervert the law as settled by the high court in m v m and malec. (emphasis in the original)
additional considerations
issues relating to the children – their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships:
issues relating to the parents – decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility:
issues of family violence:
effect of change:
practical difficulty of implementation:
avoiding further proceedings:
other relevant matters:
finding and conclusions
associate: dated: 29 november 2023
dated: 29 november 2023