last updated: 9 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
munro & waleria [2023] fedcfamc2f 1534
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
material relied upon  her application in a proceeding filed 3 october 2023, (b) her written submissions filed 6 november 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 22 september 2023.   her written submissions filed 6 november 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 22 september 2023.   her affidavit filed 22 september 2023.
background
...
dear all. we oppose for our affidavit to be used in the supreme court in all circumstances. regards mr and mrs [waleria]
... i objected on both 28th and 30th august, 2023 to his honour, that we were not obligated to make an affidavit for search of a will for the supreme court, as we are not part of the proceedings in this court. ... we object any documents to be used in the supreme court for the client to progress with letters of administration, as we are not part of the proceedings. ... (as per the original)
a) the respondents are the only persons who have access to the deceased’s property and who can conduct a physical search among his personal effects, b) due to my separation from the deceased, i no longer had access to the deceased’s property to search his personal effects, from the date of his death, c) i have attempted to contact previous neighbours residing near the deceased’s property and have not been able to obtain any assistance for affidavit evidence,
b) due to my separation from the deceased, i no longer had access to the deceased’s property to search his personal effects, from the date of his death, c) i have attempted to contact previous neighbours residing near the deceased’s property and have not been able to obtain any assistance for affidavit evidence,
c) i have attempted to contact previous neighbours residing near the deceased’s property and have not been able to obtain any assistance for affidavit evidence,
... e) i have exhausted all other means of searching for a will in the deceased’s name, f) the supreme court has indicated that the matter cannot proceed without affidavit evidence of a physical search for an original will among the deceased’s personal defects. i therefore ask the honourable court to grant leave for me to file the federal circuit and family court orders dated 30 august 2023 and respondent affidavit dated 6 september 2023 in the supreme court, equity division. my reasons for this are: a) the application has been on-going for over 12 months, b) i have incurred significant time and legal costs in this process, i have conducted all other required searches required for a will, have filed an affidavit deposing to those searches and have complied with all other requisitions, d) my application for grant of letters of administration in the supreme court are for the benefit of [x], born [in] 2012, and [y], born [in] 2016 (“the children”). as per the entitlements sought in my affidavit filed 19 february 2023, i will not be receiving any entitlements from the deceased’s estate, e) further, in accordance with my undertaking dated 23 december 2022, i have sworn to undertake steps to ensure that the funds due to the children are deposited on their behalf with the nsw trustee within 12 months of the grant of letter of administration. nothing in the application warrants or entitles me to any share, title or benefit in the deceased’s estate, f) if the matter cannot proceed in the supreme court, it will be referred to the nsw trustee and guardian at both parties’ detriment, but particularly, the detriment of the children.
e) i have exhausted all other means of searching for a will in the deceased’s name, f) the supreme court has indicated that the matter cannot proceed without affidavit evidence of a physical search for an original will among the deceased’s personal defects.
f) the supreme court has indicated that the matter cannot proceed without affidavit evidence of a physical search for an original will among the deceased’s personal defects.
d) my application for grant of letters of administration in the supreme court are for the benefit of [x], born [in] 2012, and [y], born [in] 2016 (“the children”). as per the entitlements sought in my affidavit filed 19 february 2023, i will not be receiving any entitlements from the deceased’s estate, e) further, in accordance with my undertaking dated 23 december 2022, i have sworn to undertake steps to ensure that the funds due to the children are deposited on their behalf with the nsw trustee within 12 months of the grant of letter of administration. nothing in the application warrants or entitles me to any share, title or benefit in the deceased’s estate, f) if the matter cannot proceed in the supreme court, it will be referred to the nsw trustee and guardian at both parties’ detriment, but particularly, the detriment of the children.
e) further, in accordance with my undertaking dated 23 december 2022, i have sworn to undertake steps to ensure that the funds due to the children are deposited on their behalf with the nsw trustee within 12 months of the grant of letter of administration. nothing in the application warrants or entitles me to any share, title or benefit in the deceased’s estate, f) if the matter cannot proceed in the supreme court, it will be referred to the nsw trustee and guardian at both parties’ detriment, but particularly, the detriment of the children.
f) if the matter cannot proceed in the supreme court, it will be referred to the nsw trustee and guardian at both parties’ detriment, but particularly, the detriment of the children.   per the original)
legal principles  a person who publishes in a newspaper or periodical publication, by radio broadcast or television or by other electronic means, or otherwise disseminates to the public or to a section of the public by any means, any account of any proceedings, or of any part of any proceedings, under this act that identifies: (a) a party to the proceedings, (b) a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate, or a witness in the proceedings,   a party to the proceedings, (b) a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate, or a witness in the proceedings,   a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate, or a witness in the proceedings,
commits an offence punishable, upon conviction by imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year.   a person who inspects or copies a document, in relation to a proceeding, under these rules or an order: (a) must use the document for the purpose of the proceeding only, and (b) must not otherwise disclose the contents of the document, or give a copy of it, to any other person without the court's permission.   must use the document for the purpose of the proceeding only, and (b) must not otherwise disclose the contents of the document, or give a copy of it, to any other person without the court's permission.   must not otherwise disclose the contents of the document, or give a copy of it, to any other person without the court's permission.
discussion
deputy associate: dated: 1 december 2023
dated: 1 december 2023