last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
damron & wagoner (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1619
orders
the court orders that:  approaching or coming within or otherwise permitting any other person on his behalf to approach or come within 500 metres of any residence where the mother and/or the child may from time to time reside, (b) attending upon any place of education where the child may from time to time attend, (c) attending upon any location where the child may from time to time participate in sporting and/or extra-curricular activities.   attending upon any place of education where the child may from time to time attend, (c) attending upon any location where the child may from time to time participate in sporting and/or extra-curricular activities.   attending upon any location where the child may from time to time participate in sporting and/or extra-curricular activities.   the mother be permitted to apply for and have issued to her, an australian travel document for the child, or renew any such australian travel document without the consent of the father, and it is requested that the department of foreign affairs and trade (australian passport office) provide such assistance as is necessary in relation to the issue or renewal of any such australian travel document. (b) the mother is authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any authority required for the purposes of applying for or renewing the child’s australian travel document.   the mother is authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any authority required for the purposes of applying for or renewing the child’s australian travel document.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
the hearing
chronology of events
the relationship
this would involve him yelling and screaming at me relentlessly for sometimes up to an hour of his usual tirade of name-calling. it was worse if [mr wagoner] had been drinking. [mr wagoner]’s consumption of alcohol was often to excess.   wagoner]’s father had also been controlling and jealous and he was diagnosed with morbid jealousy. he went on medication.
i accept the mother’s evidence that the paternal grandmother told her that this was a topic that was simply not spoken about within the paternal family, and that the paternal grandmother told the mother she was concerned about the father having some similarities.
x
don’t be fucking ignorant... shut the fuck up... answer the fucking question...answer the fucking question. stop interrupting me, [ms damron].
i pause here to say that the mother almost could not get a word in herself. it is quite ironic that the father would tell her to stop interrupting him. i continue:
shut your mouth...answer the question. listen and answer accordingly.
and then when the mother is upset:
don’t have a little cry about it... don’t talk shit to me. you’re a fucking idiot. shut the fuck up...you’re a fucking idiot.
and then a criticism of the maternal grandmother:
don’t be a pig ignorant cunt like your fucking mother...
and:
don’t talk over the top of me... shut up, you dumb fuck... zip it. try it. see if you can manage it... you’re an ignorant cunt of a human being... thanks, cunt. don’t be a fuckwit... i don’t give a fuck what you have to say.
why are you fucking talking, you bitch? shut your fucking mouth and learn to fucking listen...dumb little fucking head.
get fucked, you ignorant little prick. stop talking. go fuck yourself. start to fucking listen.
separation
post-separation: the early days
the father advised that he was not violent towards the mother. when asked about the conflict that was reported at the end of their relationship, the father said that he had been intoxicated at the time. he believes that he “may have” grabbed her by the shoulders, but said that he can’t remember the incident clearly. the father advised that his psychologist had suggested lack of recall surrounding the incident may have been a result of his ptsd.
on or around [early] 2018, i was charged with common assault and intimidation. in my absence, i was found guilty of these charges and an advo was issued for the protection of [ms damron] from myself. to the best of my knowledge, the advo included conditions 1, 4 and 9, and expired in [early] 2020. [ms damron] and i separated on a final basis shortly thereafter.
goodbye. you’ve pushed me to this. you’ve taken my son away from me, and it is so cruel and heartbreaking. the situation could have been handled so much differently, but your family and you are hellbent on torturing me, even though you know i’ve been suffering from depression and anxiety. i hope you all feel good.   wagoner], don’t do anything silly. your son needs you.
if you hadn’t have been ignorant and answered your phone, you would have known.
the father was continuing to be aggressive towards the mother.
i will keep [x] if you don’t answer your phone.
these proceedings
interim orders of 11/12/18
child dispute conference on 25 january 2019
parenting arrangements pursuant to the interim orders
where is the [ms damron] i knew and loved? i fear your behaviour is not best for our son. he wants his dad and more time with his dad. why do you deny him of that?   damron], you are blocking me from seeing my son. you are 100 per cent responsible for that.
i don’t see my son due to your and your actions.
i pause here to make the obvious observation that the father was accepting zero responsibility for his own behaviours.
how dare you?
you should have talked to me about his first haircut, instead of being self-absorbed and selfish.
you have a face like a dropped pie.
and asking him:
how do you let her be so ignorant? you’re all ignorant. you need to show me some respect. he’s my son.
you should have told me when you decided to take him to hospital. you broke court orders once again with your self-absorbed behaviour. it’s disgusting behaviour. again, i’ll remind you, i’m [x]’s father and have as much right as you to be included in his life and welfare. so snap out of it.
don’t fucking ignore me... nodding your little head, you ignorant little child... get it into your thick fucking head... the biggest harm to [x] is you and your goddamn family.
you’re not having [x] back tonight unless you promise to comply with the orders.
you play your little games to get a reaction and you’ll get one.
x has an injury, father blames the mother for it
he fell and you weren’t there to catch him. end of. you have to be there, [ms damron], so stop the excuses and learn from it.
he also said to the mother:
why are you so blasé? this should never have happened. you should be standing under him to catch him.
interim orders of 4/5/21
father re-partners & then perpetrates further family violence against his new partner
you said you would do anything to rectify what you had created, and in order for that to happen, we need to talk and have an honest conversation, putting things in the past. i’m not waiting. come over after work. let’s go down to the [park] and communicate. please come over and sort this out and make right. i have food for dinner and everything we need, so come on. i’ll be home in 20 minutes.
she responds:   wagoner], i’m going home. with everything that’s happened in the past week, i’m struggling and just need some time alone and to go to sleep early. i feel sick. i’m so emotionally drained and i need to go home. please understand x.
you need to understand my position here, and imagine if this was the other way around. i need to see you and you need to show me the same respect you expect, especially after everything that’s been exposed. i deserve this. come put right the wrongs, [ms m]. there is no other way. if i do not see you tonight, [ms m], you have made this decision. there is no going back. i have self-respect and i respect you, but it needs to go both ways. i will cook dinner for two, keep up my end. if you show, you show. if you don’t, i know.
i’m about to turn my headphones off and go to bed. i’ve told you i’m not feeling well and you need to respect that.
respect goes both ways. guess what? i’m not feeling well either. call me back, please, so this does not carry on. i’ll keep my word and video you on messenger at 7.15.
at 7.15 pm, the father made multiple video calls to ms m. she did not answer them. the father messaged her:
it says you’re on another call, [ms m] (sending screenshot indicating that the victim was on another call at the time). please stop making a mockery of me. call me back when you’re done. i’m really trying here, as much for you as for me. that’s next level, [m]. no respect from you to me.   m], i struggle to understand you. i have left. i’m letting you know your door is open and you should close it. no idea what you were doing, as you [sic] being very irrational, but you should close your door.
the father was blaming the victim for his own violent behaviour, just as he has consistently done with the mother in this case. nowhere there do the words appear : “i’m sorry for what i did, ms m”. the father did not feel sorry for his actions. in my view, he does not feel sorry now.
supervised time is ordered
despite pleading guilty to the domestic violence charges, the father denies any wrongdoing, stating that he took a deal to avoid dragging out the court process and additional expense. he reported that he had left his key to [ms m]’s house at home and had climbed in a window as she was asleep. he denied that they argued as per the police record, and stated that she only became upset when she found out that he had contacted her parents. he stated that he “didn’t raise a hand to her or lay a hand on her”. he alleges that she fabricated the allegations to “try and protect herself” which he insinuated meant that she was trying to trump him exposing her allegedly immoral behaviour to her parents. he also stated that she made the report to hurt him. he denied he had been drinking at the time of the incident.
his anxiety had increased, he was behaving erratically, and he admitted to being emotionally volatile at the time of the offences. [mr wagoner] states that he was not thinking clearly at the time. he described a fugue-like state brought about by a spike in anxiety that he could not contain. in this state, [mr wagoner] reported experiencing a disconnection and a lack of continuity between his thoughts, actions and overall surroundings. he reports that he had no intention of doing any harm to his partner and expressed seemingly genuine remorse over his actions.
it would appear that on the evening of the offence, [mr wagoner] was experiencing such a period of hyperarousal. the fear of losing another significant relationship appears to have caused him severe emotional distress, and he experienced high levels of emotional dysregulation. [mr wagoner] appears to have been triggered into a fight/flight state in which he felt the need to address the perceived threat of losing his partner immediately, despite the inappropriateness of the hour or the way in which he approached his ex-partner.
reminder, it only takes one second to say, “i love you. i apologise. can we talk? you were right”. i don’t want to be at odds. stop letting pride and ego hold you hostage from happiness in life.
leadup to possible undefended hearing on 7/2/23
on [x]’s first day of school, i turned up to greet him with a packed lunch (chips that he loves and some of his favourite fruits) and a tag for his school bag so he could identify it from any of the other children. [x] was so excited to see me and share his first day experience with his father. we also decided to call [x]’s grandparents in nz, which [x] was very excited about.
father attends undefended hearing & is given another chance
the matter come back before me, the father having then given a chance to run his case and for me to be told, oh, well, your honour, he did not pay us a dollar. the father should not put himself in that position if that matter comes back before me. i hope i have made myself clear to everyone in these reasons. my only focus is on what is best for [x]. [mr wagoner] will be given a chance to run his case. it is coming at a cost that i expect to be sorted out and, in fact, paid.
updated family report
parenting proceedings – the law
best interests
and i pause here to say that it is:
...then it raises significant concerns about the future risks of the father undermining [x]’s relationship with the mother. the father continually sought to bring attention to a number of unreasonable criticisms of the mother’s parenting and allegations of the mother having self-invested motivations in the parenting dispute which he clearly believes were valid.
the father has done these things.
risks can escalate if the primary perpetrator perceives further reduction in power through a court process.
- being protected from any potential denigration of the mother or maternal family. - the time spent with [x] would be activity based. - the supervisor being responsible for ensuring the needs of [x] were met in case the father was not attuned to him. - [x] would be protected from the risk associated with changeovers. the challenge of supervised time in a contact centre is that [x] would be set up to have an unrealistic view of the father’s parenting and the potential quality of his relationship with him. furthermore, supervised time should be limited and purposeful to allow for work to be done to mitigate the risks. if the risks are, as identified, and if the father (as in this assessment) continues to dismiss any coercive controlling family violence behaviour despite appearing to have engaged in considerable therapeutic work then there would be limited purpose of the continuation of supervision in any meaningful or sustained sense.  no party seeks it, and (b) the content of exhibit 15 would demonstrate that, as is so often the case, ‘blood is thicker than water’ and i could not rely on the father’s family to be any protection whatsoever.   the content of exhibit 15 would demonstrate that, as is so often the case, ‘blood is thicker than water’ and i could not rely on the father’s family to be any protection whatsoever.
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 1 december 2023
dated: 1 december 2023