last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
uttar & rajendra [2023] fedcfamc2f 1609
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
fixed at $4,500 inclusive of gst for professional costs and disbursements.  the addition of sub-clause 4.4.2 in the following terms:
payment to the husband of:   the sum of $5,000 in accordance with order 3 of the orders made on 5 february 2020, (ii) the sum of $12,122 being the expenses incurred by him or on his behalf in preparing b street, suburb c for sale and providing vacant possession of the property, (iii) the sum of the sum of $27,502.67 being the additional conveyancing costs and disbursements incurred by him as trustee for sale of the suburb c property, in excess of those amounts fixed pursuant to order 4.2 above, and (iv) the husband’s costs of an incidental to the husband’s application for enforcement filed 25 may 2022 and these proceedings since the filing of that application fixed in the sum of $100,000. (b) the addition of sub-clause 4.4.3 in the following terms:  ) the sum of $12,122 being the expenses incurred by him or on his behalf in preparing b street, suburb c for sale and providing vacant possession of the property, (iii) the sum of the sum of $27,502.67 being the additional conveyancing costs and disbursements incurred by him as trustee for sale of the suburb c property, in excess of those amounts fixed pursuant to order 4.2 above, and (iv) the husband’s costs of an incidental to the husband’s application for enforcement filed 25 may 2022 and these proceedings since the filing of that application fixed in the sum of $100,000. (b) the addition of sub-clause 4.4.3 in the following terms:  i) the sum of the sum of $27,502.67 being the additional conveyancing costs and disbursements incurred by him as trustee for sale of the suburb c property, in excess of those amounts fixed pursuant to order 4.2 above, and (iv) the husband’s costs of an incidental to the husband’s application for enforcement filed 25 may 2022 and these proceedings since the filing of that application fixed in the sum of $100,000. (b) the addition of sub-clause 4.4.3 in the following terms:  ) the husband’s costs of an incidental to the husband’s application for enforcement filed 25 may 2022 and these proceedings since the filing of that application fixed in the sum of $100,000. (b) the addition of sub-clause 4.4.3 in the following terms:   the addition of sub-clause 4.4.3 in the following terms:
payment to or as directed by d lawyers for the amount required to be paid to them by the wife, such that d lawyers did, on settlement of the sale of the suburb c property, discharge caveat no. ... registered by them on the title to that property.   sub-clause 4.4.2 be re-numbered 4.4.4.   the addition of sub-clause 4.5.3 in the following terms: (i) $41,814.55 to the wife in full and final satisfaction of any and all claims the wife may have against the husband for unpaid or under-paid interim spouse maintenance, as ordered on 12 december 2015, and (ii) $12,750 in satisfaction of orders 4.5.1 & 4.5.2 of the final orders (b) sub-clause 4.5.3 be re-numbered 4.5.4.   $41,814.55 to the wife in full and final satisfaction of any and all claims the wife may have against the husband for unpaid or under-paid interim spouse maintenance, as ordered on 12 december 2015, and (ii) $12,750 in satisfaction of orders 4.5.1 & 4.5.2 of the final orders  ) $12,750 in satisfaction of orders 4.5.1 & 4.5.2 of the final orders   sub-clause 4.5.3 be re-numbered 4.5.4.
the court notes that
reasons for judgment
introduction
the evidence   application – enforcement filed 25 may 2022, (b) affidavit of mr e filed 16 november 2023, (c) affidavit of mr rajendra filed 16 november 2023, (d) affidavit of mr f filed 23 november 2023, (e) costs notice, (f) minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   affidavit of mr e filed 16 november 2023, (c) affidavit of mr rajendra filed 16 november 2023, (d) affidavit of mr f filed 23 november 2023, (e) costs notice, (f) minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   affidavit of mr rajendra filed 16 november 2023, (d) affidavit of mr f filed 23 november 2023, (e) costs notice, (f) minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   affidavit of mr f filed 23 november 2023, (e) costs notice, (f) minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   costs notice, (f) minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   minute of order sought by the husband, (g) husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   husband’s outline of contentions, and (h) documents contained in a tender bundle.   documents contained in a tender bundle.   case outline document filed 20 november 2023, (b) affidavit of ms g filed 28 november 2023, (c) affidavit of ms uttar filed 27 september 2023, (d) application – contempt filed 11 september 2023, and (e) documents contained in the tender bundle.   affidavit of ms g filed 28 november 2023, (c) affidavit of ms uttar filed 27 september 2023, (d) application – contempt filed 11 september 2023, and (e) documents contained in the tender bundle.   affidavit of ms uttar filed 27 september 2023, (d) application – contempt filed 11 september 2023, and (e) documents contained in the tender bundle.   application – contempt filed 11 september 2023, and (e) documents contained in the tender bundle.   documents contained in the tender bundle.   per the original)
chronology   $1,790,125.18 to the wife, (b) $900,000 to the husband, and (c) $233,331.73 was held in trust by arch law.   $900,000 to the husband, and (c) $233,331.73 was held in trust by arch law.   $233,331.73 was held in trust by arch law.   difficulties in obtaining acceptance by the new south wales land registry services of the power of the court appointed trustee for sale to execute or effect a transfer. (b) delay processing the withdrawal of the wife’s caveat signed by the registrar.   delay processing the withdrawal of the wife’s caveat signed by the registrar.
enforcement application
the applicable legal principles
order 2.1 – listing property for blind tender
2.1 within thirty (30) days of the date of these orders, list for sale by blind tender the property situated at and known as [b street, suburb c] (“the [suburb c] property”) with a real estate agreed upon by the parties and failing agreement the wife shall forthwith in writing nominate two real estate agents from which the husband shall within a further seven (7) days select one, and failing which the wife shall select one who shall be the real estate agent appointed (“the agent”), (as per the original)   the wife had only recently engaged a real estate agent to assist with the sale of the suburb c property, and (b) there had been non-compliance by the wife with the final property orders.   there had been non-compliance by the wife with the final property orders.
i complied with order 2.1 make on 30 april 2019 (page 35 of 121) by signing an agreement with [mr f] and giving him instructions to list property for sale. [mr rajendra] made an inaccurate application to this court asserting that i had not complied with order 2.1 so that he could become trustee. judge rees made an order on 5 february 2020 (page 81 of 121) appointing [mr rajendra] as trustee. ... therefore, under section 86(2) of the real property act 1900, order made by judge rees has no effect. therefore, contract of sale prepared by [k lawyers] and executed by [mr rajendra] has no effect. therefore, settlement has no effect. an independent 3rd party trustee be appointed to re-sell this [suburb c] property by auction. (as per the original)
that the wife defaulted in carrying out the obligations imposed upon her by the final property orders in relation to the sale of the suburb c property pursuant to orders 2.8.3, 3.2.3 and 5.2, and that she failed to maintain the suburb c property in a neat and tidy condition, and that in contravention of order 3.2.4, she hindered the sale of the suburb c property from being effected.
2.8.3 co-operate in every way with the agent in relation to the sale of the [suburb c] property at all times requested by the agent and ensure that the [suburb c] property is in a neat and clean condition, ... 3.2.3 maintain the [suburb c] property in a presentable condition so as to facilitate the sale including but not limited to presenting the [suburb c] property in a neat and tidy condition at all times when the property is subject to inspection, and 3.2.5 do all things necessary to facilitate a sale at the earliest possible time and shall refrain from doing or saying anything which has the effect of hindering or preventing an inspection or a sale of the [suburb c] property being effected. ... 5.2 general maintenance and upkeep of the [suburb c] property, and repairs to the [suburb c] property that are occasioned by the actions of the wife or any other person living in the [suburb c] property (excluding repairs that arise from the usual wear and tear), ... (as per the original)
less: [d lawyers] $22,041 less: registration fees to discharge my caveat $154 less: remove furniture and clean up $1,000 less: tree lopping $3,000 + $3,000 less: rubbish removal, final clean up & locksmiths $2,660 + $1,000 + $462 less: council and water payments $11,300 add: interest on delayed settlement [mid]-2020 to [mid]-2022: $310,000 (as per the original)   failed to maintain the suburb c property, such that work was required to be carried out at additional expense before the purchaser was prepared to settle on its purchase, (b) failed to remove all of her furniture and personal belongings from the suburb c property, such that the husband’s agent was required to arrange removal and/or disposal of such items at further additional expense, (c) failed to remove rubbish from the suburb c property, such that the husband’s agent was required to arrange its removal and disposal, (d) failed to vacate the suburb c property, putting the husband to the expense of obtaining and having executed a warrant for possession, (e) caused the husband to incur the costs of a locksmith to secure the property and prevent any re-entry by the wife.   failed to remove all of her furniture and personal belongings from the suburb c property, such that the husband’s agent was required to arrange removal and/or disposal of such items at further additional expense, (c) failed to remove rubbish from the suburb c property, such that the husband’s agent was required to arrange its removal and disposal, (d) failed to vacate the suburb c property, putting the husband to the expense of obtaining and having executed a warrant for possession, (e) caused the husband to incur the costs of a locksmith to secure the property and prevent any re-entry by the wife.   failed to remove rubbish from the suburb c property, such that the husband’s agent was required to arrange its removal and disposal, (d) failed to vacate the suburb c property, putting the husband to the expense of obtaining and having executed a warrant for possession, (e) caused the husband to incur the costs of a locksmith to secure the property and prevent any re-entry by the wife.   failed to vacate the suburb c property, putting the husband to the expense of obtaining and having executed a warrant for possession, (e) caused the husband to incur the costs of a locksmith to secure the property and prevent any re-entry by the wife.   caused the husband to incur the costs of a locksmith to secure the property and prevent any re-entry by the wife.   she refused to apply for and obtain a foreign resident capital gains withholding clearance certificate, (b) she lodged a caveat on the title of the suburb c property, refused to sign a withdrawal of caveat, and the husband, as a result, incurred costs of an application in a proceeding for a s 106a order, (c) she caused further delays with the husband’s dealing with the new south wales land registry service in relation to the registration of the withdrawal of caveat and the registration of the transfer of the title to the suburb c property to the purchaser.   she lodged a caveat on the title of the suburb c property, refused to sign a withdrawal of caveat, and the husband, as a result, incurred costs of an application in a proceeding for a s 106a order, (c) she caused further delays with the husband’s dealing with the new south wales land registry service in relation to the registration of the withdrawal of caveat and the registration of the transfer of the title to the suburb c property to the purchaser.   she caused further delays with the husband’s dealing with the new south wales land registry service in relation to the registration of the withdrawal of caveat and the registration of the transfer of the title to the suburb c property to the purchaser.
what of the wife’s contentions that the contract for sale should be set aside?
should the court exercise its discretion under s 79a(1)(c) and make orders in substitution of the final property orders?
what orders should be made?   she had an excess of $206,000 in various bank accounts and term deposits, not including funds in foreign bank accounts, (b) prior to the making of the final property orders, the wife had accessed part of a superannuation in super fund 1, which was included in the agreed balance sheet at $495,070, (c) the wife retained the balance of her interest in the super fund 1, which was included in the agreed balance sheet at $399,450. furthermore, at the time the final property orders were made, she was aged 61, which entitled her to access that superannuation interest, (d) the parties closed their joint accounts and divided the balances equally between them, which resulted in the wife receiving further funds, and (e) the wife retained shares in l company and m company, which were readily realisable, and which were included in the agreed balance sheet at a combined value of $78,400.   prior to the making of the final property orders, the wife had accessed part of a superannuation in super fund 1, which was included in the agreed balance sheet at $495,070, (c) the wife retained the balance of her interest in the super fund 1, which was included in the agreed balance sheet at $399,450. furthermore, at the time the final property orders were made, she was aged 61, which entitled her to access that superannuation interest, (d) the parties closed their joint accounts and divided the balances equally between them, which resulted in the wife receiving further funds, and (e) the wife retained shares in l company and m company, which were readily realisable, and which were included in the agreed balance sheet at a combined value of $78,400.   the wife retained the balance of her interest in the super fund 1, which was included in the agreed balance sheet at $399,450. furthermore, at the time the final property orders were made, she was aged 61, which entitled her to access that superannuation interest, (d) the parties closed their joint accounts and divided the balances equally between them, which resulted in the wife receiving further funds, and (e) the wife retained shares in l company and m company, which were readily realisable, and which were included in the agreed balance sheet at a combined value of $78,400.   the parties closed their joint accounts and divided the balances equally between them, which resulted in the wife receiving further funds, and (e) the wife retained shares in l company and m company, which were readily realisable, and which were included in the agreed balance sheet at a combined value of $78,400.   the wife retained shares in l company and m company, which were readily realisable, and which were included in the agreed balance sheet at a combined value of $78,400.
conclusions   $12,750 in satisfaction of orders 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 of the final property orders, and (b) $41,814.55 for outstanding interim spousal maintenance as ordered on 12 december 2015.   $41,814.55 for outstanding interim spousal maintenance as ordered on 12 december 2015.
contempt application   a person shall be taken for the purposes of this part to have contravened an order under this act if, and only if: (a) where the person is bound by the order – he or she has: (i) intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or (b) in any other case – he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   where the person is bound by the order – he or she has: (i) intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or (b) in any other case – he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or  ) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or   in any other case – he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.  ) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   per the original, citations omitted)
... if it is clear that proceedings within the concept of the pleading under scrutiny are doomed to fail, the court should dismiss the action to protect the defendant from being further troubled, to save the plaintiff from further costs and disappointment and to relive the court of the burden of further wasted time which could be devoted to the determination of claims which have legal merit.
count 1: on 25 august 2023, the husband wilfully breached the court order made on 12 may 2023
on 25 august 2023 court made orders annexed and marked n. [mr rajendra] knowingly, deliberately and wilfully breached these orders in contempt of court by failing to file and serve a single consolidated affidavit without making reference to prior affidavits. (as per the original)
count 2: mr rajendra, as trustee, wilfully breached court orders made on 5 february 2020 by failing to execute contract of sale as vendor on 1 april 2020.   h] told me that he made the highest offer of $3,500,000 to the real estate. [mr h] told me that the real estate agent told him, [mr h], that [mr rajendra] told the real estate agent to reject [mr h]’s offer and accept the offer of $3 million. (as per the original)
count 3: that mr rajendra wilfully breached court orders 2.4.3 and 2.6 and 4.4 and 4.4.2 made on 30 april 2019   failed to instruct j lawyers to act on the sale, pursuant to order 2.4.3, (b) failed to maintain his guarantee of the line of credit, pursuant to order 2.6, and (c) acted in contempt of orders 4.4 and 4.4.2, although the precise actions are not identified.   failed to maintain his guarantee of the line of credit, pursuant to order 2.6, and (c) acted in contempt of orders 4.4 and 4.4.2, although the precise actions are not identified.   acted in contempt of orders 4.4 and 4.4.2, although the precise actions are not identified.
count 4: that mr rajendra wilfully breached court order 2 on 12 february 2015 by failing to pay spousal maintenance of $950 per week
costs application
should costs be awarded?  the entirety of these proceedings, since the making of the final property orders has been necessitated by the wife’s failure to comply with the obligations imposed upon her by the final property orders. (b) the husband was wholly successful in obtaining a warrant for possession of the suburb c property in mid-2022, and in obtaining a s 106a order for the signing of the withdrawal of a caveat on behalf of the wife in late 2022, and on both occasions the husband’s costs were reserved. (c) the institution of the enforcement and the s 79a proceedings arose from the wife’s failure to comply with the final property orders. (d) there were occasions in the course of the proceedings where the wife appears to have deliberately failed to comply with the final property orders and has generally sought to delay and frustrate compliance with the orders, the conduct of these proceedings, and a final division of the matrimonial assets. examples included: (i) seeking to delay these proceedings in reliance upon what was alleged to be a forged letter, purporting to be on the letterhead of her former lawyers, which the wife tendered in evidence before his honour judge kemp. (ii) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.   the husband was wholly successful in obtaining a warrant for possession of the suburb c property in mid-2022, and in obtaining a s 106a order for the signing of the withdrawal of a caveat on behalf of the wife in late 2022, and on both occasions the husband’s costs were reserved. (c) the institution of the enforcement and the s 79a proceedings arose from the wife’s failure to comply with the final property orders. (d) there were occasions in the course of the proceedings where the wife appears to have deliberately failed to comply with the final property orders and has generally sought to delay and frustrate compliance with the orders, the conduct of these proceedings, and a final division of the matrimonial assets. examples included: (i) seeking to delay these proceedings in reliance upon what was alleged to be a forged letter, purporting to be on the letterhead of her former lawyers, which the wife tendered in evidence before his honour judge kemp. (ii) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.   the institution of the enforcement and the s 79a proceedings arose from the wife’s failure to comply with the final property orders. (d) there were occasions in the course of the proceedings where the wife appears to have deliberately failed to comply with the final property orders and has generally sought to delay and frustrate compliance with the orders, the conduct of these proceedings, and a final division of the matrimonial assets. examples included: (i) seeking to delay these proceedings in reliance upon what was alleged to be a forged letter, purporting to be on the letterhead of her former lawyers, which the wife tendered in evidence before his honour judge kemp. (ii) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.   there were occasions in the course of the proceedings where the wife appears to have deliberately failed to comply with the final property orders and has generally sought to delay and frustrate compliance with the orders, the conduct of these proceedings, and a final division of the matrimonial assets. examples included: (i) seeking to delay these proceedings in reliance upon what was alleged to be a forged letter, purporting to be on the letterhead of her former lawyers, which the wife tendered in evidence before his honour judge kemp. (ii) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.   seeking to delay these proceedings in reliance upon what was alleged to be a forged letter, purporting to be on the letterhead of her former lawyers, which the wife tendered in evidence before his honour judge kemp. (ii) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.  ) refusing to sign a withdrawal of caveat, even when requested to do so by the judicial registrar. (iii) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.  i) refusing to cooperate in applying for an ato tax clearance certificate.
conclusion
associate: dated: 20 december 2023
dated: 20 december 2023