last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kaye & tait [2023] fedcfamc2f 1590
orders
the court declares that:  the applicant, ms kaye (‘the de facto wife’) and the respondent, mr tait (‘the de facto husband’) were in a de facto relationship for more than two (2) years for the purposes of s 90sb(a), (b) the de facto relationship ended in may 2020, (c) the parties made substantial contributions to their property, and (d) a failure to make an order pursuant to s 90sm and/or a declaration pursuant to s 90sl would result in serious injustice to the parties.   the de facto relationship ended in may 2020, (c) the parties made substantial contributions to their property, and (d) a failure to make an order pursuant to s 90sm and/or a declaration pursuant to s 90sl would result in serious injustice to the parties.   the parties made substantial contributions to their property, and (d) a failure to make an order pursuant to s 90sm and/or a declaration pursuant to s 90sl would result in serious injustice to the parties.   a failure to make an order pursuant to s 90sm and/or a declaration pursuant to s 90sl would result in serious injustice to the parties.   the de facto wife was ordinarily resident in a participating jurisdiction (namely the state of new south wales) at the time when the application for orders under s 90sm was made, and (b) both parties were ordinarily residents of the state of new south wales during at least one-third of the de facto relationship.   both parties were ordinarily residents of the state of new south wales during at least one-third of the de facto relationship.
the court orders that:  personal effects in her possession, (b) furniture in her possession, (c) contents of bank accounts in her sole name, (d) motor vehicle 1, and (e) her superannuation entitlements.   furniture in her possession, (c) contents of bank accounts in her sole name, (d) motor vehicle 1, and (e) her superannuation entitlements.   contents of bank accounts in her sole name, (d) motor vehicle 1, and (e) her superannuation entitlements.   motor vehicle 1, and (e) her superannuation entitlements.   her superannuation entitlements.   the property situated at b street, suburb c in the state of new south wales (“the suburb c property”), (b) motor vehicle 2, (c) motor vehicle 3, (d) personal effects in his possession, (e) furniture in his possession, (f) motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   motor vehicle 2, (c) motor vehicle 3, (d) personal effects in his possession, (e) furniture in his possession, (f) motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   motor vehicle 3, (d) personal effects in his possession, (e) furniture in his possession, (f) motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   personal effects in his possession, (e) furniture in his possession, (f) motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   furniture in his possession, (f) motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   motor vehicle 4 in his possession, (g) contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   contents of bank accounts in his sole name, and (h) his superannuation entitlements.   his superannuation entitlements.   car loan #...19, (b) student debt, (c) visa card #...94, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   student debt, (c) visa card #...94, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   visa card #...94, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   car loan, (b) mastercard, (c) p company credit card, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   mastercard, (c) p company credit card, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.   p company credit card, and (d) all other borrowings, personal loans, and credit card facilities and indemnify and keep indemnified, the respondent against such liabilities.
superannuation orders  a base amount of $50,130 is allocated, as required by s90xt(4) of the family law act 1975, to the de facto wife out of the de facto husband's interest in the fund. (b) in accordance with paragraph 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975: (i) the de facto wife is entitled to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (ii) the de facto husband’s entitlement to payments out of his interest in the fund and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order. (c) the trustee of the fund, d company (“the trustee”) shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to: (i) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the applicant by orders 9(a) and 9(b), (ii) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the de facto husband’s interest in the fund. (d) this order has effect from the operative time, and the operative time for this order is four (4) working days from the date of service of a copy of the order upon the trustee.   in accordance with paragraph 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975: (i) the de facto wife is entitled to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (ii) the de facto husband’s entitlement to payments out of his interest in the fund and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order. (c) the trustee of the fund, d company (“the trustee”) shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to: (i) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the applicant by orders 9(a) and 9(b), (ii) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the de facto husband’s interest in the fund. (d) this order has effect from the operative time, and the operative time for this order is four (4) working days from the date of service of a copy of the order upon the trustee.   the de facto wife is entitled to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (ii) the de facto husband’s entitlement to payments out of his interest in the fund and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.  ) the de facto husband’s entitlement to payments out of his interest in the fund and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splitable payment may be payable, is correspondingly reduced by force of this order.   the trustee of the fund, d company (“the trustee”) shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to: (i) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the applicant by orders 9(a) and 9(b), (ii) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the de facto husband’s interest in the fund. (d) this order has effect from the operative time, and the operative time for this order is four (4) working days from the date of service of a copy of the order upon the trustee.   calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the family law act 1975 and family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, the entitlement created for the applicant by orders 9(a) and 9(b), (ii) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the de facto husband’s interest in the fund.  ) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment out of the de facto husband’s interest in the fund.   this order has effect from the operative time, and the operative time for this order is four (4) working days from the date of service of a copy of the order upon the trustee.
other orders  cause the suburb c property to be listed for sale with a real estate agent by early 2024, and (b) sell the suburb c property.   sell the suburb c property.   that until friday 8 may 2024 or such other period as agreed in writing between the parties, the parties shall do all acts and things necessary to cause the suburb c property to be listed for sale with a real estate agent by private treaty, and: (i) the real estate agent shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a real estate agent nominated by the new south wales chair of the australian property institute or his or her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (ii) any upfront expenses incurred with the real estate agent shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the solicitor acting on the sale shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a solicitor nominated by the president of the city e law society or his/her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (iv) any upfront expenses incurred with the solicitor shall be paid equally by the parties. (v) the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property. (b) if the suburb c property has not been sold by private treaty by mid-2024 then, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, both parties shall do all acts and things so as to sell the suburb c property by public auction and: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, an auctioneer nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (ii) any upfront expenses incurred with the auctioneer shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the auction shall take place within 8 months of the date of these orders, (iv) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price. (c) if the suburb c property is not sold at the first auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall resubmit the suburb c property for auction within eight (8) weeks of the first auction and the provisions of order 12(b) shall apply. (d) if the suburb c property is not sold at the second auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall leave the suburb c property on the market for sale by private treaty and liberty is reserved for either party to apply to the court for further orders relating to the sale of the suburb c property. (e) until completion of sale of the suburb c property the de facto husband shall: (i) make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times. (f) subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   the real estate agent shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a real estate agent nominated by the new south wales chair of the australian property institute or his or her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (ii) any upfront expenses incurred with the real estate agent shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the solicitor acting on the sale shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a solicitor nominated by the president of the city e law society or his/her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (iv) any upfront expenses incurred with the solicitor shall be paid equally by the parties. (v) the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  ) any upfront expenses incurred with the real estate agent shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the solicitor acting on the sale shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a solicitor nominated by the president of the city e law society or his/her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (iv) any upfront expenses incurred with the solicitor shall be paid equally by the parties. (v) the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  i) the solicitor acting on the sale shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, a solicitor nominated by the president of the city e law society or his/her nominee following a request by either party to make such nomination, (iv) any upfront expenses incurred with the solicitor shall be paid equally by the parties. (v) the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  ) any upfront expenses incurred with the solicitor shall be paid equally by the parties. (v) the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.   the list price shall be as agreed by the parties, or failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make a nomination by either party, (vi) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  ) the sale price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (vii) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  i) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the real estate agent for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (viii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.  ii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the sale of the suburb c property.   if the suburb c property has not been sold by private treaty by mid-2024 then, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties, both parties shall do all acts and things so as to sell the suburb c property by public auction and: (i) the auctioneer shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, an auctioneer nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (ii) any upfront expenses incurred with the auctioneer shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the auction shall take place within 8 months of the date of these orders, (iv) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price. (c) if the suburb c property is not sold at the first auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall resubmit the suburb c property for auction within eight (8) weeks of the first auction and the provisions of order 12(b) shall apply. (d) if the suburb c property is not sold at the second auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall leave the suburb c property on the market for sale by private treaty and liberty is reserved for either party to apply to the court for further orders relating to the sale of the suburb c property. (e) until completion of sale of the suburb c property the de facto husband shall: (i) make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times. (f) subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   the auctioneer shall be as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, an auctioneer nominated by the real estate agent following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (ii) any upfront expenses incurred with the auctioneer shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the auction shall take place within 8 months of the date of these orders, (iv) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.  ) any upfront expenses incurred with the auctioneer shall be paid equally by the parties. (iii) the auction shall take place within 8 months of the date of these orders, (iv) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.  i) the auction shall take place within 8 months of the date of these orders, (iv) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.  ) the reserve price shall be as agreed by the parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the auctioneer following a request to make such a nomination by either party, (v) the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.   the parties shall execute: all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the suburb c property, the contract for sale, and all other documents necessary to complete the sale. (vi) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.  ) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the auctioneer in relation to the sale of the suburb c property, and (vii) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.  i) the parties shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder if the reserve price is not reached and, in the event that the parties cannot agree as to the acceptance or rejection of a price less than the reserve price, they shall accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance or rejection of such price.   if the suburb c property is not sold at the first auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall resubmit the suburb c property for auction within eight (8) weeks of the first auction and the provisions of order 12(b) shall apply. (d) if the suburb c property is not sold at the second auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall leave the suburb c property on the market for sale by private treaty and liberty is reserved for either party to apply to the court for further orders relating to the sale of the suburb c property. (e) until completion of sale of the suburb c property the de facto husband shall: (i) make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times. (f) subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   if the suburb c property is not sold at the second auction then, unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the parties shall leave the suburb c property on the market for sale by private treaty and liberty is reserved for either party to apply to the court for further orders relating to the sale of the suburb c property. (e) until completion of sale of the suburb c property the de facto husband shall: (i) make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times. (f) subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   until completion of sale of the suburb c property the de facto husband shall: (i) make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times. (f) subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   make the following payments as they fall due: council and water rate instalments, household building insurance, and the payments in respect of all mortgages secured on the suburb c property. (ii) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times.  ) keep the suburb c property in good repair (having regard to its present condition), and (iii) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times.  i) make a key available and permit inspection of the suburb c property by agents and prospective purchasers at all reasonable times.   subject to the de facto husband complying with order 12(e), he shall have the right to occupy the suburb c property until completion of the sale of the suburb c property.   to discharge any mortgage secured on the suburb c property, (b) to pay the reasonable expenses of the sale, including agent’s commission and legal costs and disbursements, (c) to pay rate adjustments, (d) to pay the remainder of the sale proceeds (“the remainder”), subject to order 12(e), as follows: (i) to the de facto wife in accordance with her written direction and calculated by reference to the following formula: (sp + wa + ha) x 25% = the de facto wife’s share where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.   to pay the reasonable expenses of the sale, including agent’s commission and legal costs and disbursements, (c) to pay rate adjustments, (d) to pay the remainder of the sale proceeds (“the remainder”), subject to order 12(e), as follows: (i) to the de facto wife in accordance with her written direction and calculated by reference to the following formula: (sp + wa + ha) x 25% = the de facto wife’s share where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.   to pay rate adjustments, (d) to pay the remainder of the sale proceeds (“the remainder”), subject to order 12(e), as follows: (i) to the de facto wife in accordance with her written direction and calculated by reference to the following formula: (sp + wa + ha) x 25% = the de facto wife’s share where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.   to pay the remainder of the sale proceeds (“the remainder”), subject to order 12(e), as follows: (i) to the de facto wife in accordance with her written direction and calculated by reference to the following formula: (sp + wa + ha) x 25% = the de facto wife’s share where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.   to the de facto wife in accordance with her written direction and calculated by reference to the following formula:   + wa + ha) x 25% = the de facto wife’s share where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.
where sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.
sp = the remainder, wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.
wa = de facto wife’s assets and financial resource already in her possession totalling $100,507, ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.
ha = de facto husband’s assets already in his possession totalling $1,103,303, and (ii) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.  ) to pay the balance to the de facto husband.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  the de facto wife should receive 40% of the parties’ non-superannuation property interests which, following closing submissions, looked like the de facto wife retaining what she already had and receiving about $793,300 in cash, (b) the de facto husband’s superannuation interest with super fund 1 being split so that the de facto wife’s nominated superannuation fund received about $161,150 and the de facto husband retained the balance, (c) the parties to otherwise retain the property that they each have power, possession and control over.   the de facto husband’s superannuation interest with super fund 1 being split so that the de facto wife’s nominated superannuation fund received about $161,150 and the de facto husband retained the balance, (c) the parties to otherwise retain the property that they each have power, possession and control over.   the parties to otherwise retain the property that they each have power, possession and control over.   the de facto wife should receive 10% of the parties’ non-superannuation property interests which, following closing submissions, looked like the de facto wife retaining what she already had and receiving $137,000 in cash, (b) the parties to otherwise retain the property that they each have power, possession and control over.   the parties to otherwise retain the property that they each have power, possession and control over.   make a declaration that grounds the court’s jurisdiction including that the parties’ de facto relationship endured for more than two (2) years and ended in may 2020, (b) make orders for the de facto husband to pay the de facto wife $200,445, failing which the husband is to sell suburb c (‘the suburb c property’) with the nett sale proceeds to be divided in accordance with an equation that ultimately reflects a 75:25 adjustment of the non-superannuation property in favour of the de facto husband, (c) make a splitting order from super fund 1 in favour of the de facto wife for $50,130, (d) make various orders and declarations to otherwise finalise the parties’ financial relationship (s 90st), and (e) make ancillary orders and notations to support me determining any costs application that may arise, provided that such application is filed by friday 12 january 2024.   make orders for the de facto husband to pay the de facto wife $200,445, failing which the husband is to sell suburb c (‘the suburb c property’) with the nett sale proceeds to be divided in accordance with an equation that ultimately reflects a 75:25 adjustment of the non-superannuation property in favour of the de facto husband, (c) make a splitting order from super fund 1 in favour of the de facto wife for $50,130, (d) make various orders and declarations to otherwise finalise the parties’ financial relationship (s 90st), and (e) make ancillary orders and notations to support me determining any costs application that may arise, provided that such application is filed by friday 12 january 2024.   make a splitting order from super fund 1 in favour of the de facto wife for $50,130, (d) make various orders and declarations to otherwise finalise the parties’ financial relationship (s 90st), and (e) make ancillary orders and notations to support me determining any costs application that may arise, provided that such application is filed by friday 12 january 2024.   make various orders and declarations to otherwise finalise the parties’ financial relationship (s 90st), and (e) make ancillary orders and notations to support me determining any costs application that may arise, provided that such application is filed by friday 12 january 2024.   make ancillary orders and notations to support me determining any costs application that may arise, provided that such application is filed by friday 12 january 2024.
issues
does the court have jurisdiction to entertain the parties’ applications?  the parties were living together in the suburb c property by mid-2012[3], (b) during the de facto relationship the parties made varying financial and non-financial contributions towards the acquisition, conservation, or improvement of the property in which either of the parties had an interest[4], (c) the parties’ relationship ended when the de facto wife vacated the suburb c property in may 2020[5], (d) the de facto husband holds most of the parties’ superannuation and non-superannuation interests, with the balance of the parties’ property interests held in the de facto wife’s sole name[6], (e) in march 2023, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings and at the time she was (and remains) a resident of new south wales.[7]   during the de facto relationship the parties made varying financial and non-financial contributions towards the acquisition, conservation, or improvement of the property in which either of the parties had an interest[4], (c) the parties’ relationship ended when the de facto wife vacated the suburb c property in may 2020[5], (d) the de facto husband holds most of the parties’ superannuation and non-superannuation interests, with the balance of the parties’ property interests held in the de facto wife’s sole name[6], (e) in march 2023, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings and at the time she was (and remains) a resident of new south wales.[7]   the parties’ relationship ended when the de facto wife vacated the suburb c property in may 2020[5], (d) the de facto husband holds most of the parties’ superannuation and non-superannuation interests, with the balance of the parties’ property interests held in the de facto wife’s sole name[6], (e) in march 2023, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings and at the time she was (and remains) a resident of new south wales.[7]   the de facto husband holds most of the parties’ superannuation and non-superannuation interests, with the balance of the parties’ property interests held in the de facto wife’s sole name[6], (e) in march 2023, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings and at the time she was (and remains) a resident of new south wales.[7]   in march 2023, the de facto wife commenced these proceedings and at the time she was (and remains) a resident of new south wales.[7]
what does the balance sheet look like?
first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. so much follows from the text of section 79(1)(a) itself, which refers to “altering” the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property ... the question posed by section 79(2) is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order.
table 1 – schedule of de facto wife’s property interests
description
value ($)
total ($)
assets
region o property (1% interest)* [11]
8,500
motor vehicle 1
11,000
various bank accounts (cba #...34 $672 + nab #...41 $102 + nab #...48 $2 + nab #...71 $14,538)
15,314
total assets
34,814
liabilities
cba credit card #...94  4)
f company loan #...19
0
student loan  ,406)
mortgage over the region o property (50% interest)  1,287)
total liabilities  0,807)
superannuation
super fund 2
60,887
total superannuation
nett property  55,106)
* not agreed
table 2 – schedule of de facto husband’s property interests
suburb c property
950,000
motor vehicle 2
19,350
various g bank accounts (#...86 $8,455 + #...21 $2,355)
10,810
h bank account #...03
166,931
j bank account #...68
motor vehicle 3
69,950
motor vehicle 4
1,500
1,218,541
g bank credit card  242)
j bank credit card  284)
p company credit card  307)
k company loan  3)
motor vehicle 3 finance  8,302)  5,238)
super fund 1
383,184
$1,486,487
the region o property cluding footnotes)
why does the de facto wife ask the court to make a property adjustment order?
what were the direct and indirect financial and direct and indirect non-financial contributions of the parties and how should the court assess them?  the agreed initial financial contribution made by the de facto husband which remains the most significant asset in the property pool, (b) the post-separation contribution made by the de facto husband to the suburb c property, his savings and his superannuation, (c) the indirect contributions each party made towards the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the suburb c property.   the post-separation contribution made by the de facto husband to the suburb c property, his savings and his superannuation, (c) the indirect contributions each party made towards the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the suburb c property.   the indirect contributions each party made towards the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the suburb c property.
are there any relevant future needs?
is not to achieve equality in the financial strengths of the parties, nonetheless the overarching obligation is to achieve a just and equitable division of the property.[40]   the de facto husband earns $265,000 per annum, and in the context of the property pool and the financial resource - the property adjustment orders i am considering would mean that his annual income is equivalent to about 88% of the entirety of what the de facto wife will receive by way of non-superannuation property and the financial resource, (b) the de facto wife has the benefit/support of mx l and the financial resource.   the de facto wife has the benefit/support of mx l and the financial resource.
what outcome will be just and equitable?  both parties are unlikely to be able to gain a direct benefit from their superannuation for many years to come, (b) to the best of their capacity, each party indirectly supported the other in their income earning endeavours during the relationship which was a contributing factor to their superannuation balances now, (c) the de facto wife (who has less capacity than the de facto husband to contribute to her superannuation) has asked for a superannuation splitting order, and (d) to do so reduces the financial consequences upon the de facto husband in having to either deplete his savings (and the interest income earned on those funds) and/or his available income by paying off the de facto wife through borrowings.   to the best of their capacity, each party indirectly supported the other in their income earning endeavours during the relationship which was a contributing factor to their superannuation balances now, (c) the de facto wife (who has less capacity than the de facto husband to contribute to her superannuation) has asked for a superannuation splitting order, and (d) to do so reduces the financial consequences upon the de facto husband in having to either deplete his savings (and the interest income earned on those funds) and/or his available income by paying off the de facto wife through borrowings.   the de facto wife (who has less capacity than the de facto husband to contribute to her superannuation) has asked for a superannuation splitting order, and (d) to do so reduces the financial consequences upon the de facto husband in having to either deplete his savings (and the interest income earned on those funds) and/or his available income by paying off the de facto wife through borrowings.   to do so reduces the financial consequences upon the de facto husband in having to either deplete his savings (and the interest income earned on those funds) and/or his available income by paying off the de facto wife through borrowings.   the wife’s intention is to contribute most (if not all) of any cash receives into the mortgage secured over the region o property which logically means that her equitable interest in that property will increase substantially above her existing legal interest of $8,500, (b) the de facto husband should not be prejudiced by me adopting an artificial approach to what property (versus financial resources) the de facto wife has access to because to do so would unfairly skew the property pool with unintended consequences, (c) whether the de facto wife now agitates with mx l for an adjusting transfer of legal title (or another legally binding way of doing so) to better reflect her newly found financial capacity is entirely up to her and is not something that either this court or the de facto husband can promulgate on her behalf. put another way, the de facto wife has a reasonable expectation because she can call on it now that she has the cash to do so.   the de facto husband should not be prejudiced by me adopting an artificial approach to what property (versus financial resources) the de facto wife has access to because to do so would unfairly skew the property pool with unintended consequences, (c) whether the de facto wife now agitates with mx l for an adjusting transfer of legal title (or another legally binding way of doing so) to better reflect her newly found financial capacity is entirely up to her and is not something that either this court or the de facto husband can promulgate on her behalf. put another way, the de facto wife has a reasonable expectation because she can call on it now that she has the cash to do so.   whether the de facto wife now agitates with mx l for an adjusting transfer of legal title (or another legally binding way of doing so) to better reflect her newly found financial capacity is entirely up to her and is not something that either this court or the de facto husband can promulgate on her behalf. put another way, the de facto wife has a reasonable expectation because she can call on it now that she has the cash to do so.
conclusion
associate: dated: 8 december 2023
dated: 8 december 2023
[1] affidavit of mr tait filed 25.08.2023 at paragraph [8]. for ease of reference, in future the contents of this affidavit will be identified as ‘t’ with paragraphs identified numerically.[2] affidavit of ms kaye filed 25.08.2023 at paragraphs [10] & [13]. for ease of reference, in future the contents of this affidavit will be identified as ‘k’ with paragraphs identified numerically.[3] t-8 & 27[4] see for example - k-42 to 70; t-31 to 48, 50 to 53[5] k-4; t-8 [6] exhibit ‘a’ - joint balance sheet[7] k-30, 31 & 77[8] see jonah v white [2012] famcafc 200; 48 fam lr 562 at [32][9] see for example, lotta & lotta [2017] famca 50 at [281] – [290][10] exhibit ‘a’[11] k-79 & 80[12] k-76, 79 & 80[13] reflected in the 50% liability attributed to the de facto wife within the joint balance sheet at exhibit ‘a’.[14] k-82[15] hall & hall [2016] hca 23 at [54][16] financial statement of ms kaye filed 20.09.2023 at item 35. for ease of reference, in future the contents of this financial statement will be identified as ‘fsw’ with parts and items identified either alphabetically or numerically (as the case may be).[17] see benson & drury [2020] famcafc 303; (2020) 62 fam lr 1 at [50][18] k-54[19] t-3[20] k-21 & 54[21] k-56[22] t-24 & k-56[23] t-31[24] exhibit ‘w1’ at [8][25] k-42[26] k-56[27] t-22 and exhibit ‘a; at item 1[28] see for example t-48 to 50 & k-65 to 70[29] exhibit ‘h1’ at page 5[30] exhibit ‘h1’ at page 5[31] t-3[32] financial statement of mr tait filed 25.08.2023 at item 9 & t-3. for ease of reference, in future the contents of this financial statement will be identified as ‘fsh’ with parts and items identified either alphabetically or numerically (as the case may be).[33] k-72 & fsw-9[34] k-73[35] fsh-17, parts f & h[36] fsw-17 & k-76[37] k-84 & 85[38] fsw-part f[39] read as ss 90sm(4)(e) & 90sf(3)[40] hobson & hobson [2020] famcafc 251 at [32]