last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hedwin & palmer [2023] fedcfamc2f 1639
orders
the court orders that:  registered post to b street, suburb c, and (b) email to mr palmer.   email to mr palmer.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge boymal  pursuant to section 69va of the family law act 1975 (cth) (the act) there be a declaration that the respondent is a parent of x, (b) pursuant to section 106a(5)(a) of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) (the assessment act) there be a declaration that the applicant is entitled to administrative assessment of child support for the child because the respondent is a parent of x, and (c) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of this application, being $2,448.00, noting she is represented by victoria legal aid.   pursuant to section 106a(5)(a) of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) (the assessment act) there be a declaration that the applicant is entitled to administrative assessment of child support for the child because the respondent is a parent of x, and (c) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of this application, being $2,448.00, noting she is represented by victoria legal aid.   the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of this application, being $2,448.00, noting she is represented by victoria legal aid.   be granted leave pursuant to rule 15.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (the rules) to file and proceed with her initiating application out of time, and (b) be exempt from filing a family dispute resolution certificate pursuant to rule 4.01 of the rules.   be exempt from filing a family dispute resolution certificate pursuant to rule 4.01 of the rules.
leave to proceed on an undefended basis  pursuant to s.69w(1) of the family law act 1975, the applicant and the respondent do everything required for a dna parentage testing procedure to be carried out on each of them and on x, born in 2022 for the purpose of obtaining information to assist in determining the child’s parentage, and (b) ancillary orders in relation to the parentage testing procedure, including the payment of costs of the testing.   ancillary orders in relation to the parentage testing procedure, including the payment of costs of the testing.   the respondent file and serve a notice of address for service by no later than 4.00 pm on 21 september 2023, (b) the parties file and serve an outline of case and a minute of orders sought no later than 4.00 pm on 8 november 2023, and (c) the respondent appear and/or be legally represented on the adjourned date.   the parties file and serve an outline of case and a minute of orders sought no later than 4.00 pm on 8 november 2023, and (c) the respondent appear and/or be legally represented on the adjourned date.   the respondent appear and/or be legally represented on the adjourned date.   the respondent failed to attend for dna parentage testing as required pursuant to the orders of 17 july 2023, (b) the respondent attributed his failure to attend for dna parentage testing to “car trouble”, and (c) the respondent confirmed he would attend for dna parenting testing as soon as practicable.   the respondent attributed his failure to attend for dna parentage testing to “car trouble”, and (c) the respondent confirmed he would attend for dna parenting testing as soon as practicable.   the respondent confirmed he would attend for dna parenting testing as soon as practicable.
dear associate judge boymal regarding tomorrow's court date for the matter of [hedwin/palmer] on the 13/11 i would like to request this date be adjourned for another date, i only wish for this as i'm attending a funeral of a close friend and will be unavailable. thank you for you're (sic) consideration. kind regards [mr palmer].   file and serve any affidavit(s) upon which he seeks to rely on or before 4.00 pm 27 november 2023, (b) file and serve an outline of case 2 days prior to the final hearing, and (c) communicate with the applicant’s solicitor on or before 4.00 pm wednesday 15 november 2023 to arrange a dna parentage testing procedure.   file and serve an outline of case 2 days prior to the final hearing, and (c) communicate with the applicant’s solicitor on or before 4.00 pm wednesday 15 november 2023 to arrange a dna parentage testing procedure.   communicate with the applicant’s solicitor on or before 4.00 pm wednesday 15 november 2023 to arrange a dna parentage testing procedure.
decision-makers, including the courts, cannot generally force people to protect their own rights, to adduce evidence or other materials, to present submissions or to act rationally in their own best interests. this consideration may be especially relevant in relation to the family court where emotions, often engendered by the highly personal issues involved, can sometimes cloud rational thought. nor are courts obliged to delay proceedings indefinitely because one party, although proved to be on notice of the proceedings, refuses or fails to appear in person or to be represented by a lawyer or some other individual permitted to speak for them who can explain the need for an adjournment. the rights of other parties are commonly involved. in the family court, the rights of non-parties (especially children) may be affected. additionally (as this court has itself accepted), the rights of the public in the efficient discharge by courts of their functions must be weighed against unreasonable delay in concluding litigation.
...delay and costs are undesirable and that delay has deleterious effects, not only upon the party to the proceedings in question, but to other litigants... it would impact upon other litigants seeking a resolution of their cases...
exemption from filing an fdr certificate   the proceeding is in relation to a discrete issue of the parentage of x, (b) the outcome of this matter is absolute. the respondent is either the father or is not the father of x. there is no room for compromise, (c) the respondent has failed to attend two court hearings. he has also failed to undertake dna parentage testing. it is unlikely he would attend a family dispute resolution event, and (d) the applicant has already taken genuine steps to resolve the matter without resorting to contested litigation.   the outcome of this matter is absolute. the respondent is either the father or is not the father of x. there is no room for compromise, (c) the respondent has failed to attend two court hearings. he has also failed to undertake dna parentage testing. it is unlikely he would attend a family dispute resolution event, and (d) the applicant has already taken genuine steps to resolve the matter without resorting to contested litigation.   the respondent has failed to attend two court hearings. he has also failed to undertake dna parentage testing. it is unlikely he would attend a family dispute resolution event, and (d) the applicant has already taken genuine steps to resolve the matter without resorting to contested litigation.   the applicant has already taken genuine steps to resolve the matter without resorting to contested litigation.
declaration as to parentage
child support application
application for costs
associate: dated: 11 december 2023
dated: 11 december 2023
[1] allesch v maunz [2000] hca 40 at [38].[2] child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth) section 4.[3]family law act 1975 (cth) section 60i(7).[4]family law act 1975 (cth) section 69y.[5] g v h [1994] hca 48.[6] family law act 1975 (cth) section 69va.[7] medlon & medlon (no. 6) (indemnity costs) [2015] famcafc 157; [2015] flc 93-664.[8] pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158.[9] lenova & levona (costs) [2011] famcafc 141.