last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
frank & ryker [2023] fedcfamc2f 1615
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  the mother will contact the father in writing and provide her views about any such issues, (b) the mother shall consult with the father in regard to any such issues, and (c) if no agreement is reached between the parties, then within 14 days the mother shall make the final decision and advise the father is writing of the decision about any such issue.   the mother shall consult with the father in regard to any such issues, and (c) if no agreement is reached between the parties, then within 14 days the mother shall make the final decision and advise the father is writing of the decision about any such issue.   if no agreement is reached between the parties, then within 14 days the mother shall make the final decision and advise the father is writing of the decision about any such issue.
living arrangements during the school terms  in week one, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:30 pm if not a school day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if not a school day save in the event the monday is a public holiday or curriculum day in which event at 9:00 am on tuesday) and each alternate week thereafter, (b) in week two, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 3:30 pm if not a school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00 am if not a school day) and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) as may be further or otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   in week two, from the conclusion of school on wednesday (or 3:30 pm if not a school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00 am if not a school day) and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) as may be further or otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.   as may be further or otherwise agreed between the parties in writing.
school term holidays  the parent who is to have the first half of the school term holidays will collect x at the conclusion of school on the last day of term, and (b) the parent who is to have the second half of the school terms holidays will collect x from the other parent’s residence at 4:00 pm on the second saturday of the holiday period (or the second tuesday if the holiday period is three weeks) and will deliver her to school at the commencement of the new school term.   the parent who is to have the second half of the school terms holidays will collect x from the other parent’s residence at 4:00 pm on the second saturday of the holiday period (or the second tuesday if the holiday period is three weeks) and will deliver her to school at the commencement of the new school term.
and, in the event there is an odd number of nights in the school holiday period, x is to spend time with the mother for the additional night.
long summer holidays  in the 2023-2024 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2024, x will spend time with the father for the first week of the long summer holidays, then with the mother for the second week of the long summer holidays alternating each week thereafter until the commencement of the term 1. in the event there is an odd number of nights in the long summer holiday period before school commences after 30 january 2024, x is to spend time with the mother for the additional nights. (b) in the 2024-2025 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2025, x will spend time with the mother for the first week of the long summer holidays, then with the father for the second week of the long summer holidays alternating each week thereafter until the commencement of term 1. in the event there is an odd number of nights in the long summer holiday period before school commences after 30 january 2025, x is to spend time with the mother for the additional nights. (c) in the 2025-2026 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2026, x will spend time with the mother for the first fortnight of the long summer holidays and alternate on a fortnightly basis, then with the father for the second fortnight (or part thereof) of the long summer holidays until the commencement of the term 1. in the event school commences after 30 january 2026, x is to spend time with the mother for any additional nights before the commencement of term 1. (d) in the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2027, x will live with the father for the first fortnight from 2 january 2027 of the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, and (e) in each alternate each thereafter, each parent will have a different first fortnight with x for all subsequent long summer holidays and time will otherwise be in accordance with order 8(c) above.   in the 2024-2025 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2025, x will spend time with the mother for the first week of the long summer holidays, then with the father for the second week of the long summer holidays alternating each week thereafter until the commencement of term 1. in the event there is an odd number of nights in the long summer holiday period before school commences after 30 january 2025, x is to spend time with the mother for the additional nights. (c) in the 2025-2026 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2026, x will spend time with the mother for the first fortnight of the long summer holidays and alternate on a fortnightly basis, then with the father for the second fortnight (or part thereof) of the long summer holidays until the commencement of the term 1. in the event school commences after 30 january 2026, x is to spend time with the mother for any additional nights before the commencement of term 1. (d) in the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2027, x will live with the father for the first fortnight from 2 january 2027 of the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, and (e) in each alternate each thereafter, each parent will have a different first fortnight with x for all subsequent long summer holidays and time will otherwise be in accordance with order 8(c) above.   in the 2025-2026 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2026, x will spend time with the mother for the first fortnight of the long summer holidays and alternate on a fortnightly basis, then with the father for the second fortnight (or part thereof) of the long summer holidays until the commencement of the term 1. in the event school commences after 30 january 2026, x is to spend time with the mother for any additional nights before the commencement of term 1. (d) in the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2027, x will live with the father for the first fortnight from 2 january 2027 of the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, and (e) in each alternate each thereafter, each parent will have a different first fortnight with x for all subsequent long summer holidays and time will otherwise be in accordance with order 8(c) above.   in the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, from 2 january 2027, x will live with the father for the first fortnight from 2 january 2027 of the 2026-2027 long summer holidays, and (e) in each alternate each thereafter, each parent will have a different first fortnight with x for all subsequent long summer holidays and time will otherwise be in accordance with order 8(c) above.   in each alternate each thereafter, each parent will have a different first fortnight with x for all subsequent long summer holidays and time will otherwise be in accordance with order 8(c) above.
x’s birthday  x spends time with the father on her birthday in 2024 and each following even numbered year from the conclusion of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day), and x spends time with her mother from the conclusion of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) the following day until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day), and (b) x spends time with the mother on her birthday in 2025 and each odd numbered year, from the conclusion of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) the following day, and x spending time with her father from the conclusion of school (or 12:00pm if a non-school day) the following day until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) the following day, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   x spends time with the mother on her birthday in 2025 and each odd numbered year, from the conclusion of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) the following day, and x spending time with her father from the conclusion of school (or 12:00pm if a non-school day) the following day until the commencement of school (or 12:00 pm if a non-school day) the following day, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
father’s day  from 4:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) (b) should another special occasion fall on the same day, time that x is otherwise living with either parent be suspended so that she spends time with the father from 4:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 2:00 pm on the sunday of father’s day. x will then spend time with the mother from 2:00 pm on sunday (father’s day) until the commencement of school on monday the next day (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) and the regular school term living arrangements will recommence in accordance with orders 5 and 6, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   should another special occasion fall on the same day, time that x is otherwise living with either parent be suspended so that she spends time with the father from 4:00 pm on the saturday before father’s day until 2:00 pm on the sunday of father’s day. x will then spend time with the mother from 2:00 pm on sunday (father’s day) until the commencement of school on monday the next day (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) and the regular school term living arrangements will recommence in accordance with orders 5 and 6, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
father’s birthday  if on a school day, from the conclusion of school on the father’s birthday until the commencement of school the day after his birthday (or until 9:00 am if the following day is a school day), or (b) if on a non-school day, from 12:00 pm on the father’s birthday until 4:00 pm the following day (or until the commencement of school if the following day is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   if on a non-school day, from 12:00 pm on the father’s birthday until 4:00 pm the following day (or until the commencement of school if the following day is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
b’s birthday  if a school day, from the conclusion of school on the day of b’s birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00 am if the following day is a non-school day). (b) if a non-school day, from 4:00 pm the day before b’s birthday until 9:00 am the day after b’s birthday (or the commencement of school if the day following b’s birthday is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   if a non-school day, from 4:00 pm the day before b’s birthday until 9:00 am the day after b’s birthday (or the commencement of school if the day following b’s birthday is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
mother’s birthday  if on a school day, from the conclusion of school on the mother’s birthday until the commencement of school the day after her birthday (or until 9:00 am if the following day is a school day), or (b) if on a non-school day, from 12:00 pm on the mother’s birthday until 4:00 pm the following day (or until the commencement of school if the following day is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   if on a non-school day, from 12:00 pm on the mother’s birthday until 4:00 pm the following day (or until the commencement of school if the following day is a school day), or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
mother’s day  from 4:00 pm on the saturday before mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00 am if a non-school day), or (b) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
christmas  the mother from 3:00 pm christmas eve to 3:00 pm christmas day, in each odd numbered year, and (b) the father from 3:00 pm christmas day to 3:00 pm boxing day, and in each even numbered year, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   the father from 3:00 pm christmas day to 3:00 pm boxing day, and in each even numbered year, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
easter  the mother from 9:00 am good friday to 9:00 am easter saturday, in each even numbered year, and (b) the father from 9:00 am easter saturday to 3:00 pm easter sunday, in each odd numbered year, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   the father from 9:00 am easter saturday to 3:00 pm easter sunday, in each odd numbered year, or (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
telephone contact
changeover  the father is to collect x from the mother's residence at the commencement of time. (b) the mother is to collect x from the father's residence at the conclusion of time.   the mother is to collect x from the father's residence at the conclusion of time.
interstate travel  a copy of the itinerary, (b) a copy return e-ticket, (c) particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (d) details of any other person who will be travelling with x.   a copy return e-ticket, (c) particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (d) details of any other person who will be travelling with x.   particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (d) details of any other person who will be travelling with x.   details of any other person who will be travelling with x.
overseas travel  a copy of the itinerary, (b) a copy return e-ticket, (c) within 7 days of any intended travel, proof that x has received any and all necessary vaccinations at least 7 days prior to the intended overseas travel, (d) particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (e) arrange appropriate make up time for the other parent if the holiday falls over a time x would otherwise be living with / spending time with them.   a copy return e-ticket, (c) within 7 days of any intended travel, proof that x has received any and all necessary vaccinations at least 7 days prior to the intended overseas travel, (d) particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (e) arrange appropriate make up time for the other parent if the holiday falls over a time x would otherwise be living with / spending time with them.   within 7 days of any intended travel, proof that x has received any and all necessary vaccinations at least 7 days prior to the intended overseas travel, (d) particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (e) arrange appropriate make up time for the other parent if the holiday falls over a time x would otherwise be living with / spending time with them.   particulars of the places and contact numbers at where x is staying (as applicable), and (e) arrange appropriate make up time for the other parent if the holiday falls over a time x would otherwise be living with / spending time with them.   arrange appropriate make up time for the other parent if the holiday falls over a time x would otherwise be living with / spending time with them.
passport  the mother shall provide the passport to the father 7 days prior to any overseas travel with x or as required to obtain any necessary visa for travel, and (b) the father shall return to the mother x’s passport within 7 days from returning from any overseas travel with x.   the father shall return to the mother x’s passport within 7 days from returning from any overseas travel with x.
contact details  their contact telephone numbers and residential addresses, and (b) the details of any extracurricular activity attended by x whilst in their care.   the details of any extracurricular activity attended by x whilst in their care.
medical  immediately if x suffers any serious injury while in their care, (b) as soon as practicable if x suffers any other injury or illness while in their care.   as soon as practicable if x suffers any other injury or illness while in their care.
school functions or extra-curricular functions
agreed variation to live with and spend time with arrangements in writing
procedural
reasons for judgment
judge champion:
introduction
procedural history  mr d, with whom the mother formed a new relationship, gave evidence, and (b) mr e, the father’s criminal lawyer as to proceedings about the father’s breach of an ivo, made an affidavit. mr e was not cross-examined.   mr e, the father’s criminal lawyer as to proceedings about the father’s breach of an ivo, made an affidavit. mr e was not cross-examined.
background and chronology of events
background
chronology of events
late 2019 – the mother’s intervention order against the father
late 2019 to early 2020 – the father’s conduct which led to him being charged with breach of the intervention order
mr d
conflict as to various issues
may to september 2020 – the father insists on changeovers at a supermarket, suburb n
2020 – the father’s birthday and the mother prefers that x goes to childcare than spends time with the father
15 november 2020 to the present – parents cannot agree as to whether x attending a child psychologist is in her best interests
late 2020 – ms q and b
late 2020 – changeover altercation between mr d and the father
early 2021 – x is unenrolled from ‘aa day care’ and enrolled at r kindergarten suburb s
15 june 2021 – mother’s concern about x’s welfare when she returns from the father’s care
what the hell is going on here [mr ryker]!?!? this is [x]'s poo tonight after returning from your care. this the 4th time returning from your care she has had green poo.
13 december 2021 – mother alleges that the father is co-sleeping with x
can you please explain why you don't let [x] sleep in her own room? ever since you sleep with her over the past two years i have to stay with her until she falls asleep [...] please ensure she gets used to sleeping by herself she is four years old. or consider putting the girls in the same room. a father who sleeps with two children in a bed is not normal and encouraging a very unhealthly relationship.”
they are extremely constructive messages and coming from' an extremely concerned mother that an 8 and 4 year old have been told they have no choice and have to sleep with their father because their father says so. it is extremely creepy and i am concerned about [x]'s welfare and how she returns with so much anxiety and trying to settle her back in to her normal sleep routine in her own bed when she comes back home. [emphasis added]
mid-2021 – diversion program .] verbally abusing [mr d] in front of [ms frank] and denigrating [mr d] to [ms frank] (referring to his criminal record primarily), insulting [ms frank], and disparaging the suburb that [ms frank] resided in. [...] in mid-2021 the outcome was that the father was placed in a diversion program. the diversion program entails acceptance of responsibility for actions but there is no entry of a guilty plea.
late 2021 – the magistrates court imposes a bond and orders the father to engage in a mbcp as to events in late 2020
late 2021 – the mother obtains a final ivo against the father
11 february 2022 to 12 july 2022 – parents’ communication about choice of primary school
early 2022 – events involving mr dd, mr d’s lawyer
early 2022 – graphic photos
early 2022 – the father’s application for an ivo against the mother and mr d  ryker], you’re fucking mentally ill. ill, ill, mentally ill, mate. you’re. mentally ill, sick in the head. you need psychiatric help... you lied. you lied. it’s in court, black-and-white. you’re a sick man. you need fucking help. and your sister and your brother and your family, you need help.”
late 2022 – ff cinema
so what i would say in relation to that is that the behaviour of both parties appears to me to be appalling in those circumstances. so, you know, engaging in an activity which is going to contravene the agreement around changeover is poor. marching into the cinema and extricating the child is also poor. it, again, is exposing [x] to the adult parental issues and conflict that has been ongoing for years and years and years.
in late 2022 - the mother’s police report as to events at ff cinema
early 2023 – police welfare check after play centre  ryker] [x] has told me via [b] (because [x] was too scared to talk to me) that she has injured [herself] at [the play centre]. [...] on top of that you cut me off from speaking to my daughter. that is disgusting in itself i would expect more from a father given the circumstances. giving me only 4 mins of time to see if [x] is not ok. i am concerned about her and would like to talk to her again please tonight
early 2023 – the father cancelled an overseas trip
the decision to now change holiday plans has extremely upset [x]. [x] had it in her mind she was spending a certain amount of time with me and was very excited [...] you seem to play by your own rules...
28 february 2023 – letter of ms gg of g organisation
early 2023 – the father was charged (charges then withdrawn) as to the cinema incident
17 april 2023 – the trial commenced
mid-2023 – x is admitted to f hospital
mid-2023 – the dffh investigation and the s. 69zw report  “my mum has less money and my dad has more money. my mum has only $100 in a bank account and my dad has $1000 may be more. that’s why i love my mum so much because she tries her best because it’s hard to look after a kid when you have no money”. (p 59 of 115), and (b) when she gets older, she wanted to be a single mum “because my mum is a single mum” (p 70 of 115).   when she gets older, she wanted to be a single mum “because my mum is a single mum” (p 70 of 115).
mid-2023 - the s. 69zw report   ryker] talked positively about his time with [x] and the activities that [x] likes. he described [x] to be really easy child she used to be a bit more emotional and cry a lot but has grown up now and is [a] lot tougher. [mr ryker] expressed that [x] used to be very enmeshed with her mother, [ms frank] but now is becoming a lot closer to him and asked now when she is coming back to his house.
mid-2023 – the mother’s notes of concerns – a 12-page document ’s continued uncertainty on her life with their father/it’s all over the place [mr ryker] cancelling his trip to [country hh]!! total abuse and try to teach me like his [2022] holiday!! i have to revolve my life around him total abuse – but can’t pay me $200 and kinder fees! the stress this is causing on our lives. the mental toll has become too much/he is trying to breach me again like sep. plan of attack so i lose it one he is wanting to cause a scene because he picks her up from school – [x]’s getting confused, it’s really upsetting how all this confusion. he is all over the place. [x]’s crying, confused, upset, tantrums – how is this showing routine, consistency and stability in a child’s life just started prep!! part-time parent when it suits him - did not provide a reason for his trip cancellation. [as written]
“[early] 23 (mon) - [x] came at sat on my leg company with no clothes on 5:16 pm i asked her where she got this from her father “she said yes” i said where from television and she said “yes” – then she ran away....she’s always been jumping bath since she was 18 months old but i ignored the fact until now. always turning herself upside down showing her bum! [as written]
7 july 2023 - the father’s amendment to his case
12 september 2023 - reopening of cases
expert evidence
mr c - 15 january 2019, 23 september 2021, 3 march 2022, oral evidence may 2023 and october 2023
15 january 2019 – first report
23 september 2021 – second report  .] the impact of [mr ryker]’s alleged behaviours would manifest as a debilitating restraint on [ms frank]’s parenting capacity. it would be unlikely that the perpetrator could sustain a long-term nurturing response with the child or support the primary caregiver’s role.... in this context, sole parental responsibility would be recommended for [ms frank] with limited term and holiday time for [mr ryker]. in the alternative, if the aetiology of the conflict is assessed as stemming from [ms frank]’s personality vulnerabilities or mental health difficulties, her capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with [mr ryker] would be seen as compromised. while it would be important to move it apace commensurate with [x]’s developmental capacity to cope, the incremental introduction of a shared care arrangement would be recommended. this type of arrangement would act as a protective mechanism around [x]’s relationship with her father. if [ms frank]’s mental health and alleged behaviours could not be remediated, a change of residency with sole parental responsibility for [mr ryker] would be recommended.
third report – 3 march 2022
oral evidence, first hearing – 16 to 18 may 2023
oral evidence, re-opened hearing – 10 october 2023
dr k - 4 february 2022 .] ....i was left with less concern about [ms frank] than [mr ryker]. given she is the primary carer of [x], if the court was to favour one party over the other in order to stem the conflict, possibly involving considerations in regard to sole parental responsibility, it would be my view that [ms frank] would fulfil that position and those responsibilities more equitably than [mr ryker]” given that [mr c]’s assessment does not question each party’s parenting responsibilities, but noting the ongoing conflict which continues, such an arrangement may serve to stem the conflict which continues in equal shared care circumstances. [emphasis added]
professor l – 20 march 2023
.... a further compelling feature reflected from both parties’ affidavits is that this case has been drawn out for a number of years — clearly to the detriment of the dependent child [x]. here, her parents clearly do not have the tools even to navigate and organise an appropriate script for transfers and for shared model of care generally, particularly with the support of substantial resourcing over the years. if history is the best predictor, this is not likely to change significantly in the short-medium term in my opinion. [emphasis added]
best interests considerations  the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents, and (b) the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the mother
the father
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence  issues as to the men’s behavioural change program, (b) issues as to the father’s mental health, (c) issues as to the father’s past family violence in breaching the ivo, and (d) the need to protect x from psychological harm from being subjected to abuse by the mother undermining x’s relationship with her father.   issues as to the father’s mental health, (c) issues as to the father’s past family violence in breaching the ivo, and (d) the need to protect x from psychological harm from being subjected to abuse by the mother undermining x’s relationship with her father.   issues as to the father’s past family violence in breaching the ivo, and (d) the need to protect x from psychological harm from being subjected to abuse by the mother undermining x’s relationship with her father.   the need to protect x from psychological harm from being subjected to abuse by the mother undermining x’s relationship with her father.  men’s behavioural change program
dr j the father’s mental health
with respect to diagnoses, the following mmpi-ii indicators require exclusion: major depressive disorder/episode, anxiety disorder, ptsd borderline personality traits.
chronic low self-esteem is a large underlying driving factor with [mr ryker]’s negative manifest behaviour, and adequate coping with close relationships has been fraught long-term and on more than one occasion. hence, his ability for insight is likely quite limited. there is little apparent learning from previous experience, which coexist against distress-laden developmental background and consequential generalised distrust of others. scoring for social abilities and interest shows a consistent significant difficulty, with [mr ryker] endorsing high avoidance of others, passivity, insecurity, abnormal sensitivity, and suspicion of others’ intent. [emphasis added]  .] the combined neuropsychological profile and associated clinical diagnostic formulation detailed above do not present sufficient impact so as to compromise either [mr ryker]’s capacity for functional independence in activities of daily living, or more directly, – his potential capacity to care for children in my opinion. however, whilst the underlying drivers for his vulnerabilities in his mental health remain inadequately treated, the risk for the currently highly problematic and conflicted dynamics between [mr ryker] and [ms frank] remaining unresolved without the benefit of more assertive scaffolding is high in my opinion, and hence the ongoing harm to their child [x] is increasingly untenable. [emphasis added]  the father’s conduct in breaching the ivo
changeovers the mother’s incapacity to support x’s relationship with her father
the events in the hospital: mid-2023 0] mother reports she has made multiple attempts to notify child protection about abuse. mother has history of photos on her phone. bruising, redness around genitalia. mother reports that patient has signs of trauma, including sleep disturbances and wetting the bed. mother explained she has tried to engage child protection several times due to concerns to the patient. child protection reportedly not investigated the father further: [225] #allegations of abuse during admission, mother [ms frank] disclosed concerns regarding physical, psychological and sexual abuse from [x]’s father towards [x] full top-to toe examination including external genitalia. no evidence of injury [...] discussed with [mm organisation] - no acute injury or clinical concern for sexual abuse social work involved and notification made to dffh - this is in the setting of complex ongoing legal proceedings [239] mother disclosed significant concerns she has of possible sexual and physical abuse by [x]’s father. according to her, [x] has significant erythema of her vulva and anus every time she returns from a stay at her fathers house. she describes that [x] seems afraid from her father. she feels that his house hold is not a safe place for her. [240] note of hospital medical worker [name omitted] [in] 2023 at 3.53pm discussion with mother, [ms frank]: - alleges that [x] has reported to her that her father has physically hit her - [ms frank] has many photos of bruises that [x] has sustained while visiting her father. she showed me some on [various parts of the body]. - [ms frank] has not witnessed this. [ms frank] reports that she has witnessed [x]’s father physically abusing another child, [b] ([x]’s older half sibling between father and another woman). - [ms frank] alleges that [x]’s father is verbally aggressive towards [x] - [ms frank] reports that [x] consistently complains that she does not want to visit her father and does not like spending time at his home. - [ms frank] reports a concern regarding sexual abuse. she has not witnessed this and [x] has not reported this. [ms frank] has noted several episodes of redness around [x]’s vagina and anus on return from her father's home. [emphasis added]
when [x]’s [specialist] was explaining her diagnosis to [mr ryker] and i, [x] was on the side of her bed trying to stand. [mr ryker] yelled at her with words the effect of “just walk [x]”. [x] tried to take minor steps before getting upset and responding upset with words the effect of “i’m trying daddy”. when i saw [x] getting upset, i defended her in front of the doctor by saying to [mr ryker] words to the effect of “[mr ryker], she hasn’t walked in 4 days”  .] the [f centre’s] situation was a cause – i think is a cause for concern in terms of – [...] it does appear to me that it was an escalation. and at the time of reading – and i can’t speculate [...] escalation in relation to the stress of these proceedings and the sort of imminent conclusion of things coming to an end. i cannot answer in terms of – and i said this last time – i cannot predict about what [the mother’s] behaviour will be in the future in the context of what has happened in relation to the court case. certainly, if it continued on in this pattern, then there is a risk of [x] being alienated as she becomes more cognisant of what’s going on from mr [ryker]. so the trajectory is one of psychological splitting, where the child cannot – because of their proximity to the conflict, the child cannot process positive and negative inferences and integrate them into their sense of self, and so chooses one parent over the other. and if the court concluded that this was part of a long-term pattern for [ms frank] that could not be ameliorated, or would not be ameliorated, by the situation settling with final it would constitute, possibly, a risk factor going forward. [emphasis added]   c]: [...] there are examples in the pattern of [ms frank]’s behaviour that speak more profoundly to her capacity to support the relationship with [x] than – than individual incidents as they’re pulled out like that. counsel: could you tell us, then, what you think they are? that might be - - -? [mr c]: well, i think the pattern of reporting to dffh and the – the constant inference of [mr ryker] as an abusive parent is – is the significant issue from a clinical point of view, and if we’re talking about what has the potential to profoundly affect [x], those day-to-day things are important and, you know, it is not unusual for children from separated parents, particularly where one parent repartners, for that partner to play a significant role. the counter-balance to that is that we provide significant and substantial time with the other parent for their relationship to evolve in a significant way. the key issue, then, is this behaviour – is the behaviour by [ms frank] undermining that relationship with [mr ryker], and i think that’s – that’s for your honour to - - - his honour: there are two matters. you – the reporting to dffh and the constant inferences of him as an abusive parent, i have to consider whether that, deliberate or otherwise, in undermining that relationship?--- [mr c]: yes. whether they’re deliberate or otherwise, conscious or unconscious, meant with malicious intent or just a firmly held belief, in the absence of any proof to the contrary that he is doing these things, it is – it’s corrosive. [emphasis added]   c]: it certainly – i mean, and it goes to what i’ve said before, in terms of this narrative of abuse in terms of being a potential risk factor in terms of systems abuse. so if the – if this constant narrative is – keeps on, the statutory authorities have got no other option other than to keep investigating. people – professionals in hospitals, in teaching organisations are obliged to respond in some form or way in terms of the types of narratives of abuse that are being promulgated by – by [ms frank] and, yes, it will lead to systems abuse if it carries on.
it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw.
is the mother’s conduct likely to continue unbated?
other case law
additional considerations
issues relating to x including her views, level of maturity, culture and relationships
36. [mr ryker] was able to engage [x] around her imaginative play with the kitchen and an exploration of the toys. [mr ryker] displayed a good range of shared play and language, and [x] was relaxed and at ease in his care. [mr ryker]'s interactions were appropriately pitched at [x]'s developmental capacities, and his ability to calm her after the departure of her mother was skilled and sensitive to her distress. there is a warm and reciprocated rapport between father and child, and [mr ryker]'s parenting of [x] presented as intuitive and responsive throughout the assessment. [emphasis added]
b
issues relating to parents – including decision-making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility
issues of family violence
the father’s persistent breaches of the ivo  in late 2019 the father called mr d “an idiot, weak as piss, dirty lowlife and a loser”, (2) in late 2019 the father shouted that the mother came from her “mum’s asshole”, (3) in late 2019 the father denigrated mr d by saying he was a convicted criminal and had been to jail, (4) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “nice photo of that crim, it’s a bit embarrassing, at least i know she is not his child”, (5) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “do you think [mr d] being aggressive in front of [x]’s okay, he’s always been aggressive, he is a violent person”, (6) in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in late 2019 the father shouted that the mother came from her “mum’s asshole”, (3) in late 2019 the father denigrated mr d by saying he was a convicted criminal and had been to jail, (4) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “nice photo of that crim, it’s a bit embarrassing, at least i know she is not his child”, (5) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “do you think [mr d] being aggressive in front of [x]’s okay, he’s always been aggressive, he is a violent person”, (6) in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in late 2019 the father denigrated mr d by saying he was a convicted criminal and had been to jail, (4) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “nice photo of that crim, it’s a bit embarrassing, at least i know she is not his child”, (5) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “do you think [mr d] being aggressive in front of [x]’s okay, he’s always been aggressive, he is a violent person”, (6) in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “nice photo of that crim, it’s a bit embarrassing, at least i know she is not his child”, (5) in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “do you think [mr d] being aggressive in front of [x]’s okay, he’s always been aggressive, he is a violent person”, (6) in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in early 2020 he denigrated mr d by saying “do you think [mr d] being aggressive in front of [x]’s okay, he’s always been aggressive, he is a violent person”, (6) in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in early 2020 the father harassed the mother over sending x to childcare. as the mother tried to comfort x who became upset, the father told the mother to move away and put x down. whilst there was some distance between him and the mother, the father started yelling, “don’t touch me you’re a violent person, why did you touch me give me my child please you’re a horrible person”, and (7) in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.   in early 2020 the father attended mr d’s residence in suburb pp. he made derogatory comments to the mother about where she was living. he said, “great spot, you’ll fit in well here, it’s a bit working-class, this is where you’re going to spend a lot of life”, “this is it [ms frank], this is as good as it gets.” these comments were distressing for x.
counsel: you are carrying your screaming daughter along the road in a straight line towards the camera? father: yes. counsel: you turn to the right and walk towards [mr d] - - -?--- father: yes. [...] counsel: knowing that you had your screaming daughter with you, you chose to walk towards [mr d], didn’t you? father: i deviated to see if i could hear what [mr d] was saying. counsel: are you seriously telling the court you couldn’t hear him? is that honestly your excuse? father: well, i’m sure you will see in the picture that there was a child screaming in my ear who i had this close who was yelling and screaming. and i could not hear [mr d]. i didn’t know what he was saying and - - - [...] counsel: why on earth when your responsibility, surely, is your screaming daughter in your arms, why would you want to go and try and understand what [mr d] was saying? father: well, i didn’t know what he was saying. so – and i only took a small step to the right. counsel: listen to me carefully. you are carrying your screaming daughter? father: yes. counsel: i would have thought she was your priority, wasn’t she? father: absolutely. counsel: why then would you want to go and talk to [mr d] who you can’t quite hear properly? father: well, i didn’t know what he was saying so - - - [...] counsel: on each occasion [referring to incident with [mr dd], see below], i suggest to you, the person who’s aggressive, the person who advances on other people, the person who is initiating the contact is you. and on each occasion you excuse yourself by saying, “i was reacting with someone else. i was defending myself.” you see those parallels, [mr ryker]? father: not as you do, [...]
a pattern of disregulated behaviour
a lack of insight
it is quite wrong, in my opinion, to assume that violence can be relevant only if it is directed at the children or takes place in their presence. it is equally wrong to assume that violent behaviour will necessarily be repeated, or to assume too readily that it will harm children, or to give it excessive importance, it is of course only one factor relevant to the assessment of what the child's welfare requires, and it will be more important in some cases than in others.
coercive control
mother’s family violence
the effect of any changes in x’s circumstances
practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with a parent
avoiding further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
determinations
equal shared parental responsibility  ] it might be thought that the circumstances of the instant case, including his honour’s specific findings about the parents’ inability to interact meaningfully and responsibly in x’s best interests [....] together with the requirements of s 65dac, may well have led—despite the apparent agreement of the parties—to an order that did not see the parents share parental responsibility equally. in that event, s 65daa would not have applied and the s 65daa grounds would not have arisen. [emphasis added]
i see sole parental responsibility as one of the few levers that the court has got in terms of making structural changes and arrangements that are more likely to diminish the capacity for the parties to engage in conflict,
conflict as to issues that are non-major long term issues
allocation of sole parental responsibility to the mother
live with and spend time with arrangements
no reversal of primary residence
no reduction in x’s time with the father
should x’s time with the father be increased?
in the event that you find alienation then certainly i would be looking at reversing my initial recommendation for sole parental responsibility. i would be looking at the possibility of increasing [x]'s time up to a shared care arrangement, probably by the end of grade 2 primary school.
it would be my view that the current arrangement of five nights a fortnight and working up to half school holidays constitutes substantial time for the father with [x] and, indeed, enough time for him to cement a significant and meaningful relationship with the child. [emphasis added]
block time
other issues
choice of secondary school
terms 1, 2 and 3 holidays and the long summer holidays
a child psychologist
child support
whether the mother’s time ought to be conditioned on her engagement with a psychologist as to her entrenched antipathy towards the father
whether the father’s time ought to be conditioned on him engaging in a mbcp or other treatment
the injunction
application in a proceeding
the recusal application
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 december 2023
dated: 14 december 2023
annexure a summary of evidence
summary of evidence
mother’s evidence – first part of the trial  in the first part of the trial, the mother relied upon the following evidence:   ms frank, trial affidavit, 1 april 2023 (cb45-128) (b) ms frank, affidavit, 14 march 2021, (c) mr d, affidavit, 12 april 2023 (ex. a1), and (d) ms frank, reply affidavit, 14 april 2023.   ms frank, affidavit, 14 march 2021, (c) mr d, affidavit, 12 april 2023 (ex. a1), and (d) ms frank, reply affidavit, 14 april 2023.   mr d, affidavit, 12 april 2023 (ex. a1), and (d) ms frank, reply affidavit, 14 april 2023.   ms frank, reply affidavit, 14 april 2023.
father’s evidence – first part of the trial  in the first part of the trial, the father relied upon the following documents as of 13 april 2023:   mr ryker, trial affidavit, 6 april 2023 (cb157-339), and (b) mr e, criminal lawyer, affidavit, 28 september 2021 (cb340-352)   mr e, criminal lawyer, affidavit, 28 september 2021 (cb340-352)
expert evidence  there was the expert evidence as follows:   mr c was the family report writer. he had prepared three written reports dated 15 january 2019 (cb353-372), 23 september 2021 (cb436-452) and 3 march 2022 (cb453-470), (b) dr k, psychiatrist, made a psychiatric assessment of the parties, filed 4 february 2022 (cb471-487), and (c) professor l, psychologist, made a neuropsychological assessment of the father dated 20 march 2022 (cb488-522).   dr k, psychiatrist, made a psychiatric assessment of the parties, filed 4 february 2022 (cb471-487), and (c) professor l, psychologist, made a neuropsychological assessment of the father dated 20 march 2022 (cb488-522).   professor l, psychologist, made a neuropsychological assessment of the father dated 20 march 2022 (cb488-522).
re-opening of cases  when the cases were reopened, the parties relied on the following material:   mr ryker, affidavit, 1 september 2023, (b) ms frank, affidavit, 1 september 2023, and (c) mr ryker, reply affidavit, 11 september 2023.   ms frank, affidavit, 1 september 2023, and (c) mr ryker, reply affidavit, 11 september 2023.   mr ryker, reply affidavit, 11 september 2023.   further, when both parties reopened their cases, additional subpoenaed material was received by the court including material subpoenaed from:   f hospital, (b) the dffh, (c) o school, and (d) g organisation, a provider of men’s behavioural change programs.   the dffh, (c) o school, and (d) g organisation, a provider of men’s behavioural change programs.   o school, and (d) g organisation, a provider of men’s behavioural change programs.   g organisation, a provider of men’s behavioural change programs.
exhibits  there were a substantial number of exhibits: a1–a15, r1–r23 and ce1. (2) each party produced an aide-memoire document for the purposes of final submissions: mfi-1 (father), and mfi-2 and mfi-3 (mother).
[1] the following pages were tendered from the f hospital subpoenaed documents: 217, 220, 225–228, 238–244, 248, 249