last updated: 31 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pacelli & civita [2023] fedcfamc2f 1703
orders
the court orders that:  records, reports, and complaints relating to fvms report ... concerning events in late 2023, and (b) all documents relating to police investigations and interviews concerning an allegation of physical assault of x by the father or his partner in or around 2023.   all documents relating to police investigations and interviews concerning an allegation of physical assault of x by the father or his partner in or around 2023.
until further order  such communication is to be facilitated by the mother initiating a call to the father's mobile number, (b) the father will ensure that his phone is charged and that the call is taken, (c) the father will afford privacy to x and mother during the calls, and (d) the mother must notify father at least 24 hours in advance of her intention to exercise telephone communication with the x pursuant this order.   the father will ensure that his phone is charged and that the call is taken, (c) the father will afford privacy to x and mother during the calls, and (d) the mother must notify father at least 24 hours in advance of her intention to exercise telephone communication with the x pursuant this order.   the father will afford privacy to x and mother during the calls, and (d) the mother must notify father at least 24 hours in advance of her intention to exercise telephone communication with the x pursuant this order.   the mother must notify father at least 24 hours in advance of her intention to exercise telephone communication with the x pursuant this order.
hair follicle testing  standard 5-panel hair drug test, and (b) covering a 6-month period.   covering a 6-month period.   the mother is restrained from taking any steps to interfere with the provision of hair samples or to interfere with the test results and to that end is restrained from cutting or colouring her hair, and (b) the mother will direct and authorise tdda to provide directly to the father's solicitor copies of all test results forthwith upon those results becoming available.   the mother will direct and authorise tdda to provide directly to the father's solicitor copies of all test results forthwith upon those results becoming available.   the father is restrained from taking any steps to interfere with the provision of hair samples or to interfere with the test results and to that end is restrained from cutting or colouring his hair, and (b) the father will direct and authorise tdda to provide directly to the father's solicitor copies of all test results forthwith upon those results becoming available.   the father will direct and authorise tdda to provide directly to the father's solicitor copies of all test results forthwith upon those results becoming available.
restraints  abusing, belittling, harassing, or threatening the other parent or x, (b) assaulting or damaging the personal property of the other parent or x, (c) denigrating the other parent or a member of the other parent's family to, or in the presence or hearing of, x or allowing third parties to do so, (d) exposing x to parental conflict or family violence as defined by s 4ab of the family law act 1975 (cth), (e) consuming alcohol to excess while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to have consumed alcohol to excess, (f) consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.   assaulting or damaging the personal property of the other parent or x, (c) denigrating the other parent or a member of the other parent's family to, or in the presence or hearing of, x or allowing third parties to do so, (d) exposing x to parental conflict or family violence as defined by s 4ab of the family law act 1975 (cth), (e) consuming alcohol to excess while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to have consumed alcohol to excess, (f) consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.   denigrating the other parent or a member of the other parent's family to, or in the presence or hearing of, x or allowing third parties to do so, (d) exposing x to parental conflict or family violence as defined by s 4ab of the family law act 1975 (cth), (e) consuming alcohol to excess while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to have consumed alcohol to excess, (f) consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.   exposing x to parental conflict or family violence as defined by s 4ab of the family law act 1975 (cth), (e) consuming alcohol to excess while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to have consumed alcohol to excess, (f) consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.   consuming alcohol to excess while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to have consumed alcohol to excess, (f) consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.   consuming illicit substances or abusing prescription medication while x is in their respective care or exposing x to third parties reasonably suspected to be under the influence of illicit substances.
and the court notes that:  x to live with the father and spend time with the mother, (b) the parties to communicate directly or indirectly for the purposes of making parenting arrangements and complying with these orders.   the parties to communicate directly or indirectly for the purposes of making parenting arrangements and complying with these orders.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
there have been limited concerns raised for [x] in the care of [mr pacelli], with concerns only arising in [mid-]2023, which have related to alleged family violence in the home along with verbal and physical harm by [mr pacelli] and his partner. while service providers have reported their concerns in relation to [x] disclosing harm, [x]'s voice has not been independently obtained without influence from [ms civita].
evaluation
risk to the child in the father’s care  there is no report of physical harm until late 2023, and even then there were concerns that the allegations were influenced or made by the mother and not the child. (b) there is no record of any report of harm at the school between the beginning of the school year and when the child was withheld by the mother, being the period when she was in the father's care. (c) the mother's allegations all arose after the changeover dispute. (d) the allegations initially reported by the mother to police are inconsistent with her subsequent and enlarged allegations against the father and stepmother, which she then reported to doctors and css. (e) the police investigation which did hear the voice of the child (because she was interviewed) considered that the allegations were not reliable. it is notable that this was the same view held by css.   there is no record of any report of harm at the school between the beginning of the school year and when the child was withheld by the mother, being the period when she was in the father's care. (c) the mother's allegations all arose after the changeover dispute. (d) the allegations initially reported by the mother to police are inconsistent with her subsequent and enlarged allegations against the father and stepmother, which she then reported to doctors and css. (e) the police investigation which did hear the voice of the child (because she was interviewed) considered that the allegations were not reliable. it is notable that this was the same view held by css.   the mother's allegations all arose after the changeover dispute. (d) the allegations initially reported by the mother to police are inconsistent with her subsequent and enlarged allegations against the father and stepmother, which she then reported to doctors and css. (e) the police investigation which did hear the voice of the child (because she was interviewed) considered that the allegations were not reliable. it is notable that this was the same view held by css.   the allegations initially reported by the mother to police are inconsistent with her subsequent and enlarged allegations against the father and stepmother, which she then reported to doctors and css. (e) the police investigation which did hear the voice of the child (because she was interviewed) considered that the allegations were not reliable. it is notable that this was the same view held by css.   the police investigation which did hear the voice of the child (because she was interviewed) considered that the allegations were not reliable. it is notable that this was the same view held by css.
risk to the child in the mother’s care
conlcusion
associate: dated: 9 january 2024
dated: 9 january 2024