last updated: 23 january 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
beta & avron [2023] fedcfamc2f 1453
orders
the court orders that:  notifies the respondent, ms avron (the “respondent”), of any proposed decision relating to the long-term care and welfare of the children including but not limited to: (i) proposed decisions about which schools the children shall attend, (ii) proposed decisions about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long term medical issues affecting the children, (iii) she shall ensure that such notification is given to the respondent in writing and is given not less than 28 days before the final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (iv) she takes into consideration any views expressed by the respondent in respect to such proposed decisions.   proposed decisions about which schools the children shall attend, (ii) proposed decisions about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long term medical issues affecting the children, (iii) she shall ensure that such notification is given to the respondent in writing and is given not less than 28 days before the final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (iv) she takes into consideration any views expressed by the respondent in respect to such proposed decisions.  ) proposed decisions about elective surgery, treatment of chronic conditions, orthodontic treatment and other long term medical issues affecting the children, (iii) she shall ensure that such notification is given to the respondent in writing and is given not less than 28 days before the final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (iv) she takes into consideration any views expressed by the respondent in respect to such proposed decisions.  i) she shall ensure that such notification is given to the respondent in writing and is given not less than 28 days before the final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, and (iv) she takes into consideration any views expressed by the respondent in respect to such proposed decisions.  ) she takes into consideration any views expressed by the respondent in respect to such proposed decisions.   during the school term, commencing in the second week of each term from the conclusion of school on tuesday until the conclusion of school on monday, and thereafter in alternate weeks, (b) for the first week in each of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter and in alternate even years for the second week of each of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) during the end of term 4 christmas school holiday periods of alternate blocks of seven (7) nights commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday following the last day the children attend school in evens years, and 10:00am on the second saturday in odd years.   for the first week in each of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter and in alternate even years for the second week of each of the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) during the end of term 4 christmas school holiday periods of alternate blocks of seven (7) nights commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday following the last day the children attend school in evens years, and 10:00am on the second saturday in odd years.   during the end of term 4 christmas school holiday periods of alternate blocks of seven (7) nights commencing at 10:00am on the first saturday following the last day the children attend school in evens years, and 10:00am on the second saturday in odd years.   discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the children, (b) showing the children any documents pertaining to these proceedings.   showing the children any documents pertaining to these proceedings.   in the event that the children are with the respondent on their brother's birthday, the respondents time shall be suspended on j’s birthday. (b) in the event that mother's day falls on the respondent's weekend, the respondent’s time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the applicant can then spend time with the children on mother’s day from 12 noon until return to school on the monday. (c) in the event that mother's day falls on the applicant's weekend, the applicant’s time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the respondent can then spend time with the children on mother’s day from 12 noon until return to school on the monday. (d) the children shall spend time with parent they are not otherwise spending time with or living with on their birthday and that party’s birthday, as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, from 3:00pm-7:00pm.   in the event that mother's day falls on the respondent's weekend, the respondent’s time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the applicant can then spend time with the children on mother’s day from 12 noon until return to school on the monday. (c) in the event that mother's day falls on the applicant's weekend, the applicant’s time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the respondent can then spend time with the children on mother’s day from 12 noon until return to school on the monday. (d) the children shall spend time with parent they are not otherwise spending time with or living with on their birthday and that party’s birthday, as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, from 3:00pm-7:00pm.   in the event that mother's day falls on the applicant's weekend, the applicant’s time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the respondent can then spend time with the children on mother’s day from 12 noon until return to school on the monday. (d) the children shall spend time with parent they are not otherwise spending time with or living with on their birthday and that party’s birthday, as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, from 3:00pm-7:00pm.   the children shall spend time with parent they are not otherwise spending time with or living with on their birthday and that party’s birthday, as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, from 3:00pm-7:00pm.   pursuant to section l1(1)(a) of the australian passport act 2005 (cth), the parents' consent to the children having or being issued with an australian travel document, (b) that within sixty days (60) days of the date of these orders, the parents shall do all things necessary in obtaining a passport for the children, including but not limited to, the completing and signing of such application forms and providing certified copies of identification as required.   that within sixty days (60) days of the date of these orders, the parents shall do all things necessary in obtaining a passport for the children, including but not limited to, the completing and signing of such application forms and providing certified copies of identification as required.   the proposed period of travel and itinerary for the trip, (b) the addresses and telephone numbers of any accommodation where it is proposed the children will stay, and (c) copies of return airline tickets and details of flights.   the addresses and telephone numbers of any accommodation where it is proposed the children will stay, and (c) copies of return airline tickets and details of flights.   copies of return airline tickets and details of flights.
reasons for judgment
judge myers:
...remains on workers compensation payments whilst recovering and her treating psychologist [mr e] gave evidence she cannot return to her former employment and should be able to engage in some form of alternate employment in 2024 with her prognosis for recovery being quite good.
proposed orders
ms karagiannis: the minute speaks for itself, your honour. it’s a matter where your honour has before you two very competent parents. there were no abuse issues, there were no child protection issues. the icl has met with the children. the children’s views are adequately expressed in the family report. the family report has clear recommendations. the child – the icl, rather, has issued and read the subpoenas and prepared a complete tender bundle. ..... the preliminary view and have done the best to resolve the matter and it’s not a matter where there has been any allegation of abuse or any maltreatment, which is refreshing, but it means that i don’t think we can be of much assistance to your honour. (transcript, 30 may 2023, page 11, lines 31-39).
a) there was no objection by either party to the icl’s application, and where the court was satisfied that the best interests of the children could be met without the need for independent representation in the proceedings, b) the court was of the view that the criteria for the appointment of an icl as outlined in re:k [1994] famca 21, (1994) 17 fam lr 537 were no longer relevant in the proceedings, c) this matter did not contain allegations of sexual, physical or psychological abuse, allegations of anti-social conduct by one or both parents of a kind that seriously impinges on the child or young person's welfare (e.g. family violence), d) there was no relocation proposal that would restrict or, in practice, exclude the other parent from having contact with the children, e) the court was satisfied the icl had facilitated the participation of the children in the proceedings (family report interviews), had undertaken evidence gathering and litigation management - playing an ‘honest broker’ role in case management and settlement negotiation.
b) the court was of the view that the criteria for the appointment of an icl as outlined in re:k [1994] famca 21, (1994) 17 fam lr 537 were no longer relevant in the proceedings, c) this matter did not contain allegations of sexual, physical or psychological abuse, allegations of anti-social conduct by one or both parents of a kind that seriously impinges on the child or young person's welfare (e.g. family violence), d) there was no relocation proposal that would restrict or, in practice, exclude the other parent from having contact with the children, e) the court was satisfied the icl had facilitated the participation of the children in the proceedings (family report interviews), had undertaken evidence gathering and litigation management - playing an ‘honest broker’ role in case management and settlement negotiation.
c) this matter did not contain allegations of sexual, physical or psychological abuse, allegations of anti-social conduct by one or both parents of a kind that seriously impinges on the child or young person's welfare (e.g. family violence), d) there was no relocation proposal that would restrict or, in practice, exclude the other parent from having contact with the children, e) the court was satisfied the icl had facilitated the participation of the children in the proceedings (family report interviews), had undertaken evidence gathering and litigation management - playing an ‘honest broker’ role in case management and settlement negotiation.
d) there was no relocation proposal that would restrict or, in practice, exclude the other parent from having contact with the children, e) the court was satisfied the icl had facilitated the participation of the children in the proceedings (family report interviews), had undertaken evidence gathering and litigation management - playing an ‘honest broker’ role in case management and settlement negotiation.
e) the court was satisfied the icl had facilitated the participation of the children in the proceedings (family report interviews), had undertaken evidence gathering and litigation management - playing an ‘honest broker’ role in case management and settlement negotiation.   however, in proceedings in which an independent children's lawyer for a child has been appointed, if: (a) a party to the proceedings has received legal aid in respect of the proceedings, or (b) the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,   a party to the proceedings has received legal aid in respect of the proceedings, or (b) the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,   the court considers that a party to the proceedings would suffer financial hardship if the party had to bear a proportion of the costs of the independent children's lawyer,
the court must not make an order under subsection (2) against that party in relation to the costs of the independent children's lawyer.
icl proposed orders
during school term commencing in the second week of each term from the conclusion of school on tuesday until the conclusion of school on monday, and thereafter in alternate weeks, during school holidays for the first week in each of the mid term school holidays in 2023, and thereafter in alternate years, in other years, for the second week of each of the mid term school holidays, december – january school holidays in a week about arrangement commencing on the first day of the holidays in 2023 and thereafter in alternate weeks, in other years, in a week about arrangement commencing on the second week of the december-january school holiday period. special occasions – to be discussed that the parties be and are hereby restrained from: discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the children, showing the children any documents pertaining to these proceedings. that within 28 days of the date of these orders, or on or before another date as agreed with legal aid nsw, the applicant and respondent each pay to legal aid nsw the sum of $7,312.90, being half share of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer in the proceedings between the parties. notations a. it is noted that the applicant and respondent have not returned any application to waive the icl fee. b. should the applicant or respondent subsequently lodge an application for fee waiver with the legal aid commission, the commission will consider same prior to pressing for enforcement of the above order. c. the applicant and respondent are not in receipt of a grant of legal aid funding.
applicant’s proposed orders
parental responsibility the applicant mother to have sole parental responsibility for the children, [x] born [in] 2015 and [y] born [in] 2016 (collectively referred to as "the children") that for the purpose of order 1 and except in the event of an emergency, before making any major long term decisions in relation to health or education of the children, the applicant mother will consult the respondent mother as follows:- in writing of the decision that needs to be made and request her views about this decision, that within fourteen (14) days of the correspondence being sent, the respondent mother will advise the applicant mother in writing of any views she has about the decision, the applicant mother will consider the respondent mother’s views prior to making the decision, and upon making the decision, the applicant mother will advise the respondent mother in writing of the decision made as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than seven (7) days after the making of the decision. children’s surname the children's surname will be legally changed to include the applicant mother's surname, such that the names of the children will be, [x beta-avron] and [y beta-avron] and for the purposes of this order: the applicant mother and respondent mother will sign all documents required for the application of new birth certificates to reflect this change within two (2) weeks of the date of the final order. that if either party fails to comply with order 3 (i) except as may be agreed in writing, this order shall operate as authority to the other party to make any necessary application to obtain the birth certificates for the children without the written consent of the party previously failing to comply with order 3 (i). the applicant mother will solely fund the application of the new birth certificates and provide the respondent mother with a copy of the birth certificates once received. upon receipt of the new birth certificates, the applicant mother and respondent mother will do all things and sign all documents to ensure the children’s legal documents reflect their surname, “[beta-avron]”. live with/ spend time with arrangements the children live with the applicant mother. the children spend time with the respondent mother during the nsw school terms as agreed between the parents in writing but failing agreement as follows: each alternate weekend from friday at the conclusion of school (or 3pm in the event of a non-school day) until monday at the commencement of school (or 9am on a non-school day),
ii. in the alternate week from thursday at the conclusion of school (or 3pm on a non-school day) until friday at the commencement of school (or 9am on a non-school day).
school holidays the children to spend time with the respondent mother during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays in even years, for a period of seven nights from the first saturday following the conclusion of school on the last day that the children attend school until 10am the following saturday. during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays in odd years, for a period of seven nights from 10am on the second saturday following the last day the children attend school until 10am on the saturday immediately prior to the first day the children’s attendance is required at school. during the longer christmas school holiday period the children to spend time with the respondent mother in blocks of 7 nights commencing at 10am on the first saturday following the last day the children attend school in even years, and 10am on the second saturday in odd years. upon [y]’s commencement of high school in 2029, the children will spend time with the respondent mother in blocks of fourteen (14) nights commencing at 10am on the last saturday in december until 10am saturday fortnight in odd years, and commencing 10am on the third saturday in even years. the children are otherwise to spend time with the applicant mother for the remainder of the school holiday period that the children are not spending time with the respondent. special occasions that the children spend time with the applicant mother from 10am christmas eve, until 4pm boxing day in 2023 and each odd year thereafter. the children to spend time with the respondent mother from 10am christmas eve until 4pm boxing day in 2023 and each even year thereafter. in the event that the children are with the respondent on their brother's birthday the respondents time shall be suspended on [j]’s birthday,
i. from 9am until 5pm on a non-school day and 3-5pm on a school day, with changeover to occur at woolworths [suburb h]. in the event the applicant or respondent move from the [suburb h] area then changeover shall be the midpoint between the residences of the applicant and respondent. ii. that in the event of any subsequent siblings, time be suspended as per the arrangement in 12(i). in the event that mother’s day falls on the respondent’s weekend the respondents time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the applicant mother can spend time with the children on mother’s day. in the event that mother’s day falls on the applicant’s weekend the applicants time shall be suspended from 12 noon until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am in the event of a non-school day) so that the respondent mother can spend time with the children on mother’s day.
changeover that for the purposes of these orders, unless otherwise agreed in writing, changeover will occur as follows,
i. the respondent mother will collect the children from school at the commencement of her time and return the children to school at the conclusion of her time on all days on which the children are to be attending school (with the applicant mother to notify the respondent mother in writing in the event that either of the children are not in attendance at school on those days where the respondent mother is otherwise due to collect the children), ii. on school days where one of the children are not otherwise attending school and the other child is in attendance, changeover shall occur at the school at which the children usually attend at 3pm. iii. on non-school days and school days where both children are not otherwise attending school, changeover shall occur at woolworths [suburb h]. iv. in the event that either the applicant or respondent move from [suburb h] then the changeover venue will be the midpoint between the residences of the applicant and respondent.
communication that the children shall communicate with either parent by way of video or telephone call as agreed between the parents in writing but failing agreement, on one occasion each period of seven (7) or more nights when the children are in the other parent’s care. in the event of a telephone call, the parents will contact the children by calling the other parent's personal mobile phone and providing the phone to the child. that the children be at liberty to communicate with both parents at times reasonably requested by the child(ren) and the parent with the care of the child(ren) at that time will make reasonable efforts to facilitate such communication with the other parent by contacting them on their mobile phone. that telephone or video call occur on the following special occasions upon request,
i. the children’s birthdays ii. the applicant and respondents birthdays iii. easter sunday iv. christmas eve and christmas day v. new year’s eve. that for the purposes of facilitating these orders and unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, the parents are to communicate with each other via email or telephone message, except in the event of an emergency, in which case the parents are to communicate by telephone call, and the parents will limit their communications to discussing parenting matters for the children. that the parents are to keep each other informed of their current mobile telephone numbers, email address and residential address and will notify the other parent of any change to those details within 48 hours of such change occurring.
medical and education that each parent will immediately notify the other in the event of an emergency involving either of the children including, but not limited to, either of the children suffering a serious illness or injury or being hospitalised while in their care. that each parent will inform the other as soon as is reasonably practicable of any significant medical problems, illness or injury suffered by either of the children while in their care. that each parent will provide the details of the prescribing doctor and any medication that has been prescribed for either of the children that needs to be administered during any periods that the children spend with the other parent. that the applicant mother and respondent mother will provide the full particulars of any doctor, medical practitioner, therapeutic or allied health service provider attended upon by the children. any specialist medical appointment that either of the children attends and the full particulars of that specialist medical practitioner. any occasion that either of the children is scheduled to be hospitalised, and any major dental treatment required by either of the children. the parents shall be at liberty to liaise directly with the children's school principals or teachers to obtain any information about the children's progress at school or information about school events including all school and extra-curricular activities involving the children including but not limited to the first day of school, parent teacher meetings, parenting information sessions, school [sports] carnivals, school assemblies, concerts, fairs, performances and school sporting events or special events, and to arrange for the sending out of newsletters, school photos and academic report cards and any other documents provided by the school, regardless of which parent's care the children are in at that time. that notwithstanding order 29, each parent may contact the children's respective schools, extracurricular organisations and/or treating health professionals attended upon by the child to obtain information ordinarily available to parents and these orders will be sufficient authority to authorise the release of such information to the requesting parent (at that parent's request). travel & passports that in the event that either parent intends to travel interstate with the children during those periods that the children is living with or spending time with them, the travelling parent is to inform the other parent of the intended interstate travel (including details about the intended destination, the proposed duration of the travel and the contact telephone numbers and address details for where the children will be staying) as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than fourteen (14) days before the intended departure date. that in relation to passports for the children:
i. that pursuant to section 11(l)(a) of the australian passport act 2005, the parents' consent to the children having or being issued with an australian travel document, ii. that within sixty days (60) days of the date of these orders the parents shall do all things necessary in obtaining a passport for the children including, but not limited to, the completing and signing of such application form and providing certified copies of identification as required. iii. that if either party fails to comply with order 32(ii), except as may be agreed in writing, this order shall operate as authority to the other party to make any necessary application to obtain the passports for the children without the written consent of the party previously failing to comply with order 32 (ii). iv. the applicant mother shall be solely responsible for the costs of applying and renewing the children's passports, except in circumstances whereby either child's passport has been misplaced, lost or destroyed whilst in the respondent mother's possession, in which the respondent mother shall be solely responsible for the costs for the replacement of the child(ren)'s passport. v. that the children's australian passport is to be kept by the applicant mother for safe-keeping at all times except when the children's passports are required by the respondent mother for the purpose of travelling overseas with the children in accordance with these orders in which case the applicant mother is to provide the children's passports to the respondent mother not less than thirty (30) days prior to the intended departure date and the respondent mother will return the children's passports to the applicant mother not less than fourteen (14) days following the children's return to the commonwealth of australia. vi. that the applicant mother provides the respondent mother with a certified copy of the children's australian passports within fourteen (14) days of the children being issued or re-issued with an australian passport. that pursuant to section 65y of the family law act 1975 each parent is permitted to travel outside the commonwealth of australia with the children as follows, i. for periods up to fourteen (14) days whilst the children are primary school age, and, ii. for periods up to twenty one (21) days whilst the children are high school age. that for the purpose of order 33 and unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the parent proposing such holiday is to notify the non-travelling parent in writing not less than ninety (90) days prior to the departure of such proposed trip, and provide to the non-travelling parent the following particulars:- the proposed period of travel and itinerary for the trip, the addresses and telephone numbers of any accommodation where it is proposed the children will stay, and that at least twenty eight (28) days before departure on a holiday pursuant to order 14, the travelling parent must provide to the non-travelling parent:- a final itinerary including contact telephone numbers and full street addresses of where the child will be staying, and copies of return airline tickets and details of flights. the travelling parent will provide the non-travelling parent with a landline telephone number at which the travelling parent and/or the children can be contacted in each country, or, will activate global roaming on their personal mobile for the duration of the trip, or, will purchase a local sim card and provide the non-travelling parent with their local mobile number, so as to provide a communication channel for the non-travelling parent with the children via telephone, text or instant messaging. the travelling parent will do all things necessary to facilitate the non­ travelling parent being able to communicate with the children as often as the children wish to communicate with the non-travelling parent, or at least once a week whilst the children are overseas.
implementation that each parent be restrained from making any negative, critical, belittling or derogatory comments about the other parent or members of the other parents' family or household in the presence or within the hearing range of the children, or via written correspondence or on social media which may be viewed or accessed by the children, and each parent will do all things reasonably necessary to ensure that no other person does so. that in the event of any dispute as to the interpretation or implementation of these order, the parties shall first attend family dispute resolution with a family dispute resolution practitioner jointly appointed by the parties and make a genuine attempt to resolve the dispute. failing agreement as to the appointment of the family dispute resolution practitioner, the party raising the dispute shall nominate three (3) family dispute resolution practitioners, one of whom shall be chosen by the other party within fourteen (14) days with the cost’s incidental to the appointment of the family dispute practitioner be shared equally between the parties. property orders that the applicant and respondent to forthwith list for sale and sell the property situate and known as [n street, suburb o] in the state of new south wales. the proceeds of sale of the property are to be disbursed as follows:
i. in payment of the outstanding council rates and water rates, ii. in payment of the agent’s commission and legal fees of the sale, iii. to discharge the mortgage secured with [p bank], iv. the balance of proceeds to be disbursed as follows:
a. $15,000 [ms & mr q] b. as to the balance to the applicant mother – 70% c. as to the balance to the respondent mother – 30% except as otherwise provided for in these orders the applicant and respondent to otherwise retain what other assets are in the name, possession and control and each party shall be responsible for any liability in their own respective names. in the event that either party refuses or neglects to sign any document required to give effect to these orders then the registrar shall be permitted to sign any document to give effect to these orders pursuant to section 106a of the family law act.
respondent’s proposed orders
1. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children [x] born [in] 2015 and [y] born [in] 2016. 2. the applicant and the respondent shall have equal shared care of the children as follows:-
i. each of the parties will have one week each fortnight during school terms with changeovers to occur each monday after school. school holidays ii. the week about orders shall continue during the first, second and third term school holidays. iii. during the christmas school vacation in years ending in an even number from after school on the last day of the school year and for seven consecutive nights until 10:00am on the eighth day in each alternate seven day period thereafter until the new school term commences and from 10:00am on the eighth day after the last day of the school year and for seven consecutive nights thereafter. special days iv. in years ending in an even number the children shall live with the applicant from 5:00pm on the saturday before mother's day until 2:00pm mother's day and the respondent shall have such time in odd numbered years and the children shall live with the applicant in years ending in an even number from 2:00pm mother's day until before school on the monday and the respondent shall have such time in odd numbered years. v. when such party has the care of the children for the second half of the christmas school vacation then such party shall have the care of the children from 3:00pm christmas day until 6:00pm boxing day.
3. the parties shall forthwith do all acts and things necessary to sell the property situate at and known as [n street, suburb o] and in respect of such sale the following shall apply:-
i. the parties shall place the property in the hands of a licensed auctioneer to sell the property by way of public auction in such time period as advised by the auctioneer at a reserve price agreed between the parties. ii. in the event the parties cannot agree to the reserve price then the parties or either of them shall appoint the president for the time being of the real estate institute [new south wales division] or his or her nominee to assess the reserve price at auction and each party sha11 be bound by such assessment and equally bear the cost. iii. upon sale the proceeds shall be paid as follows:-
a. in payment of agents commission and costs and legal fees occasioned by the sale. b. in discharge of the mortgage secured upon the property. c. in payment to the applicant of 43.2 percent of the proceed. d. in payment to the respondent of 56.8 percent of the proceeds.
parenting determination
thanks for your concern, albeit provocative. but seeing as though you enquired, unlike you, [ms k] is more than capable of caring for our son without instruction, which has been such a pleasant change. as you would be aware, it is school term and there are court orders in place, irrespective of covid. need i remind you, the girls live with me and visit you. i arrange my life and my commitments according to my family and their needs, of which you are not part nor are you of any consideration.
...it’s a matter where your honour has before you two very competent parents. there were no abuse issues, there were no child protection issues. the icl has met with the children. the children’s views are adequately expressed in the family report. the family report has clear recommendations. the child – the icl, rather, has issued and read the subpoenas and prepared a complete tender bundle. ..... it’s not a matter where there has been any allegation of abuse or any maltreatment, which is refreshing. (transcript, 30 may 2023, page 11, lines 31-38).
i have not concluded that the children are at risk of maltreatment or family violence in the care of either parent. as will be explored below, primary concern for the welfare of the children relates to the highly acrimonious relationship between the parents, and the concomitant inability to communicate effectively, even briefly, at times of handover, for example. that the children continue to be exposed to the same, in my opinion, presents the most significant risk at the current time.
almost immediately [y] made reference to having “two mums, a step-mum, a donor, and a brother”. i remarked that she has a very big family and she seemed pleased to give me help with everyone’s name.
the children appear to have a close bond with both parents, and there was nothing to indicate the children have anything but secure attachments to the parents.
i recommend the children spend the fortnightly schedule living with [ms beta] and spend increased time with [ms avron] compared to the current arrangements. respectfully, the court may wish to consider the children spending time with [ms avron] from tuesday after school until the following monday before school, every second week, in a fortnightly cycle. alternatively, the court may consider the children spending time with [ms avron] from wednesday after school until before school the following monday in week 1, and from after-school thursday to before school friday in week 2. i also respectfully recommend 50:50 care arrangements over the short school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3. at this point, i believe the children are too young to spend three weeks of the six-week summer holidays in block time with the respective parent. furthermore, a three-week block in the care of [ms avron] would mean that the children would not spend that time with their younger brother.
you have no idea how to parent. you never have. you are the reason they are always sick, you cannot care for them how they should be cared for. christ! you can’t even look after yourself. the fact that you have given no consideration to their needs is typical of you and disgusting! just like taking them to a hospital of a dying/dead woman! you’re pathetic!
each of the parents clearly have established that they have the capacity to provide for the needs of the children.
both parents appeared to have reasonable capacity to meet the children's needs including emotional and intellectual.
i think it is in the interest of both children for the parents to retain shared parental responsibility. i recommend the parents attend upon a practitioner experienced in working with high-conflict separated parents to engage in co-parenting focused family therapy. this would probably be best conducted via telehealth, and need not be more than monthly, over the course of approximately six to 12 months, subject to review. it might prove helpful for the family therapist to receive a copy of this report in anticipation of commencing therapy with the parents.
children’s surname
i asked [ms avron] to comment on allegations by [ms beta] that she removes labels from the children’s clothes which indicate their name is [beta-avron], as opposed to just [avron]. she explained she asked [ms beta] not to write ‘[beta-avron]’ on the children's clothing labels as their names had not changed. [ms beta] continued to write the double barrelled surname therefore she removed the labels. she added that she believes [ms beta] is doing, “everything she can to replace me” in the children's lives. she added that the children's lunch boxes have contact details stating ‘[ms beta]’ and ‘birth mother’ with [ms beta]’s phone number. i subsequently asked [ms beta] to explain why she had specifically written her name, and “birth mother”, and contact number on the children's lunchboxes. [ms beta] explained that she is mindful the children have three maternal figures, herself, her partner [ms k], and [ms avron] and she wanted to clarify her role as she is the only birth mother. i explained to [ms beta] that i was aware the labels had her name only, and only her contact number therefore i was unclear as to why she had written ‘birth mother’ on the labels, as there would be no need to differentiate between roles given there was only one contact person provided. at this point [ms beta] could not advise why she had specifically written “birth mother”. when asked subsequently why she had added ‘[beta]’ to the children's surname on school clothing, [ms beta] indicated that she had “trouble” with the school because they had not read any of the court orders and she wanted to ensure the school contacted her, and not just [ms avron], given the name that was on the label when they started school. [ms beta] added that there are ongoing issues with the children's clothes being lost and [ms avron] not returning them to her. i understood from [ms beta] that when clothing items are lost at school they are placed at a box in the school office, and she spoke to the school about how she might make it easier for the school staff to identify which to parent contact regarding any missing clothing items – i.e. to add both parents’ surnames to the clothes.   beta] is the birth mother of [y] and her sister [x] (current student). family law court orders are in place where [y] and [x] reside with [ms beta] & [ms k] and visit [ms avron] every second weekend and each alternate thursday overnight. (schedule previously provided to [b school]). [ms beta] has parental responsibility for education, please ensure if there is any emergency or.
mr rosic: doctor, in respect of a hyphenated name, there’s an application that’s before the court in which [ms beta] seeks that the children be known by a hyphenated name, the surname of both parents? [dr l]: ---yes. mr rosic: do you see that as being a benefit to the children so that they can associate, relate with both of their parents? [dr l]: ---i could see some benefit to that here, yes, given both parents – having both parents’ surnames, yes, i could see some benefit.   avron]: your honour, certainly, my initial and, i guess, primary view is that [ms beta] and i made the decision in relation to naming our children together and that that’s how they always identified. however, listening to the child expert and his views and – and i understand [ms beta] wants to have representation of her name with our daughter. yes. i can appreciate that. i do very strongly feel, though, the sequence of name should stay the same. the girls, as mr rosic mentioned previously – they’re accustomed to being – they’re accustomed to their name. they identify with it. it’s used every day in school and extracurricular activities. to add [beta] would certainly give [ms beta] what she’s asking for. it would provide the girls with the opportunity to recognise both – parentage of both her mother – their mothers. it’s – you mentioned the syllables, your honour. that would be consistent with their brother, [j], who’s [k]-[beta], and i note syllable name, followed by [beta] – one. (transcript 22 june 2023, page 300, lines 13-25).
parental responsibility and spend time with arrangements ] ...whether the parties agree or disagree on matters relevant to the child's day to day life. for example, methods of discipline, attitudes to homework, health and dental care, diet and sleeping pattern. where they disagree on these matters the likelihood that they would be able to reach a reasonable compromise. do they share similar ambitions for the child? for example...extra curricular activities...can they address on a continuing basis the practical considerations that arise when a child lives in 2 homes? if the child leaves necessary school work or equipment at the other home will the parents readily rectify the problem?
it’s a matter where your honour has before you two very competent parents.  (a) the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child's daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   as set out above the parties’ houses are extremely close. they do not live too far apart to make such an arrangement impracticable. (b) for the same reasons set out above, the parents' have the current and future capacity to implement such an arrangement. (c) the parties’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing such an arrangement, while well less than good enough for equal time, is good enough for the proposal suggested by the icl to be reasonably practical. in this regard the court notes the support and suggestion of such an arrangement by dr l. while parallel parenting is not ideal, it will in this case suffice and make the arrangement reasonably practicable. (d) the impact that an arrangement of the kind suggested by the icl would have on the children, given their limited separation from ms beta, her partner and their brother would not be detrimental. (e) there are no other matters as the court considers relevant when evaluating the icl’s proposal.   for the same reasons set out above, the parents' have the current and future capacity to implement such an arrangement. (c) the parties’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing such an arrangement, while well less than good enough for equal time, is good enough for the proposal suggested by the icl to be reasonably practical. in this regard the court notes the support and suggestion of such an arrangement by dr l. while parallel parenting is not ideal, it will in this case suffice and make the arrangement reasonably practicable. (d) the impact that an arrangement of the kind suggested by the icl would have on the children, given their limited separation from ms beta, her partner and their brother would not be detrimental. (e) there are no other matters as the court considers relevant when evaluating the icl’s proposal.   the parties’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing such an arrangement, while well less than good enough for equal time, is good enough for the proposal suggested by the icl to be reasonably practical. in this regard the court notes the support and suggestion of such an arrangement by dr l. while parallel parenting is not ideal, it will in this case suffice and make the arrangement reasonably practicable. (d) the impact that an arrangement of the kind suggested by the icl would have on the children, given their limited separation from ms beta, her partner and their brother would not be detrimental. (e) there are no other matters as the court considers relevant when evaluating the icl’s proposal.   the impact that an arrangement of the kind suggested by the icl would have on the children, given their limited separation from ms beta, her partner and their brother would not be detrimental. (e) there are no other matters as the court considers relevant when evaluating the icl’s proposal.   there are no other matters as the court considers relevant when evaluating the icl’s proposal.
associate: dated: 18 december 2023
dated: 18 december 2023