last updated: 29 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
atlan & timsit [2021] fedcfamc2f 718
orders
the court orders that:  the husband shall place the property situated at b street, suburb c nsw on the market for sale by private treaty at a sum as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, at a price suggested by a registered valuer nominated by the president of the australian property institute. (b) the real estate agent to act upon the sale shall be selected by the respondent husband. (c) should the said property fail to be sold within 8 weeks from the date at which the said property is first listed for private sale, the property shall be publicly auctioned on the first saturday 12 weeks after the said property was first offered for sale by private treaty. (d) where the said property fails to sell at the auction contemplated at order 3(c) above, the said property shall be auctioned every fourth saturday until such time as the property is sold. (e) that the reserve price for the first auction shall be 5% less than the last price the said property was offered for sale by private treaty, and the reserve price for every subsequent auction shall be 2% less than the preceding auction reserve price. (f) simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   the real estate agent to act upon the sale shall be selected by the respondent husband. (c) should the said property fail to be sold within 8 weeks from the date at which the said property is first listed for private sale, the property shall be publicly auctioned on the first saturday 12 weeks after the said property was first offered for sale by private treaty. (d) where the said property fails to sell at the auction contemplated at order 3(c) above, the said property shall be auctioned every fourth saturday until such time as the property is sold. (e) that the reserve price for the first auction shall be 5% less than the last price the said property was offered for sale by private treaty, and the reserve price for every subsequent auction shall be 2% less than the preceding auction reserve price. (f) simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   should the said property fail to be sold within 8 weeks from the date at which the said property is first listed for private sale, the property shall be publicly auctioned on the first saturday 12 weeks after the said property was first offered for sale by private treaty. (d) where the said property fails to sell at the auction contemplated at order 3(c) above, the said property shall be auctioned every fourth saturday until such time as the property is sold. (e) that the reserve price for the first auction shall be 5% less than the last price the said property was offered for sale by private treaty, and the reserve price for every subsequent auction shall be 2% less than the preceding auction reserve price. (f) simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   where the said property fails to sell at the auction contemplated at order 3(c) above, the said property shall be auctioned every fourth saturday until such time as the property is sold. (e) that the reserve price for the first auction shall be 5% less than the last price the said property was offered for sale by private treaty, and the reserve price for every subsequent auction shall be 2% less than the preceding auction reserve price. (f) simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   that the reserve price for the first auction shall be 5% less than the last price the said property was offered for sale by private treaty, and the reserve price for every subsequent auction shall be 2% less than the preceding auction reserve price. (f) simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   simultaneous with settlement of the sale of the said property, the applicant wife shall provide a discharge of caveat. (g) the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   the proceeds of sale be paid in the following order of priority: (i) pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   pay out the existing mortgage over the said property, (ii) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.  ) pay the agent’s commission, advertising expenses and auctioneer’s fees, (iii) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.  i) pay all rates and tax adjustments on the sale, (iv) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.  ) pay the solicitors/conveyancers reasonable costs and disbursements for acting on the sale, (v) pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.   pay the sum of $120,750 to the applicant wife, (vi) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.  ) pay the end remaining balance to the respondent husband.
oral reasons for judgment
myers j:  that the respondent be declared the sole and absolute owner and sole beneficiary of all legal and equitable rights in the property known as b street, suburb c, new south wales. (b) that the caveat registered on the abovementioned property be removed. (c) that the applicant pay the respondent an amount exceeding $40,000.00 representing the respondent’s expenses in bringing the applicant into australia, this includes, but is not limited to, ticket fares, visa costs and medical expenses. (d) that each party retain the property in their possession and control on the basis that an order for adjustment of property is not just and equitable in all circumstances of the present case. (e) that each party be solely liable and responsible for and shall indemnify the other party regarding any and all past, present and future debts and liabilities in the name of each of them respectively or which may be incurred by each of them, including, but not limited to, credit cards, loans, debts and liabilities of any kind and nature. each party shall do all acts and things and sign any documents as may be necessary to put this order into effect.   that the caveat registered on the abovementioned property be removed. (c) that the applicant pay the respondent an amount exceeding $40,000.00 representing the respondent’s expenses in bringing the applicant into australia, this includes, but is not limited to, ticket fares, visa costs and medical expenses. (d) that each party retain the property in their possession and control on the basis that an order for adjustment of property is not just and equitable in all circumstances of the present case. (e) that each party be solely liable and responsible for and shall indemnify the other party regarding any and all past, present and future debts and liabilities in the name of each of them respectively or which may be incurred by each of them, including, but not limited to, credit cards, loans, debts and liabilities of any kind and nature. each party shall do all acts and things and sign any documents as may be necessary to put this order into effect.   that the applicant pay the respondent an amount exceeding $40,000.00 representing the respondent’s expenses in bringing the applicant into australia, this includes, but is not limited to, ticket fares, visa costs and medical expenses. (d) that each party retain the property in their possession and control on the basis that an order for adjustment of property is not just and equitable in all circumstances of the present case. (e) that each party be solely liable and responsible for and shall indemnify the other party regarding any and all past, present and future debts and liabilities in the name of each of them respectively or which may be incurred by each of them, including, but not limited to, credit cards, loans, debts and liabilities of any kind and nature. each party shall do all acts and things and sign any documents as may be necessary to put this order into effect.   that each party retain the property in their possession and control on the basis that an order for adjustment of property is not just and equitable in all circumstances of the present case. (e) that each party be solely liable and responsible for and shall indemnify the other party regarding any and all past, present and future debts and liabilities in the name of each of them respectively or which may be incurred by each of them, including, but not limited to, credit cards, loans, debts and liabilities of any kind and nature. each party shall do all acts and things and sign any documents as may be necessary to put this order into effect.   that each party be solely liable and responsible for and shall indemnify the other party regarding any and all past, present and future debts and liabilities in the name of each of them respectively or which may be incurred by each of them, including, but not limited to, credit cards, loans, debts and liabilities of any kind and nature. each party shall do all acts and things and sign any documents as may be necessary to put this order into effect.
associate: dated: 16 november 2021
dated: 16 november 2021