last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
terry & terry [2023] fedcfamc2f 1674
orders
the court orders that:
the school dispute
reasons for judgment
judge champion:
introduction  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) the children live with the mother, and (c) the children spend time with the father every second weekend (friday to monday), on thursday evenings and on a “week about” arrangement during school holidays and on special occasion time.   the children live with the mother, and (c) the children spend time with the father every second weekend (friday to monday), on thursday evenings and on a “week about” arrangement during school holidays and on special occasion time.   the children spend time with the father every second weekend (friday to monday), on thursday evenings and on a “week about” arrangement during school holidays and on special occasion time.
the competing applications
legal principles  the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
the primary judge’s task was a two-staged process. first, to make findings of fact as to what changes there had been in circumstances since the making of the 2015 orders and secondly, to assess whether or not the father had established that these changes are sufficient to provoke a new inquiry, or put in another way, whether the father has established a prima facie case of changed circumstances that would justify embarking on a second contested parenting hearing as being in the child’s best interests.
the nature of the changes being sought to the orders is also relevant .] the rule may not impede hearing an application for a small alteration, which may require only a short and narrow enquiry, but may properly prevent a hearing in respect of more far-reaching changes.
we should emphasise that the magnitude of the variation of the parenting orders sought to be achieved in the fresh proceedings, necessarily informs the nature of change of circumstances sufficient to justify that re-litigation. here, the mother was seeking a complete reversal of the child’s living arrangements, rather than merely some minor tinkering or slender change [...] the nature of the change in circumstances needed to be of sufficient gravity to warrant the wholesale re-litigation of the child’s living arrangements. [emphasis added]
background
consideration
has the father established a case to be answered of changed circumstances which warrants re-opening the parenting dispute?
past circumstances, including the reasons for the previous orders and the evidence upon which they were based
the passage of time and the fact that the children are older
school
new siblings
geography and changed living circumstances
family violence
i do not know what the children are being subjected to in [the mother’s] house or what they are being told about me... to cause the reaction above. i am worried about the psychological harm the children may suffer if it continues.
“[...] children are at significant risk of psychological harm due to being exposed and actively involved in the parenting disagreements and actions by [ms terry] and [mr n] to undermine their relationship with me.”
the tender bundle
the dffh report
follow up with the children school was unable to find any concerns and indicated that the parental group are all involved when picking the children up and it appeared as though this was an amicable arrangement. [emphasis added]
determination as to rice & asplund
the school issue
those aspects of parental responsibility are the subject of an existing order. however there is a present dispute about those aspects arising some three years after those orders were made. the mother seeks to vary an aspect of the relevant order. the court has both jurisdiction and power to determine that question if the parties cannot agree upon it for themselves. [emphasis added]   the father file an outline of argument, a consolidated affidavit and any further affidavit in the support of the orders he seeks as to the school dispute on or before 4:00 pm on 8 january 2024, (b) the mother file an outline of argument, a consolidated affidavit and any further affidavit in the support of the orders she seeks as to the school dispute on or before 4:00 pm on 12 january 2024, (c) the matter be listed for a hearing at 10:00 am on 18 january 2024 (on a 1-day estimate).   the mother file an outline of argument, a consolidated affidavit and any further affidavit in the support of the orders she seeks as to the school dispute on or before 4:00 pm on 12 january 2024, (c) the matter be listed for a hearing at 10:00 am on 18 january 2024 (on a 1-day estimate).   the matter be listed for a hearing at 10:00 am on 18 january 2024 (on a 1-day estimate).
conclusion
associate: dated: 20 december 2023
dated: 20 december 2023