last updated: 29 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hagarty & valenza (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 1651
orders
the court orders that:
immediate time for child with father  week 1 commencing 15 january 2024, and unless otherwise agreed from 10.00am until 2.00pm on two consecutive days, and (ii) week 2 commencing 29 january 2024, and unless otherwise agreed from 10.00am until 4.00pm on two consecutive days.  ) week 2 commencing 29 january 2024, and unless otherwise agreed from 10.00am until 4.00pm on two consecutive days.   the father will, within seven days of the date of these orders, nominate which two consecutive days in each of week 1 and week 2 he intends to spend time with the child. (ii) changeover will be supervised by city c contact service or city d contact service (collectively “the contact service”) and the times for changeover set out in order 5.1 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), (iii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time to the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  ) changeover will be supervised by city c contact service or city d contact service (collectively “the contact service”) and the times for changeover set out in order 5.1 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), (iii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time to the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  i) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time to the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.
spend time arrangements during school terms  changeover will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 5.3 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”) and the mother or the mother’s nominee will deliver the child to the father at commencement of time at the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.   the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time. (ii) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 5.4 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the mother or the mother’s nominee will deliver the child to the father at commencement of time at the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  ) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 5.4 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the mother or the mother’s nominee will deliver the child to the father at commencement of time at the contact service, or the changeover location if the contact service is not available, and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.
spend time arrangements during school holiday periods commencing from 2024
term school holiday periods  the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time. (ii) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.1 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  ) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.1 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.   the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time. (ii) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.2 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  ) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.2 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.   the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time. (ii) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.3 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.  ) changeover at the conclusion of time will be supervised by the contact service and the times for changeover set out in order 6.3 may be varied in accordance with the availability of the contact service provided that in the event that the contact service is unable to facilitate supervised changeover then changeover will instead occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time to the contact service, or at the changeover location if the contact service is not available.
christmas school holiday periods  when the christmas school holiday period commences in an even numbered year, from 9.00am on 13 january until 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holiday period, and (b) when the christmas school holiday period commences in an odd numbered year from after school or 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm on 13 january. (c) for the purposes of order 7 (a) changeover will occur as follows: (i) the changeover will occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and (ii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time at the changeover location and the father will return the child to the mother or her nominee at the conclusion of time at the changeover location. (d) for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).   when the christmas school holiday period commences in an odd numbered year from after school or 3.00pm on the last day of school until 4.00pm on 13 january. (c) for the purposes of order 7 (a) changeover will occur as follows: (i) the changeover will occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and (ii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time at the changeover location and the father will return the child to the mother or her nominee at the conclusion of time at the changeover location. (d) for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).   for the purposes of order 7 (a) changeover will occur as follows: (i) the changeover will occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and (ii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time at the changeover location and the father will return the child to the mother or her nominee at the conclusion of time at the changeover location. (d) for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).   the changeover will occur at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”), and (ii) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time at the changeover location and the father will return the child to the mother or her nominee at the conclusion of time at the changeover location. (d) for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).  ) the mother or another responsible adult who is known to the child (“the mother’s nominee”) will deliver the child to the father at the commencement of time at the changeover location and the father will return the child to the mother or her nominee at the conclusion of time at the changeover location. (d) for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).   for the purposes of order 7 (b) hereto changeover will occur as follows: (i) the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).   the father will collect the child from school at the commencement of time, (ii) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).  ) the father will return the child to the mother or the mother’s nominee at the conclusion of time at mcdonalds city c, or such other location as the parents agree in writing (“the changeover location”).
father to pay fees for supervision of changeover and costs of travel and accommodation
child’s communication with the father
parental communication
restraints
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge carty
introduction
relevant background  mr k born in 2004, currently 19 years old, (2) l born in 2006, currently 17 years old, and (3) m born in 2011, currently 12 years old .   l born in 2006, currently 17 years old, and (3) m born in 2011, currently 12 years old .   m born in 2011, currently 12 years old .
“...as the wishes of [ms valenza] are not met by statutory agencies, contact information has changed in its gravity and seriousness...there are worries that reports have been made to satisfy [ms valenza]’s pursuit of family law action in relation to custody of [x].”[7]
the final hearing
documents relied uponthe father  case outline filed 30 september 2022, (2) his affidavit filed 16 september 2022, (3) affidavit of mr aa filed 29 january 2021, (4) affidavit of ms y filed 29 january 2021, (5) single expert report prepared by dr f dated 26 september 2022, (6) family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   his affidavit filed 16 september 2022, (3) affidavit of mr aa filed 29 january 2021, (4) affidavit of ms y filed 29 january 2021, (5) single expert report prepared by dr f dated 26 september 2022, (6) family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   affidavit of mr aa filed 29 january 2021, (4) affidavit of ms y filed 29 january 2021, (5) single expert report prepared by dr f dated 26 september 2022, (6) family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   affidavit of ms y filed 29 january 2021, (5) single expert report prepared by dr f dated 26 september 2022, (6) family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   single expert report prepared by dr f dated 26 september 2022, (6) family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   family report prepared by ms j dated 14 june 2019, and (7) written submissions filed 17 march 2023.   written submissions filed 17 march 2023.
the mother  further amended response filed 29 september 2022, (2) her affidavit filed 27 september 2022, (3) affidavit of mr k filed 23 september 2022, (4) affidavit of ms ee filed 27 september 2022. (5) affidavit of mr ff filed 23 september 2022, (6) affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   her affidavit filed 27 september 2022, (3) affidavit of mr k filed 23 september 2022, (4) affidavit of ms ee filed 27 september 2022. (5) affidavit of mr ff filed 23 september 2022, (6) affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   affidavit of mr k filed 23 september 2022, (4) affidavit of ms ee filed 27 september 2022. (5) affidavit of mr ff filed 23 september 2022, (6) affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   affidavit of ms ee filed 27 september 2022. (5) affidavit of mr ff filed 23 september 2022, (6) affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   affidavit of mr ff filed 23 september 2022, (6) affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   affidavit of ms cc filed 23 september 2022, and (7) affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.   affidavit of mr gg filed 27 september 2022.
the independent children’s lawyer
exhibits
proposals of the partiesthe father  the father have sole parental responsibility for the child[14]. (2) the child live with the father in town r. (3) for two months following the making of the orders, there is a moratorium on the child spending time or communicating with the mother, to assist the child to settle into her placement with the father. (4) after the expiration of two months and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother one weekend per month in city e, supervised by city e children’s contact centre, on each of saturday and sunday for two hours. (5) thereafter, and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother in city e on one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday. (6) thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   the child live with the father in town r. (3) for two months following the making of the orders, there is a moratorium on the child spending time or communicating with the mother, to assist the child to settle into her placement with the father. (4) after the expiration of two months and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother one weekend per month in city e, supervised by city e children’s contact centre, on each of saturday and sunday for two hours. (5) thereafter, and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother in city e on one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday. (6) thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   for two months following the making of the orders, there is a moratorium on the child spending time or communicating with the mother, to assist the child to settle into her placement with the father. (4) after the expiration of two months and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother one weekend per month in city e, supervised by city e children’s contact centre, on each of saturday and sunday for two hours. (5) thereafter, and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother in city e on one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday. (6) thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   after the expiration of two months and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother one weekend per month in city e, supervised by city e children’s contact centre, on each of saturday and sunday for two hours. (5) thereafter, and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother in city e on one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday. (6) thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   thereafter, and for the next 12 months, the child spend time with the mother in city e on one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday. (6) thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   thereafter the child spend time with the mother: (i) in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years. (7) following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   in city e one weekend every two months from 5.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, (ii) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years.  ) for one week of each term school holiday period, and (iii) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years.  i) during christmas school holiday periods, including christmas day in alternate years.   following the two-months’ long moratorium on the child’s time and communication with the mother, the child thereafter have telephone or video calls with the mother each wednesday, and on special occasions with the parent does not then have the care of the child (8) the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   the parents will communicate about the child’s medical needs and will exchange information and authorities to enable each parent to receive information about the child from her treating medical practitioners and teachers. (9) the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   the parents be restrained from denigrating the other parent or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any other person who denigrates the child’s parents. (10) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.  ) the parents be restrained from discussing the court proceedings with the child. (11) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.  ) the father to arrange for the child to attend on a general practitioner to obtain a referral to a suitably qualified mental health practitioner, and the father to act on any referrals and abide by recommendations of mental health practitioners in relation to management and treatment of the child.   that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the child. (2) that the child live with the mother. (3) that the child spend time with the father on one occasion each month supervised by b children’s contact centre at city c (“the service”) on such dates and at such times as nominated by the director or manager of the service. (4) the father pays all costs associated with spending time with the child.   that the child live with the mother. (3) that the child spend time with the father on one occasion each month supervised by b children’s contact centre at city c (“the service”) on such dates and at such times as nominated by the director or manager of the service. (4) the father pays all costs associated with spending time with the child.   that the child spend time with the father on one occasion each month supervised by b children’s contact centre at city c (“the service”) on such dates and at such times as nominated by the director or manager of the service. (4) the father pays all costs associated with spending time with the child.   the father pays all costs associated with spending time with the child.
issues to be determined and matters for consideration.  the live with arrangements for the child. (2) the spend time with arrangements for the child. (3) the allocation of parental responsibility for the child.   the spend time with arrangements for the child. (3) the allocation of parental responsibility for the child.   the allocation of parental responsibility for the child.   whether the child is at risk of physical or psychological harm in household of the mother from being exposed or subjected to abuse, neglect, or family violence, and whether identified risks can be ameliorated only by an order that the child lives with the father. (ii) whether the child is at risk of physical or psychological harm in household of the father from being exposed or subjected to abuse, neglect, or family violence, and whether identified risks can be ameliorated only by an order that the child’s time with the father occurs under long-term professional supervision. (iii) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. (iv) the parenting capacity of each parent. (v) the impact on the child of a change of residence. (vi) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  ) whether the child is at risk of physical or psychological harm in household of the father from being exposed or subjected to abuse, neglect, or family violence, and whether identified risks can be ameliorated only by an order that the child’s time with the father occurs under long-term professional supervision. (iii) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. (iv) the parenting capacity of each parent. (v) the impact on the child of a change of residence. (vi) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  i) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. (iv) the parenting capacity of each parent. (v) the impact on the child of a change of residence. (vi) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  ) the parenting capacity of each parent. (v) the impact on the child of a change of residence. (vi) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.   the impact on the child of a change of residence. (vi) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  ) the impact on the child of the proposed order for long-term professional supervision of any time that she spends with the father. (vii) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  i) the practical difficulties and expense of the child spending time with and communicating with each of the parents. (viii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  ii) the child’s right to enjoy her aboriginal culture. (ix) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.  ) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.
legal principles in parenting proceedings  the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (ii) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect, or family violence.  ) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect, or family violence.
the evidence
the father
“[ms valenza] and i agreed that the children were to take their clothes with them into the bathroom and get changed in the bathroom to ensure that their towels were hung up in the bathroom and did not end up on the kids bedroom floors.”[34]
alleged maltreatment of mr k in 2012.
alleged inappropriate supervision of mr k and l when showering.
excessive discipline involving l and the bike.
“...on the balance of probabilities, you did use excessive discipline against a child in your care at the time, however it is not assessed that this has caused “significant harm’” and that the father has “...not been identified on the state record as a “person causing harm...”.
alleged common assault on mr k.
alleged indecent treatment of l.
allegation that father “groomed” m.
other allegations of mistreatment of the children.
alleged excessive alcohol use by father.
care of x during relationship
time and communication with x since separation
the father’s demeanour as a witness
ms y  in approximately 2015 the mother telephoned in a highly distressed state and threatened to harm herself, saying words to the effect “because it is [mr hagarty’s] favourite place”. the mother said that she was depressed because the father did not want to marry her. (b) in 2017, when she was 7 months pregnant with x, the mother telephoned and was hysterical, screaming and crying and threatened to “[harm herself]”. ms y telephoned the father and heard him attempting to calm the mother. (c) the mother was “obsessed” with marriage, and she was angry and upset that the father had not asked her to marry him.   in 2017, when she was 7 months pregnant with x, the mother telephoned and was hysterical, screaming and crying and threatened to “[harm herself]”. ms y telephoned the father and heard him attempting to calm the mother. (c) the mother was “obsessed” with marriage, and she was angry and upset that the father had not asked her to marry him.   the mother was “obsessed” with marriage, and she was angry and upset that the father had not asked her to marry him.
mr aa
the mother
“...every single day how you’ve been over the last 7 days ...hostile... constantly dictating and riding the boys about shit every minute of the day. everything that comes out of your mouth is complaint, rules, what we haven’t done or have to do or just your own idea of humour...it’s a relief when you go...nothing we do is or will ever be clean enough nor will your ever understand or be reasonable about general day to day stuff...it’s always your rules and they are unliveable. things just aren’t fun with you, you have no energy or zest for life and happy childhoods, you treat us like you don’t want us here anymore...”
alleged abuse of mr k and l.
“...on one occasion when the father was naked, he pinned [l]’s arms down on the ground and rubbed his penis in [l]’s face. she said that [mr k] punched the father to get him off [l]. the mother alleged that the father would taunt the boys and threatened to “[perform a lewd act on]” them and take photos of them while they slept.”[65]
“[mr hagarty] would walk to the bedroom from the shower naked and if [l] was lying on the loungeroom floor watching tv, [mr hagarty] would sit on [l]’s face and rub his penis and testicles in [l]’s face. this occurred over a 4 year period. as far as i am aware [mr hagarty] never did this to [mr k] as [mr k] is a bigger build to [l] and would have been able to fight [mr hagarty] off...in terms of those assaults i witnessed personally, i have estimated these to be approximately 10 in number.”[66]
the mother’s allegation of “grooming” m.
“with mom concerned about her mental health recent disclosure about sexual verbal abuse by the step dad mom separated from him a few m ago and left qld child is stable now mom wants assessment and reporting that actions: letter printed. letter written re. mental health plan, letter to [oo centre] printed. letter written to [oo centre] re. specialist referral... letter written re. atsi health assessment, child”
“[ms valenza], as i am sure you can appreciate there are a large number of people requesting our service. we are happy to continue services for [m], however our attendance policy must be adhered to. this was outline in the agreement to counselling form you signed on [m]’s first appointment. alternatively, if you wish, we can send her referral back to her gp for further consideration for other options to counselling services. should we not hear from you...we will assume [m] no longer requires our assistance.”
“[mr hagarty] says he wants me to sit on his couch but i want to sit with [m] ...he wants me to watch a tv show that i don’t like...sit with him...sometimes...rubs my shorts i don’t like it...” the notes also record “shorts, points to leg.”
“[x]’s grandfather is reported to have sexually abused a young female relative. as there are not further identifying details a report has not been completed for ...[75]. however it should be confirmed whether [x] has contact with her grandfather.”
father’s alleged abuse of alcohol during the relationship.
“...on average 4 to 8 drinks per night [...]. [mr hagarty] would drink between half a bottle to a full bottle of [alcohol] per night when he was home.”[76]   early 2016 when mr k told the mother that the father “had strangled him”[81], (ii) mid-2016 when the father allegedly tried to strangle the mother.[82] (iii) mid-2016 after the father had been drinking and he became abusive. (iv) an incident in late 2017 when the mother alleges that m reported that she’d seen the father pick l up and hold him over the balcony and threaten to drop him.[83]  ) mid-2016 when the father allegedly tried to strangle the mother.[82] (iii) mid-2016 after the father had been drinking and he became abusive. (iv) an incident in late 2017 when the mother alleges that m reported that she’d seen the father pick l up and hold him over the balcony and threaten to drop him.[83]  i) mid-2016 after the father had been drinking and he became abusive. (iv) an incident in late 2017 when the mother alleges that m reported that she’d seen the father pick l up and hold him over the balcony and threaten to drop him.[83]  ) an incident in late 2017 when the mother alleges that m reported that she’d seen the father pick l up and hold him over the balcony and threaten to drop him.[83]
“i’m sorry! i feel terrible! maybe getting drunk to become a nicer person to doesn’t work...i was too drunk last night...some of it is very hazey!”.
the mother writes:
“i have never seen you like that. you even pushed me. i did nothing wrong.”
mother’s mental health issues and difficulties with mr k and l   the mother’s history of adverse childhood experiences.[92] (ii) the mother’s difficulties in her relationships with her family of origin, and in her co-parenting relationship with mr g, with whom she engaged in protracted family law litigation. (iii) mr k and l were exposed to family violence during the relationship between their parents. in 2009 police attended due to a disturbance between the mother and mr g while mr k and l were present.[93] the mother and mr g were arguing about a property settlement, and both became frustrated. the mother is reported to have said “why don’t we just smash the place” and mr g replied, “well here let me help you then” and he kicked a computer desk near where the mother was sitting. the computer desk collapsed, and the mother screamed at him. (iv) mr k and l were subjected to neglect in mr g’s care, due to his drug dependency and unstable living arrangements. (v) the inconsistency in mr g’s children’s relationships with their father pre-dates the mother’s relationship with the father in this case. [94] in late 2018, well after the parents had separated, l and mr k spent time with mr g however m did not. the mother did not explain why m did not spend time with her father on that occasion.[95] (vi) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  ) the mother’s difficulties in her relationships with her family of origin, and in her co-parenting relationship with mr g, with whom she engaged in protracted family law litigation. (iii) mr k and l were exposed to family violence during the relationship between their parents. in 2009 police attended due to a disturbance between the mother and mr g while mr k and l were present.[93] the mother and mr g were arguing about a property settlement, and both became frustrated. the mother is reported to have said “why don’t we just smash the place” and mr g replied, “well here let me help you then” and he kicked a computer desk near where the mother was sitting. the computer desk collapsed, and the mother screamed at him. (iv) mr k and l were subjected to neglect in mr g’s care, due to his drug dependency and unstable living arrangements. (v) the inconsistency in mr g’s children’s relationships with their father pre-dates the mother’s relationship with the father in this case. [94] in late 2018, well after the parents had separated, l and mr k spent time with mr g however m did not. the mother did not explain why m did not spend time with her father on that occasion.[95] (vi) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  i) mr k and l were exposed to family violence during the relationship between their parents. in 2009 police attended due to a disturbance between the mother and mr g while mr k and l were present.[93] the mother and mr g were arguing about a property settlement, and both became frustrated. the mother is reported to have said “why don’t we just smash the place” and mr g replied, “well here let me help you then” and he kicked a computer desk near where the mother was sitting. the computer desk collapsed, and the mother screamed at him. (iv) mr k and l were subjected to neglect in mr g’s care, due to his drug dependency and unstable living arrangements. (v) the inconsistency in mr g’s children’s relationships with their father pre-dates the mother’s relationship with the father in this case. [94] in late 2018, well after the parents had separated, l and mr k spent time with mr g however m did not. the mother did not explain why m did not spend time with her father on that occasion.[95] (vi) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  ) mr k and l were subjected to neglect in mr g’s care, due to his drug dependency and unstable living arrangements. (v) the inconsistency in mr g’s children’s relationships with their father pre-dates the mother’s relationship with the father in this case. [94] in late 2018, well after the parents had separated, l and mr k spent time with mr g however m did not. the mother did not explain why m did not spend time with her father on that occasion.[95] (vi) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:   the inconsistency in mr g’s children’s relationships with their father pre-dates the mother’s relationship with the father in this case. [94] in late 2018, well after the parents had separated, l and mr k spent time with mr g however m did not. the mother did not explain why m did not spend time with her father on that occasion.[95] (vi) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  ) the mother insisted, during cross examination by learned counsel for the father, that mr k was not exposed to the fight which occurred at the temporary accommodation where the family was living, before they moved in with the father, but her denial is inconsistent with mr k’s evidence, given under cross examination, that he recalled hearing the fight at the accommodation and he was scared. (vii) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  i) the children have lived at multiple different addresses, across three australian states, including in temporary accommodation. l and mr k have changed schools frequently. m has changed school at least once. (viii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:  ii) sometime during the period between 2018 and 2020, when mr k was living with the mother in city h, there was a home invasion. mr k deposes:
“i was in the house at the time and became very scared. i had a lot of anxiety problems after that.”[96]  in 2015 there is a record of contact produced by af school[97] that a staff member was attempting to enter his or her vehicle to leave the school on a friday when a vehicle pulled up
“...trapping me between it and my own vehicle. the window was wound down and i was shouted at...i felt extremely unsafe.” “is [l] in trouble?” was again shouted and i made the connection on what was happening. we discussed [l] not completing homework on a regular basis...excuses were made and i countered them...[ms valenza] then stated that [l] and his siblings are busy designing, planning and implementing programs (assuming sporting) in [town ag] at the weekends and are too busy to do homework...” ) in 2018 ms pp reported that the mother
“became abusive and told me i had a terrible communication manner...again became abusive...started to have a go at me...hung up on me.”[98] (sic) i) in mid-2020 there was a report to qq company about the mother’s conduct while she was working as an allied health worker. it was alleged that the mother’s relationship with the father of a client currently under assessment had become inappropriate and it was noted that “the allegation that [ms valenza] is having sex with the father is escalated to management.”[99]
mother’s demeanour as a witness
mr k   the father assaulted mr k sometime in mid-2012, after mr k spat on one of the mr kk’s sons. the father chased mr k, who says he felt scared and threatened and ran away. the father caught mr k, picked him up and threw him with some force onto the ground. the father screamed in mr k’s face the whole time. mr k said that this was the first time he can recall the father being angry. (ii) the father drank a lot. he drank “spirits”, and when drunk the father would be angry in a flash. (iii) the father called mr k names including “bitch”, “girl”, “fag”, “faggot”, “lazy”, and “slob”. the father denigrated mr k, telling him that he’d grow up to be a dropkick, a crack user, and would never amount to anything. (iv) the father told mr k that his father is a paedophile, a deadbeat, and a drug‑addicted hippie. (v) on one occasion when mr k called the father a paedophile, the father shoved mr k to the ground and swore at him. (vi) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father drank a lot. he drank “spirits”, and when drunk the father would be angry in a flash. (iii) the father called mr k names including “bitch”, “girl”, “fag”, “faggot”, “lazy”, and “slob”. the father denigrated mr k, telling him that he’d grow up to be a dropkick, a crack user, and would never amount to anything. (iv) the father told mr k that his father is a paedophile, a deadbeat, and a drug‑addicted hippie. (v) on one occasion when mr k called the father a paedophile, the father shoved mr k to the ground and swore at him. (vi) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  i) the father called mr k names including “bitch”, “girl”, “fag”, “faggot”, “lazy”, and “slob”. the father denigrated mr k, telling him that he’d grow up to be a dropkick, a crack user, and would never amount to anything. (iv) the father told mr k that his father is a paedophile, a deadbeat, and a drug‑addicted hippie. (v) on one occasion when mr k called the father a paedophile, the father shoved mr k to the ground and swore at him. (vi) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father told mr k that his father is a paedophile, a deadbeat, and a drug‑addicted hippie. (v) on one occasion when mr k called the father a paedophile, the father shoved mr k to the ground and swore at him. (vi) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.   on one occasion when mr k called the father a paedophile, the father shoved mr k to the ground and swore at him. (vi) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) when the father found out that the family were of aboriginal descent, he demonstrated his racist attitudes by referring to the family as “coons”. (vii) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  i) the father was cruel to animals and wildlife. mr k alleged that the father was horrible to the family dog, frequently locking her in a small cage. mr k also says that on one occasion he saw the father bludgeon a possum to death. (viii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ii) in front of mr k’s school friend, the father talked about “a sex act”, and having sex in the bathroom at school. on one occasion the father handed mr k a phone and told him to read what was on the screen, which was open on website called “the urban dictionary” about a sex act. (ix) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father would walk from the bathroom to his bedroom naked. (x) the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.   the father had a lot of surveillance cameras on the property which were aimed at the house. (xi) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father insisted that mr k and l shower together to save water, and watched the children in the shower every day when he was at home and made a big deal about them washing their private parts. he insisted that mr k and l to pull back their foreskins but had stopped doing this by the time mr k went to high school. (xii) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  i) the father would never allow the boys to take their towels from the bathroom and forced them to walk to their rooms naked via the lounge room. the father made that rule because there were never any clean towels when he got back from work. (xiii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ii) the father would pin mr k and l down and sit on them a lot when they were younger. the father would sometimes assault mr k and l by pinning them down against their will and “[assaulting]” them with his genitals, particularly l. he would often pin l down and “[perform a lewd act on]” him. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences charged against the father in queensland in mid-2019. (xiv) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  v) on one occasion, which mr k thinks was during the christmas break in 2016, the father was drunk and mr k asked if they could watch something other than sports on tv. mr k and the father argued, and mr k went to his bedroom and was lying on the top bunk playing his playstation. the father entered mr k’s bedroom and ripped the cords out of the playstation and threw them on the ground. the father climbed up to the top bunk where mr k was sitting and put his hands around mr k’s neck and tried to strangle him. mr k kicked and tried to scream to get the father off him and says that it was hard to scream while he was being strangled. it is this allegation which was the subject of offences with which the father was charged in queensland in mid-2019, (xv) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father would get angry when he caught mr k reading books, (xvi) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  i) on one occasion mr k was forced to defecate on a dirt pile next to a field and behind the shed, after he was locked out of the house. the father got mr k’s scooter and put poo in the wheels to teach mr k a lesson. (xvii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ii) the father would make m give him a “tongue” kiss before providing her with something she wanted. mr k never saw whether the father kissed m or not. on multiple occasions the father would tell m that she had to sit on his lap on his couch, and he would always have his hands in her shirt and on her body. (xviii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  iii) the father pushed the bike over on top of l. (xix) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  x) on one occasion the father picked l up and had l’s head and neck hanging over the balcony rail and threatened to drop him on the ground below. (xx) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.  ) the father force fed mr k fat from steak on two occasions.
alleged “strangling” incident.
“[tt]: alright. so [mr k] can you tell me what you’ve come here to talk about today? [mr k]: erm, i think it’s about mum’s partner, in queensland. [tt]: and what is it about mum’s partner in queensland? [mr k]: oh, just how he treated us. [tt]: and what do you mean by how he treated us? [mr k]: erm, well that the baby out there, oh wait no, she’s not out there, she is at daycare. he is trying to get part-time custody of her. and mum doesn’t want that because of how he treated us. so yeah we need to talk to you guys and try to stop that from happening.”
“[in] summer because it was [sports]... i’m not too sure...i was in year 7 so 2017”.
“he put both his hands around my neck ....just started squeezing i could barely breath so i couldn’t scream out to mum or anything mum was asleep [l] was in the loungeroom with [mr hagarty] so [l] came in a few seconds after [mr hagarty] [l] saw what [mr hagarty] was doing, [l] tried kick him off me i was squirming around he stopped after about 30 seconds [l] punched him in the ribs a few times but he didn’t do anything really he stopped and he just walked out really like nothing happened.”   mr k’s first account has the mother coming into the room immediately after the incident, and when asked by jirt how it stopped, mr k reports that he “whacked him...he let go & jumped back. mum in... holding nose said i hit him for no reason mum didn’t believe.” there is no mention of l being in the room or of l doing anything. (b) in the mother’s account she does not observe an injury to mr k or the father. (c) in mr k’s second account he has the mother asleep, and he does not say that she was in the room. he has l trying to kick the father off him and says that l punched the father in the ribs a few times. this is a strikingly different account to mr k’s first account to police and is different to the mother’s account. (d) the two separate accounts of the incident which mr k provided to police differ from the evidence he provided in his affidavit[109] in which mr k relevantly says that “i kicked and tried to scream to get him off me...i am not sure if [l] was there or not...mum wasn’t there. i’m not sure where she was.” the mother was not there, and mr k is not sure whether l was there.   in the mother’s account she does not observe an injury to mr k or the father. (c) in mr k’s second account he has the mother asleep, and he does not say that she was in the room. he has l trying to kick the father off him and says that l punched the father in the ribs a few times. this is a strikingly different account to mr k’s first account to police and is different to the mother’s account. (d) the two separate accounts of the incident which mr k provided to police differ from the evidence he provided in his affidavit[109] in which mr k relevantly says that “i kicked and tried to scream to get him off me...i am not sure if [l] was there or not...mum wasn’t there. i’m not sure where she was.” the mother was not there, and mr k is not sure whether l was there.   in mr k’s second account he has the mother asleep, and he does not say that she was in the room. he has l trying to kick the father off him and says that l punched the father in the ribs a few times. this is a strikingly different account to mr k’s first account to police and is different to the mother’s account. (d) the two separate accounts of the incident which mr k provided to police differ from the evidence he provided in his affidavit[109] in which mr k relevantly says that “i kicked and tried to scream to get him off me...i am not sure if [l] was there or not...mum wasn’t there. i’m not sure where she was.” the mother was not there, and mr k is not sure whether l was there.   the two separate accounts of the incident which mr k provided to police differ from the evidence he provided in his affidavit[109] in which mr k relevantly says that “i kicked and tried to scream to get him off me...i am not sure if [l] was there or not...mum wasn’t there. i’m not sure where she was.” the mother was not there, and mr k is not sure whether l was there.
alleged indecent treatment of l- “[a lewd act]”.
“here to talk about mum’s partner. very inappropriate with us...swore a lot...called me lots of names, vagina, bitch...he is very threatening...once threatened to throw me over the balcony...used to make us walk through lounge naked after shower...pin us doing [a lewd act]...once i asked could you help me put bike on stand. he was trying to do his way. i couldn’t do that. he pushed it over top of me. really hurt, he was dancing around shed.”   the mother’s initial account of the alleged abuse of l is that it occurred on “one occasion”. her current account is that she observed the behaviour on “estimated...approximately 10...” occasions. (ii) l told jirt that the father was naked when the alleged incidents occurred, whereas mr k told the police that the father always wore boxers. (iii) l told police the alleged incidents occurred every night, and later said that the incidents occurred once per week for 4 years. (iv) mr k’s account to nsw police is that the alleged lewd acts happened to l “on a few occasions” and he did not mention that the father had done the same to him. in his account to qld police, in relation to the father sexually assaulting l, mr k said “it happened a lot actually” and when asked specifically about when the father sexually assaulted him he said “he did it once or twice”  ) l told jirt that the father was naked when the alleged incidents occurred, whereas mr k told the police that the father always wore boxers. (iii) l told police the alleged incidents occurred every night, and later said that the incidents occurred once per week for 4 years. (iv) mr k’s account to nsw police is that the alleged lewd acts happened to l “on a few occasions” and he did not mention that the father had done the same to him. in his account to qld police, in relation to the father sexually assaulting l, mr k said “it happened a lot actually” and when asked specifically about when the father sexually assaulted him he said “he did it once or twice”  i) l told police the alleged incidents occurred every night, and later said that the incidents occurred once per week for 4 years. (iv) mr k’s account to nsw police is that the alleged lewd acts happened to l “on a few occasions” and he did not mention that the father had done the same to him. in his account to qld police, in relation to the father sexually assaulting l, mr k said “it happened a lot actually” and when asked specifically about when the father sexually assaulted him he said “he did it once or twice”  ) mr k’s account to nsw police is that the alleged lewd acts happened to l “on a few occasions” and he did not mention that the father had done the same to him. in his account to qld police, in relation to the father sexually assaulting l, mr k said “it happened a lot actually” and when asked specifically about when the father sexually assaulted him he said “he did it once or twice”
“he had pants on so he didn’t rub his testicles on my face” “he didn’t pin me down either, i was just laying down watch tv” “he just ran in like he was pulling a prank on someone” “he ran in and just squatted down on my face” “he was wearing shorts”   in mr k’s affidavit he says that the father walked from the shower to his room with no clothes on and no towel and he would sometimes assault “us” by pinning down and performing a lewd act. at other times he would assault l while wearing boxer shorts and singlet.
“he used to get a lot of his ideas from [a tv show][114], he used to watch a lot of that show.”
mr k’s view of father as paedophile
ms ee
mr ff
ms cc
mr gg
expert evidence
family consultant ms j (“the family consultant” or “ms j”)
“that each parent described feeling fearful that the other parent has the capacity to kill them, the children, and/or themselves.”[126]
“if the court finds that the father has perpetrated abuse and that there is an unacceptable risk of harm to [x]... then the mother’s proposal will protect [x]. the loss of the relationship in this case would have less adverse impacts on [x], than the deleterious impacts of abuse on a child. however, if the court finds that the father has not perpetrated abuse and does not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to [x] then the mother’s proposal is not consistent with [x]’s best interests.”[133] “if the court finds that the mother is actively and unreasonably obstructing [x]’s relationship with the father, including inciting the older children to fabricate or embellish allegations against him, then there may be concerns for [x]’s future wellbeing in the mother’s primary care. concerns identified in this matter about the mother’s capacity for empathy for the children, and her ability to prioritise the children’s needs and experiences over her own, raises concerns in this regard, as do the allegations that the mother may have obstructed her older children’s relationships with [mr g] in the past. nevertheless, if the court finds that the father has been abusive to the mother and/or the children, then the mother’s opposition to [x] having a relationship with him, may be considered reasonable and protective.”[134]
the father described his relationships with [mr k] and [l] in reasonably positive terms throughout the interview. however, he demonstrated inconsistent degrees of insight and empathy for the children’s experiences. for example, he had difficulty appreciating, and accepting responsibility for, the impact on the children of his presence in the home (when he was not at work) and the authoritarian approach they would have to adjust to. with regards to his sentiments for the children post-separation, at times he would express empathy and concern for the children having been (in his opinion) coerced into making allegations against him, while at other times he spoke derogatorily about them, describing the children as “co-conspirators”.
single expert forensic and clinical psychologist dr f (“the single expert”)
“[x] would need to leave her mother, stepfather, maternal siblings and extended maternal family and friends. she has just started school this year and has established new friendships. to be removed from this situation would have a significant emotional impact on her and her maternal family members. however, remaining in her current living situation provides limited opportunity for her to restore a meaningful relationship with her biological father and extended paternal family”.
“[mr hagarty’s] test results reflected that his response style was valid, and did not detect any symptom profiles consistent with personality disorder, mental illness, or addiction problems. there were mild indications of situational depression, but not reaching the threshold for a mental health diagnosis. [mr hagarty] advised during interview that he takes [anti-depressants] as a treatment for [a medical condition] which pre-dated his relationship with [ms valenza]. the medication is prescribed by his gp.”[144] “[ms valenza’s] test results reflected that her response style was significantly elevated for positive impression management. this profile is interpreted as a highly defensive (guarded) profile, with a reluctance to endorse items that may indicate any mental health difficulties. the significant positive impression distortion renders the clinical profile invalid (i.e., unlikely to be a true reflection).”[145] “[ms valenza] provided written authority for me to contact her counsellor at [ae centre], and i received a letter verifying that [ms valenza] had “attended [ae centre] for support with management of ongoing stress created through court proceedings and associated financial pressures. in addition, [ms valenza] has proactively sought positive parenting strategies to support the emotional wellbeing of her children.” [ae centre] verified that [ms valenza] commenced individual counselling with the service [in late] 2021, and has attended [20] consultations since that time. the letter noted that “[ae centre] does not conduct mental health diagnoses and [ms valenza] has reported she has no prior mental health diagnosis.” it is noted that [ms valenza] has previously received advice that she is suffering from mental health symptoms variously described as anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress.”[146]
“in terms of [mr hagarty’s] risk profile, it has been recommended to him in past investigations to moderate his alcohol use, and to learn to adopt less punitive parenting strategies in response to challenging behaviours. [mr hagarty] advised that he no longer consumes alcohol to excess. he reflected during interview that he was “not perfect” as a parent to the four children when residing with [ms valenza], but acknowledged that it was difficult as a [tradesperson] to return to the home and deal with challenging behaviours, with no prior parenting experience.”[148]
“there are foreseeable risks in both pathways for [x] put before the court in the opposing proposals of the parties. she will require extensive support networks to protect her from the potential risks posed by either pathway. she is a bright and active child who has the potential to thrive in a stable environment.”[149]
primary considerations
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents.
“[x]’s relationship with her biological father...is fading with distance and minimal contact...”[155]
and
“...remaining in her current living situation provides limited opportunity for her to restore a meaningful relationship with her biological father and extended paternal family.”[156]
“the impact of the mother’s proposal for [x] to spend no time with the father or paternal family is likely to be experienced as a minimal short-term loss given the limited nature of time [x] currently spends with the father. however, there are long-term implications on a child when they lose a parent. the degree of impact on a child will depend on the quality of the child’s other supports, and will vary across different stages of their lifespan. a child’s social and emotional development, specifically their sense of self-worth, their mental health, and the healthy formation of their own relationships, are specific aspects of a child’s life which may be impacted by such a loss.”
“...as [children]... grow into adults, their identity, certainly as a child, is generally informed through their parental relationships. so to lose a parental relationship is a significant loss for a child, and the impact of that varies, depending on the developmental stage...as they get older-say, in middle childhood-they start to identify that, “i’m a product of two people”, and they start to get interested in their characteristics, and what that means. in adolescence, identity becomes particularly important, “who am i” and how their sense of wellbeing is intrinsically connected to their relatedness with each parent, and then, into adulthood, and becoming parents, what we know is that that identity, and that connection to our parents-our biological parents – is very significant in the way that we identify our sense of self-worth. so it’s significant across the whole lifespan, it just has different types of impacts, depending on a child’s developmental stage.”
the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect, or family violence.  that the father might sexually abuse x, and (ii) that the father might subject x to excessive discipline.  ) that the father might subject x to excessive discipline.
relevant additional considerations
“despite making some minor concessions about the negative impact on the children of the way he spoke at times in the household, the father generally maintained the view that there was not anything inappropriate about his parenting.”[169]
“the emotional difficulty that the child would undoubtedly experience if she changes residence and moves from the primary care of the mother in tasmania, and is separated from her siblings and all of the maternal family, and goes into the care of her father thousands of kilometres away, into a household where she is an only child, is a factor which weighs heavily in favour of the child remaining in the care of the mother.”   notwithstanding the considerable challenges involved in spending time with the child since separation in 2018, including the significant distances involved in travel, and while dealing with the police investigation and the criminal charges, not only has the father persevered, but he has committed significant resources to provide opportunities for the child to spend time with him, and he has been consistent in his efforts to spend time with the child. (b) the father has paid an appropriate amount of child support for the child. (c) the father has demonstrated that he is prepared to prioritise the child’s needs above his own, including on 18 august 2022 during the observation conducted by the single expert, when he agreed to end the visit early at x’s request, despite the considerable distance he had travelled to participate in the assessment and his desire to spend more time with x.[173]   the father has paid an appropriate amount of child support for the child. (c) the father has demonstrated that he is prepared to prioritise the child’s needs above his own, including on 18 august 2022 during the observation conducted by the single expert, when he agreed to end the visit early at x’s request, despite the considerable distance he had travelled to participate in the assessment and his desire to spend more time with x.[173]   the father has demonstrated that he is prepared to prioritise the child’s needs above his own, including on 18 august 2022 during the observation conducted by the single expert, when he agreed to end the visit early at x’s request, despite the considerable distance he had travelled to participate in the assessment and his desire to spend more time with x.[173]   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person's family (the family member ), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's family towards another member of the child's family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who has been assaulted by another member of the child's family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child's family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child's family by another member of the child's family.
“... aspects of control and coercion are features of coercive control, but they don’t exist in isolation to other features, which this matter had. while there are allegations of coercive control, there are counter-allegations of the facts. so just the presence of an allegation of control doesn’t equate to a definition of “coercive control.”
parental responsibility
conclusion
live with arrangements for the child  an order that provides for x to spend regular time with the father, and (ii) an order that the mother is restrained by injunction from denigrating the father to or in the presence of the child, and which requires her to remove the child from the presence of any other person who denigrates the father.  ) an order that the mother is restrained by injunction from denigrating the father to or in the presence of the child, and which requires her to remove the child from the presence of any other person who denigrates the father.
spend time with arrangements for the child.
allocation of parental responsibility for the child
associate: dated: 21 december 2023
dated: 21 december 2023
[1] exhibit k[2] the mother has maintained that the parents separated in january 2018.[3] family report paragraph 10[4] affidavit of ms y filed 29 january 2021 paragraphs 11 and 17[5] exhibit x[6] father’s affidavit paragraph 103 and annexure h9[7] family report paragraph 169[8] exhibit w contains the dvds of the qld police interviews with mr k and l[9] exhibit q[10] ms cc provided an affidavit in support of the mother’s case and was not required for cross-examination.[11] hagarty & valenza [2022] fedcfamc2f 95[12] ..., the parenting proceedings between the mother and mr g concerning the maternal half siblings which commenced in 2012.[13] exhibit z[14] the father proposes that he notify the mother of any long-term decisions he must make for the child and seek and consider the mother’s views before notifying her of the decision he has taken[15] exhibit y[16] exhibit z[17] section 60ca [18] section 60cc(2)[19] section 60cc(2a)[20] section 60cg(1)(b)[21] section 60cc (3) [22] see subsection 65daa of the act[23] father’s affidavit paragraph 114[24] family report paragraph 73[25] father’s affidavit paragraph 14[26] ibid paragraph 44[27] ibid paragraph 15[28] ibid paragraph 32[29] ibid paragraph 34[30] ibid paragraph 35[31] father’s affidavit paragraph 91[32] father’s affidavit paragraph 42[33] family report paragraph 70[34] ibid paragraph 44[35] family report paragraph 74[36] exhibit f[37] the reports include l being non-compliant with teacher instruction, acting in a bullying behaviour towards staff and students, and screaming loudly, mimicking the bell.[38] exhibit g[39] father’s affidavit paragraph 115[40] ibid paragraph 12.[41] ibid paragraph 13[42] exhibit a[43] mr k gave evidence under cross examination that by the time he started high school in 2015, the father had stopped making the boys wash themselves.[44] father’s affidavit paragraph 104[45] ibid paragraph 162[46] father’s affidavit paragraphs 59-62[47] ibid paragraph 117[48] family report paragraph 174[49] ibid paragraph 123[50] father’s affidavit paragraph 128, 129[51] ibid paragraph 147, 148[52] it appears that there may have been one occasion when the paternal grandparents attended a supervised visit for x with the father in city h, with the mother’s permission.[53] family report at paragraph 61[54] mother’s affidavit paragraph 84[55] affidavit of mr aa paragraph 25[56] family report paragraph 55[57] mother’s affidavit paragraph 84[58] mother’s affidavit annexure v01 [59] father’s affidavit annexure h14[60] father’s affidavit annexure h3[61] mother’s affidavit paragraph 12[62] family report paragraph 56[63] family report paragraph 56[64] mother’s affidavit annexure v01[65] ibid paragraph 150[66] ibid paragraph 109, 111[67] single expert report [18][68] family report paragraph 131[69] exhibit x[70] exhibits o, p[71] exhibit d [72] exhibit o[73] exhibit p oo centre[74] exhibit r[75] the name has been redacted in these reasons to preserve privacy and confidentiality.[76] mother’s affidavit paragraph 150[77] ibid paragraph 153[78] ibid paragraph 154[79] ibid paragraph 155[80] ibid paragraph 157[81] ibid paragraph 34-35, 39[82] ibid paragraph 40[83] ibid paragraphs 42, 43[84] ibid paragraphs 33-36[85] mother’s affidavit paragraph 40 -41[86] mother’s affidavit paragraph 159[87] mother’s affidavit at annexure v01[88] exhibit x[89] family report paragraph 180[90] ibid paragraph 181[91] single expert report [14][92] family report paragraph 46, 47 [93] exhibit c[94] family report paragraph 52[95] ibid paragraph 53[96] affidavit of mr k paragraph 127[97] exhibit h[98] exhibit l[99] exhibit m: rr authority helpline assessment record [100]family report paragraph 45[101] single expert report [53][102] it appears that the mother told mr k that l had to go to hospital because of something the father had done, whereas the records show that l was suffering from an infection.[103] family report paragraph 174[104] exhibit s[105] affidavit of mr k paragraph 127[106] affidavit of mr k paragraph 142[107] exhibit x[108] exhibit w[109] affidavit of mr k paragraphs 104, 106, 107[110] ibid paragraph 108[111] affidavit of mr k paragraphs 88,89[112] ibid paragraph 108[113] family report paragraph 166[114] although not explored in the evidence, i take judicial notice of the fact that [...] is [a] tv series which depicts the bizarre misadventures [of] characters who live in ‘[...]. it is generally intended for adult audiences, due to profane and coarse language and content. the show uses satire and scatological humour.[115] exhibit u[116] exhibit t[117] family consultant ms j and single expert dr f[118] family report paragraph 79[119] this was a change from the father’s proposal that x live with the mother [120] family report paragraph 36[121] this was a change from the mother’s proposal that x spend no time with the father until a family report is completed.[122] family report paragraph 34[123] ibid paragraph 35 [124] ibid 37.[125] ibid paragraph 38[126] ibid paragraph 44[127] ibid [46].[128] family report paragraphs 47 and 50[129] the single expert dr f considered that “the lack of availability of [mr g]’s family report is a significant issue, as it is a key document in analysing the allegations of the parties, and past patterns of behaviour”: single expert report at paragraph 61. over objection by the mother, an order was made by the court on 1 february 2022, granting leave to the parties to inspect the family report prepared in mr g’s family law proceedings, however the relevant report appears to have been lost in transit, and the information in mr g’s family report has not been available to the court in the current proceedings.[130] ibid paragraph 224[131] ibid paragraph 189, 212[132] family report paragraph 225[133] family report paragraph 226[134] ibid paragraph 227[135] family report paragraph 231[136] family report paragraph 76[137] single expert report [14].[138] single expert report [16].[139] single expert report [25][140] single expert report [17].[141] single expert report [18].[142]single expert report [28][143] single expert report [24].[144] single expert report [55][145] single expert report [56][146] single expert report [57][147] single expert report [12][148] single expert report [64][149] single expert report [65][150] family report paragraph 210 – 211[151] single expert report [20][152] single expert report [20][153] ibid paragraph 21[154] ibid paragraph 20[155] ibid paragraph 25[156] ibid paragraph 28[157] family report paragraph 225[158] the relevant standard of proof is set out in s.140 evidence act 1995 (cth); briginshaw and briginshaw (1938)[159] family report paragraph 62[160] single expert report [31][161] single expert report [16][162] single expert report [22][163] family report paragraphs 222 – 225[164] ibid paragraph 224[165] family report paragraph 61[166] mother’s affidavit annexure v 11[167] single expert report [31][168] family report paragraph 168[169] family report paragraph 168[170] mother’s affidavit annexure v12[171] family report paragraph 48[172] family report paragraph 48[173] single expert report [31][174] exhibit r[175] single expert report [19][176] single expert report [65]