last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
otmar & mack [2024] fedcfamc2f 37
orders
the court orders that:
parenting  inform the mother, ms otmar (‘mother”), of all details of the decision he proposes, in a timely manner by text message or email, and (b) in the event the mother responds in a timely manner, consider her response, and, (c) inform the mother in a timely manner, by text or email, of the decision.   in the event the mother responds in a timely manner, consider her response, and, (c) inform the mother in a timely manner, by text or email, of the decision.   inform the mother in a timely manner, by text or email, of the decision.
final property alteration orders
former matrimonial home   first, to pay all the costs and commissions and expenses of the sale, including legal fees and conveyancing fees, (b) second, to discharge the mortgage secured against the fmh and any other encumbrance affecting the fmh, and (c) third, the fees of ms m, for appearing at the final hearing be paid, and in the event either party has already paid those fees or part thereof, that party be reimbursed such proportion, either 58% or 42% as the case maybe, to the same effect as if those fees were being paid from the proceeds of sale. (d) fourth, the balance to be split as follows: (i) 42 % to the mother, and (ii) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and   second, to discharge the mortgage secured against the fmh and any other encumbrance affecting the fmh, and (c) third, the fees of ms m, for appearing at the final hearing be paid, and in the event either party has already paid those fees or part thereof, that party be reimbursed such proportion, either 58% or 42% as the case maybe, to the same effect as if those fees were being paid from the proceeds of sale. (d) fourth, the balance to be split as follows: (i) 42 % to the mother, and (ii) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and   third, the fees of ms m, for appearing at the final hearing be paid, and in the event either party has already paid those fees or part thereof, that party be reimbursed such proportion, either 58% or 42% as the case maybe, to the same effect as if those fees were being paid from the proceeds of sale. (d) fourth, the balance to be split as follows: (i) 42 % to the mother, and (ii) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and   fourth, the balance to be split as follows: (i) 42 % to the mother, and (ii) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and   42 % to the mother, and (ii) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and  ) 58 % to the father, and (iii) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and  i) on account of motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 to be retained by the mother, from the mother’s 42% there be paid to the father the sum of $8,700 (58% of the motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2 valued together at $15,000), and   within 14 days the parties jointly appoint an independent conveyancer or solicitor to act as the conveyancer, and (b) within 14 days the parties jointly appoint a real estate agent (‘the agent’) and failing agreement as to the agent the parties or either of them request the president of real estate institute of victoria (“reiv”), or his nominee, to nominate a suitable agent for the purpose of the sale of the former matrimonial home, (c) the reserve price be set at $920,000 unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing,   within 14 days the parties jointly appoint a real estate agent (‘the agent’) and failing agreement as to the agent the parties or either of them request the president of real estate institute of victoria (“reiv”), or his nominee, to nominate a suitable agent for the purpose of the sale of the former matrimonial home, (c) the reserve price be set at $920,000 unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing,   the reserve price be set at $920,000 unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing,   the father have the sole right to occupy the frp and during such right of occupation the respondent shall be liable for and pay for all rates and taxes and like apportionable outgoings of the property as and when they fall due, (b) for the purpose of the sale the father take all steps necessary to maintain and present the frp at the standard advised by the agent in writing. (c) the parties hold their respective interests in the former matrimonial home upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the parties be and are hereby restrained from encumbering the former matrimonial home without consent in writing from the other party, and (e) the parties take all necessary steps to prevent the building permit issued in respect of the former matrimonial home from lapsing prior to the sale at their equal shared expense. (f) unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   for the purpose of the sale the father take all steps necessary to maintain and present the frp at the standard advised by the agent in writing. (c) the parties hold their respective interests in the former matrimonial home upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the parties be and are hereby restrained from encumbering the former matrimonial home without consent in writing from the other party, and (e) the parties take all necessary steps to prevent the building permit issued in respect of the former matrimonial home from lapsing prior to the sale at their equal shared expense. (f) unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   the parties hold their respective interests in the former matrimonial home upon trust pursuant to these orders, (d) the parties be and are hereby restrained from encumbering the former matrimonial home without consent in writing from the other party, and (e) the parties take all necessary steps to prevent the building permit issued in respect of the former matrimonial home from lapsing prior to the sale at their equal shared expense. (f) unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   the parties be and are hereby restrained from encumbering the former matrimonial home without consent in writing from the other party, and (e) the parties take all necessary steps to prevent the building permit issued in respect of the former matrimonial home from lapsing prior to the sale at their equal shared expense. (f) unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   the parties take all necessary steps to prevent the building permit issued in respect of the former matrimonial home from lapsing prior to the sale at their equal shared expense. (f) unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   unless advised to the contrary by the agent the remaining renovation items including the tapware, bath, toilets, vanity, shower should be neatly left in the frh for the purpose of enhancing the prospects of sale. (g) any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   any insurance fees arising out of the building permit issues to be shared in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.
timber flooring
e company fund
winding up the companies and the trust  the parties jointly retain a suitable accountant, and (b) the parties do all acts and things, and if required the amendment or rectification of accounts, to cause the debts of the parties or either of them to the companies and trust to be recorded and/or treated as due from them to the effect that, in the event of a surplus after such amendment or rectification and the winding up, then such surplus be divided between the parties in the proportions of 85% to the father and 42% to the mother, and to the effect that in the event of a deficiency after such amendment or rectification and the winding up, then the parties contribute to such deficiency in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   the parties do all acts and things, and if required the amendment or rectification of accounts, to cause the debts of the parties or either of them to the companies and trust to be recorded and/or treated as due from them to the effect that, in the event of a surplus after such amendment or rectification and the winding up, then such surplus be divided between the parties in the proportions of 85% to the father and 42% to the mother, and to the effect that in the event of a deficiency after such amendment or rectification and the winding up, then the parties contribute to such deficiency in the proportions of 58% by the father and 42% by the mother.   the motor vehicle 3, and (b) the motor vehicle 4, and (c) the motor vehicle 5,   the motor vehicle 4, and (c) the motor vehicle 5,   the motor vehicle 5,
and apply the entire proceeds towards the winding up with the mother to have the conduct of those sales but provided the father is informed of the proposed sale prices, sale conditions and identity of the purchaser before any sale.
superannuation splitting orders  pay to the applicant wife the base amount referred to in the preceding order, which is calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (b) make the corresponding reduction in entitlement which the respondent father would have had in the fund but for the provision of these orders. (c) these superannuation splitting orders have effect from the operative time and the operative time is seven days after service of a sealed copy of these orders on the trustee.   make the corresponding reduction in entitlement which the respondent father would have had in the fund but for the provision of these orders. (c) these superannuation splitting orders have effect from the operative time and the operative time is seven days after service of a sealed copy of these orders on the trustee.   these superannuation splitting orders have effect from the operative time and the operative time is seven days after service of a sealed copy of these orders on the trustee.   the establishment of a separate account in the name of the applicant mother in the fund, or (b) the transfer or "rolling over" into another superannuation fund of the payments created by these orders, (c) the applicant mother satisfying a condition of release of being paid the payment split which was created by these orders, or (d) the applicant mother executing a waiver of right within the meaning of section 90xza of the family law act 1975 in relation to payments created by these orders –   the transfer or "rolling over" into another superannuation fund of the payments created by these orders, (c) the applicant mother satisfying a condition of release of being paid the payment split which was created by these orders, or (d) the applicant mother executing a waiver of right within the meaning of section 90xza of the family law act 1975 in relation to payments created by these orders –   the applicant mother satisfying a condition of release of being paid the payment split which was created by these orders, or (d) the applicant mother executing a waiver of right within the meaning of section 90xza of the family law act 1975 in relation to payments created by these orders –   the applicant mother executing a waiver of right within the meaning of section 90xza of the family law act 1975 in relation to payments created by these orders –
the respondent father be and is hereby restrained by himself, his servants, or agents from executing a death benefit nomination in favour of any person or doing any act or thing which would render any part of his interest in the fund a "non-splittable payment" within the meaning of regulation 12 or 13 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 and the trustee of the fund shall give effect to these orders.
ancillary orders  motor vehicle 1 and motor vehicle 2, and the father execute any necessary document to facilitate the transfer of the registration of motor vehicle 2 to the mother at her expense, if any. (b) any funds standing to her credit in bank accounts in her personal name.   any funds standing to her credit in bank accounts in her personal name.   any funds standing to his credit in bank accounts in his personal name, (b) the membership number ... with f company (formerly known as e company fund), (c) the household items and furniture situated in the frh.   the membership number ... with f company (formerly known as e company fund), (c) the household items and furniture situated in the frh.   the household items and furniture situated in the frh.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property, including choses-in-action, in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders and the contents, household items and furniture situated in the frh are deemed to be in the possession of the father, (b) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) the parties shall do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents to close bank accounts in their joint names and any funds standing to the credit of the parties in those accounts shall be distributed to the parties equally, (d) each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (e) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) the parties shall do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents to close bank accounts in their joint names and any funds standing to the credit of the parties in those accounts shall be distributed to the parties equally, (d) each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (e) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   the parties shall do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents to close bank accounts in their joint names and any funds standing to the credit of the parties in those accounts shall be distributed to the parties equally, (d) each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (e) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other save as provided for in these orders, (e) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner as named, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the applicant mother and respondent father in any real or personal estate is expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
the proceedings
first interim orders
the section 11f report
that assessment is a "child inclusive conference" which is a meeting with a family consultant, the adults and the children involved in the matter and is ordered by the court. lawyers are not included. the conference is intended to give the court an understanding of the family situation, and particularly of the child/ren's experience. the conference can help the judicial officer hearing the case make short-term decisions about arrangements for the child/ren. it may also help the parties reach an agreement. a family consultant is an expert psychologist or social worker with a high level of training and experience in child development and parenting after separation and divorce. family consultants are employed directly and exclusively by the court in child dispute services which is located within the registry.  phasis added)
first interim parenting orders
matter set down for final hearing
the ill-fated contravention application holds things up
mother self represented and the long awaited final hearing adjourned
more interim orders and more family therapy
final intervention order against the father
final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
parenting: what questions must be answered?
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
family law act 1975 (cth) provisions
4ab definition of family violence etc.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.
... 60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by mr l and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by mr l and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of mr l and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of mr l and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 60cf informing court of relevant family violence orders   if a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that party must inform the court of the family violence order. (2) if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.
60cg court to consider risk of family violence   in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:   is consistent with any family violence order, and (b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order.
... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances equal time   subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.
substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant.
reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility (1) this section applies if, under a parenting order:   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.
some significant events
january 2021: the night of the injury
mother’s version of the incidents
father’s version of the incident
the icl’s version of the incident
more questions should have been asked and certainly it does appear that the party that was seeking some solace, in terms of a room, locked and away, was the one ultimately injured and taken away (by the police).
the transcript and the recording of the january incident
the first forced entry into bedroom
the second forced entry into the bedroom
mother: i’m sleeping here tonight father: this is our room. this is our bedroom. this is our bed. mother: we are separated, [mr mack]. father: this is our bedroom and our bed. at this point the father became more angry, heighted and forceful. he continued: father: ........not going to fight you tonight. but this is my bedroom as much as yours. mother: ok....i’ve been on the couch for the last 6 weeks and you’ve been in here, ya know, “on bed” and all and ..um..i figure i’ve got 6 weeks here now. father: figure what you want mate. mother: you’ve had 6 weeks, its my 6 weeks. father: figure what you want. figure what you want [now increasingly very angry and loud]
father: don’t you dare try and record me:
father continues while on top of the mother
father: “...i wanna make sure that you’re covered for when the ambulance guys arrive. ok?”
the police attend and remove the mother from frh
conclusion: the night of the injury
communication with the children after the january 2021 incident/s
the mother: hey honey thank you for your help earlier. my phones are now charged. please message or call anytime. i love you [mr l]: ok i love you to
his honour: okay, thank you. now, from your point of view, as a parent, the fact that the police have removed their mother from the home, would be a significant event in their lives?--- the father: yes. his honour: [mr l] has – did [mr l] speak to the police? the father: i think he – i think he did, yes. i’m unsure, but i think he did. his honour: would he have been present when the mother’s being removed from the home by the police? ms – [the mother] just nodded, when i asked you the question?--- the father: yes, yes. his honour: he would have been present?--- the father: yes. his honour: okay. and is it a stretch – it just seems likely to me that one way or another, either from [mr l] or you, it’s inevitable that [x] would have learned that the police had removed her mother from the home that morning?--- the father: yes. his honour: or at least if not that – very soon, thereafter? the father: yes his honour: and from your interaction as a parent, what impact or influence did it have on [x] and [mr l], the fact that the police had removed their mother from the home? the father: i’m not sure i can comment on what influence it’s actually had that they’ve removed that -- the police removed her. i can tell you how they’ve behaved since that time, immediately afterwards, as far as the actual impact upon them, [mr l] witnessing it, especially, i don’t know if i could comment. his honour: is it, from your point of view as a parent, would you agree with the proposition that it’s inevitable that a then, i think, 14 year old and 16 year old, would have only got the message that their mother was the bad person, wrong doer, whatever, deserved to be removed from the home by the police. is there any other message they could have got?--- the father: i’m not sure what you mean by - - - his honour: sorry, she’s removed, and you’re left there, is there any other message the children could have got except that you were right, she was wrong, their mother was either a bad person, or had behaved such that it was necessary for the police to remove her?--- the father: they were already aware of that. in the weeks leading up to the january [...] incident, [the mother]’s behaviour was quite - - his honour: it’s a different question?--- the father: but the children were witness to this. the children filmed, have videos of the abuse that was directed at me his honour: yes, yes, i haven’t been shown that, yes? the father: so they were aware of the situation. his honour: different question, okay. the children witnessed real conflict between the two of you over some weeks, that appears pretty clear? the father: yes. his honour: and the police, in the middle of the night, remove one of their parents from the home?--- the father: yes. his honour: okay. and you’re the parent, you were there, and you’ve dealt with them since, all right. and it – one matter that’s going through my mind, is whether that was just irrelevant to the children, made no difference to them whatsoever, or it – or, that’s one extreme, and the other extreme is it delivered a message that their mother was – her behaviour was such that it was necessary to remove her from the home, and leave you in it. is there any other inference that a 14 year old, and a 16 year old, could have got?--- the father: no, i don’t believe so. his honour: and but you say, it’s combined with her behaviour of the previous few weeks?--- the father: yes, of which they had witnessed and been a part of.
not the sole cause
the weekly telephone communication
family therapy x 2
the family report
120. like [x], [mr l] could not recall any recent happy memories. [mr l] feels that the family therapy is pointless. [mr l] stated that after two sessions, the family therapist disclosed that she felt there was no chance of reconciliation. [mr l] was adamant that as much as [the mother] tries, nothing will change and that [mr l] cannot be forced to have as relationship with [the mother].
the assertion of maturity
x not responsible for the train wreck
alcohol and illicit drugs
the family report and father reporting alcohol consumption
the handyman and alcohol
the health records and alcohol
the dui conviction with child mr l on ‘l’ plates
the next hair follicle test shows low to moderate drinking
the last hair follicle test: heavy consumption shown  provide a sample of hair preferably at least 3.9cm in length. (b) the purpose of the hair follicle testing shall be to test for:  amphetamine, methamphetamine, mdma, ecstasy, (ii) marijuana and its metabolites, (iii) cocaine and its metabolites, (iv) opiates, and (v) alcohol/etg. to facilitate both parties undertaking hair follicle testing in accordance with order 1, both parties shall contact the appropriate facility to arrange a locality for the supervised hair follicle test to take place. until completion of the hair follicle testing both parties shall refrain from taking any step which may interfere with the provision of hair samples or to interfere with the test results including taking any step to shave, cut, shorten, colour, bleach any scalp or body hair and both parties shall be restrained from cutting their head and body hair shorter than 3.9cm in length. both parties are directed to provide a copy of these orders to the relevant facility.
5. each party pay the costs of their hair follicle test. 6. the matter remains listed for part-heard final hearing on 3 may 2023.
father does not regard his alcohol consumption as a problem
mr levine: now, whilst you were in a relationship with [ms otmar] you drank more than a slab of beers a week. is that correct? the father: which part of the relationship? me levine: say towards the end. what do you say was your drinking towards the end? the father: yes, i would possibly say that i was drinking more. probably, one to – occasionally two slabs a week that i would purchase if i had friends come over as well. so we would go through more. mr levine: and did you drink any spirits at the end of the relationship as well? the father: no, i gave up drinking spirits a long time ago. mr levine: did you drink any wine at the end – towards the end of the relationship as 20 well? the father: no. mr levine: so you state that you were only – you were drinking two slabs a week? the father: just beer. yes. ... mr levine: no. in [mid]-2022, i’m asking you? the father: in [mid]-2022, back then, i was probably still drinking every night.
illicit substance use
mr levine: okay. so in, say, in january 2021, how often would you have a cone?--- the father: generally when i come home from work, sit down and relax and have one or two when i came home from work. a couple more after dinner. ... mr levine: okay. did you say that before january 2021, you were having more marijuana than that? is that correct? cones?--- the father: yes. yes. so, yes, i would be having more than just after work during the week whilst i was working during [work] days. yes, i would have some during the day as well.
his honour: ...in terms of paying for the alcohol and the cannabis that both you and [the mother] have consumed over the – your relationship, i know there’s a period early on where you were growing your own cannabis but thereafter, the impression i have is that the extent of your cannabis consumption and alcohol consumption would have been a fairly substantial hit on the weekly budget of the family, wouldn’t it?--- the father: yes, that’s – that’s probably fair to say. yes. his honour: and i’m – there’s no evidence that you set aside a jar of money and budgeted. you just spent it along with everything else you spend on. is that a fair? the father: yes. ... his honour: and so the money for that would have directly or indirectly come from your income, [the mother]’s income and other moneys that you would have had available?--- the father: yes. his honour: and that would include the $200,000 gift as well, which you had available?--- the father: it’s – yes. everything was basically pooled in to one, the slush fund. so yes.
his honour: and if i draw the conclusion that whilst you both consumed alcohol and cannabis, from your perspective, would it be fair to say that you consumed much more cannabis and much more alcohol than [the mother] did?---no.
illicit drug only once
the sexual assault allegations
alleged identification of the father by the neighbour
yes. im pretty confident its him. if you take the smile away it definitely looks like who i saw. the same shape face and the [beard] looks very similar with the same colouring. his hair wasn’t so neat.
evidence act 1995 – section 59 the hearsay rule--exclusion of hearsay evidence   evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact that it can reasonably be supposed that the person intended to assert by the representation. (2) such a fact is in this part referred to as an asserted fact . (2a) for the purposes of determining under subsection (1) whether it can reasonably be supposed that the person intended to assert a particular fact by the representation, the court may have regard to the circumstances in which the representation was made.
family law act 1975 – section 69zt rules of evidence not to apply unless court decides   these provisions of the evidence act 1995 do not apply to child-related proceedings: ... (2) the court may give such weight (if any) as it thinks fit to evidence admitted as a consequence of a provision of the evidence act 1995 not applying because of subsection (1). ...
the determining issues
the extent of the mother’s involvement in the children’s lives prior to separation.
whether the mother had mental health difficulties...
mother’s mental health history e mother] has been my patient since [late] [2020]. she has attended 8 sessions with me for review of her mental state and medications. her current working diagnosis is of [a mental illness]. she has previously been diagnosed and treated for depression, and [a mental illness]. during her initial consultation, she presented with symptoms of [a mental illness]. this resolved within a few weeks with regular treatment. her most recent check-up was [in mid]-2021. she presented with stable mental state with normal mood, thinki9ng, with no evidence of [a mental illness] or clinical depression. she told me she is now working one day a week to keep up with their business mostly by herself. she is also running her own business. management of her condition includes regular follow up to review medication, progress and mental state, and supportive therapy top manage her stressful life situations. [a mental illness] is an ongoing condition with periods of depression and [other] symptoms. it can sometime[s] be triggered by stressful life circumstanced. generally, they do have inter episode periods of return to normal baseline functioning that may last several years. [the mother] has had periods of [symptom of a mental illness] and depression for many years and has been stable just prior to this episode of illness. with regular treatment her chance of keeping well for an extended period lasting [a] few years can be achieved. [the mother] has agreed to come for regular follow up and she has been compliant with her treatment as of now.
during her initial consultation, she presented with symptoms of [a mental illness].
the previous diagnosis of [a mental illness] did not appear relevant, at least in my observation. however, it is important to note that erratic moods and behaviours are customary in states of high stress such as separation from children, evictions, divorces, etcetera. as such and in light of her current circumstances, i cannot confidently argue that [the mother] meets criteria for any other disorder beyond an acute stress disorder, which will need to be managed over time.
mother’s hacked social media account
mother: when i went into my [social media] account, i saw that there was – suddenly he was in my – because i don’t follow people, i only just – just started. when i – i just opened the [social media] account, i can’t remember when i did that, just sort of had a bit of a, you know, see what it was like, what it, you know - - - his honour: bit of a what? mother: a bit of a look around, see, you know, is it – yes. his honour: yes? mother: one day, all of my – there was a whole bunch of people that i was following that i hadn’t followed, people that i’ve never heard of. so, i left them there, and i thought that’s a bit strange. maybe, you know, i don’t know, maybe they recommend, i don’t know, on things that you look at, i don’t know. and – and then there was a – and some sort of – i logged in another day and there was another post accusing him of – i can’t remember what the details, it was – i didn’t like – i didn’t like the flavour at all. mr dunlop: paedophilia? mother: yes.
mother’s handwritten notes
notes should have been disclosed
conclusion as to mother’s mental health and impact on children
which parent was violent to the other on the night of the injury...
whether the father had and has a substantial alcohol consumption...
whether the mother blamed or denigrated the father during weekly telephone calls...
whether the father “alienated” the children from the mother
mr dunlop: all right. and can i just clarify one thing with you. you don’t dispute that [x] is saying these things, do you? the mother: correct. no, i don’t dispute that. mr dunlop: no. but your position is – and tell me if i’m wrong – that she has been alienated by her father? the mother: yes. severely, yes. mr dunlop: all right. and because of that, you say you should – or the judge should ignore what she’s saying because of the fact that she has been alienated? the mother: i’ve read extensive about – extensively in – about parental alienation and how other jurisdictions deal with it, and at different ages. and if the alienation is deemed severe enough, some jurisdictions do remove the child from the alienating parent and give them to the alienated parent to break that bond of control that the alienating parent has over that child. ... the mother: i believe [the father] has alienated the children on purpose to hurt me because i had such a deep and loving relationship with the children, and that [the father] was jealous of the depth of that relationship.
conclusion as to whether father “alienated” the children
the weight to be given to x’s wishes described in expert evidence as “mature”...
... [mr l] talked of noticing a change in his mother when he started secondary school, he felt that at times [the mother] would counteract his feelings, contradict him, and that she always wanted to be involved in their lives, thinking that she knew better and what was in the best interests of both of them. [x] talked of being “manipulated” by her mother, and that she felt emotionally upset by her, “she wouldn’t let me do my own thing.” neither of the siblings are interested in talking to their mother. both acknowledged that over the last few years there was a gradual reluctance to see their mother until they finally stopped all together, but acknowledged too that they both never had a solid relationship with [the mother] once they entered secondary school. ... in this matter, the expressions of negativity and unwillingness for both siblings to contemplate spending time with their mother was vocal and intense. they hold little or any regard for their mother. from the sessions, both [of the children] presented as mature and confident adolescents who have strongly held views about their mother along with strong resolve.
the impact on x if she were compelled to live with or spend time with the mother.
section 60b – objects of part and principles underlying it   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and ... (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), ...   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives),   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives),
section 60cc factors
the benefit of a relationship with both parents
the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm
nature of relationship with each of the child’s parents and other persons
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the child’s emotional and intellectual needs
attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood
family violence & section 60g
section 60cg court to consider risk of family violence   in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child's best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:
final or interim orders
conclusion as to parenting matters
x to live with her father
restraint of father’s alcohol consumption
parental responsibility for long term decisions
orders for limited communication and obtaining some information
need for orders to be explained
property alteration
the issues in dispute
the applicable law
90sf matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance   in exercising jurisdiction under section 90se ..., the court must apply the principle that a party to a de facto relationship must maintain the other party to the de facto relationship: (a) only to the extent that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, and (b) only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   only to the extent that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, and (b) only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or  ) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or  ) for any other adequate reason.  in applying this principle, the court must take into account only the matters referred to in subsection (3).
... 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them – altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
...   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,  ) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to:   the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to:   a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and   the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to:  ) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.
90ss general powers of the court general powers   the court, in exercising its powers under this division, may do any or all of the following: (a) order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (c) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a de facto relationship, (d) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (f) appoint or remove trustees, (g) order that payments be made direct to a party to the de facto relationship, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the de facto relationship, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order, or grant any other injunction, (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section) which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.   order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a de facto relationship, (d) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the de facto relationship, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the de facto relationship, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order, or grant any other injunction, (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section) which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.
stanford ] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) [and/or section 90sm(4)].
the preferred approach ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”...  ] ...firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. (citations omitted and emphasis added)
application of the preferred approach
step one: identify the property and liabilities
description
legal ownership
agreed value
assets
fmh
joint
920,000
company shares
applicant
13,000
motor vehicle 1
8,000
motor vehicle 2
respondent
7,000
j pty ltd atf g family trust underlying assets: shareholding in joint business beneficiary loan accounts $50,381 owed by applicant $56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
underlying assets: shareholding in joint business beneficiary loan accounts $50,381 owed by applicant $56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
shareholding in joint business beneficiary loan accounts $50,381 owed by applicant $56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
beneficiary loan accounts $50,381 owed by applicant $56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
$50,381 owed by applicant $56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
$56,508 owed by respondent underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
underlying liabilities: loan to family trust 2 $111,383
loan to family trust 2 $111,383
j pty ltd atf g family trust
not known
h pty ltd underlying assets: loan owing from family j pty ltd atf g family trust $111,383 motor vehicle 4 $12,000 motor vehicle 5 $13,000 motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
underlying assets: loan owing from family j pty ltd atf g family trust $111,383 motor vehicle 4 $12,000 motor vehicle 5 $13,000 motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
loan owing from family j pty ltd atf g family trust $111,383 motor vehicle 4 $12,000 motor vehicle 5 $13,000 motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
motor vehicle 4 $12,000 motor vehicle 5 $13,000 motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
motor vehicle 5 $13,000 motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
motor vehicle 3 $1,500 underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
underlying liabilities: payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
payg payable ($17,019) superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
superannuation payable ($2,649) equity retained earnings $106,788
equity retained earnings $106,788
retained earnings $106,788
furniture and whitegoods
nil/20,000
e company fund re x
21,354
moneys in bank account #...81
nominal
moneys in bank account #...44
timber flooring
9,500
other investments
unknown
assets subtotal
liabilities
home loan anz  4,265)
loan from applicant’s mother for legal fees  ,500)
outstanding legal fees payable
loan owed to h p/l  ,381)  ,508)
liabilities subtotal
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
super fund 2
accumulation
30,584
super fund 3
32,839
super fund 1
91,138
superannuation subtotal
total (assets – liabilities)
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
common ground: alter egos and need to wind up trusts and companies
the e company fund
the motor cars
superannuation
recasting the list of assets and liabilities
step two: section 90sm(4)(a), (b) & (c) contributions
weight to be given to inheritance
his honour: ...in terms of paying for the alcohol and the cannabis that both you and have consumed over the – your relationship, i know there’s a period early on where you were growing your own cannabis but thereafter, the impression i have is that the extent of your cannabis consumption and alcohol consumption would have been a fairly substantial hit on the weekly budget of the family, wouldn’t it?--- father: yes, that’s – that’s probably fair to say. yes. his honour: and i’m – there’s no evidence that you set aside a jar of money and budgeted. you just spent it along with everything else you spend on. is that a fair? father: yes. ... his honour: and so the money for that would have directly or indirectly come from your income, [the mother]’s income and other moneys that you would have had available?--- father: yes. his honour: and that would include the $200,000 [inheritance] as well, which you had available?--- father: it’s – yes. everything was basically pooled in to one, the slush fund. so yes.
his honour: and if i draw the conclusion that whilst you both consumed alcohol and cannabis, from your perspective, would it be fair to say that you consumed much more cannabis and much more alcohol than [the mother] did?--- father: no.
in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to the provisions of s 79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties’ cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.[21]  ] ...it plainly could not be said to be money applied for the benefit of any property, be property preservation or improvement, it in no way constitutes a contribution under s 90sm, and i consider that such amount [spent on drugs] really ought to be treated as moneys thrown away.
homemaker and parent income contribution
post separation homemaker and parent contribution impaired
the length of the marriage can be seen to be of considerable importance in the assessment of contributions.
not a kennon case
conclusion as to contribution
step three: section 90sf(3) factors
age and state of health
income, property, financial resources and capacity for employment
care of children under 18 years
commitments of each of the parties to support themselves or a child
responsibilities of either party to support any other person
whether party cohabiting with another person
child support to be provided
conclusion as to section 90sf factors
...in any event it is the real impact in money terms which is ultimately the critical issue.
on our adjusted figure for the value of the parties’ net assets ($1,503,863), adjustment of 10% in the wife’s favour results in an increase in her entitlement of $150,386, and a corresponding reduction in the husband’s entitlement, producing a differential movement between them of $300,772 ...  ] it is always important to keep in mind that an adjustment of x% for s 75(2) factors leads to a disparity in the value of property received by the parties representing 2 x x%. it is that disparity, measured in “money terms”, that requires consideration in determining whether the result is just and equitable: see campbell v kuskey [1998] famca 10, (1998) flc 92-795 at 84,928.  9] in our view, s 79(4)(e) requires those matters to be taken into account in arriving at orders that are just and equitable as between the parties. in arriving at an appropriate assessment for those factors, a dollar value of it should be uppermost in our minds [79] and, of course, the ultimate disparity in entitlements which it might produce. that dollar value is, in turn, dependent upon the value of the interests in property of the parties.
step four: just and equitable and conclusion
conclusion
associate: dated: 23 january 2024
dated: 23 january 2024
[1] section 11f of the family law act 1975 (c’lth) (‘the act’).[2] the mother asserts, and was not contradicted, she commenced this process or application, back in march 2022 but “it was lost in the system somehow and it wasn’t filed until august 2022” (mo trial affidavit at [85]) [3] this was not permitted to be relied upon and was not accepted into evidence.[4] see [12] of his trial affidavit.[5] transcript page (‘tp’) 155.[6] edited to omit the long periods of silence in between events.[7] father’s police statement 16 february 2021, mm-01 to father’s interim affidavit of 8 april 2021.[8] the mother describes a “bedside table” and the father describes “a chest of drawers”, but nothing turns on this. i am satisfied they are describing the same item of furniture as a “chest of drawers” can be used as a “bedside table”. i am satisfied it was a chest of drawers that was used as a bedside table. [9] at [91] of the father’s trial affidavit.[10] trial affidavit at [94].[11] family report at [80].[12] family report at [86].[13] when beer is referred to in these reasons it is full strength beer.[14] i infer outraged by the .102 l plate offence, the police officer immediately impounded the car and sought to immediately cancel the father’s drivers licence for 12 months. that much is consistent with community attitudes to drink driving. it turns out that by the fine print of the relevant legislation that this meant the immediate suspension of licence was not authorised and after the father turned his mind to it and complained the cancellation was revoked and his licence reinstated about four weeks prior to the final hearing.[15] tp 378 lines 8-23.[16] see the discussion and reference to authorities in uniform evidence law 18th ed, odgers s, lawbook co, 2023, at ea.140.60 at pages 1439 & 1440.[17] then 15, now 16.[18] mother’s superannuation $30,584 + $32,839 = $63,423 + father’s superannuation $91,138 = $15,4561 / 2 = $77,280[19] it was common ground that after separation the mother had utilised a similar fund that was designated as for mr l for her own purposes and for this reason neither party pressed to include the x fund in the pool.[20] not included because the funds were applied to the mother’s legal fees and those fees are not included as an asset, either both go in or neither.[21] approved by the full court in hallinan & witynski at [51] (23.7.99). cited with approval at [29] of harrington [2007] famca 451; (2007) flc 93-317