last updated: 17 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
nihal & nihal [2024] fedcfamc2f 96
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility
living arrangements
spend time arrangements before x’s relocation to the greater sydney area   from 20 january 2024, at 9 am until 3 pm the following saturday, being 27 january 2024. (b) from 10 february 2024 each week from saturday 9am to sunday 3pm. (c) for one half of all victorian school term holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 9 am on the saturday immediately following the actual last day of school, until 3 pm on the following saturday. (d) communication via electronic means in accordance with order 10.   from 10 february 2024 each week from saturday 9am to sunday 3pm. (c) for one half of all victorian school term holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 9 am on the saturday immediately following the actual last day of school, until 3 pm on the following saturday. (d) communication via electronic means in accordance with order 10.   for one half of all victorian school term holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, from 9 am on the saturday immediately following the actual last day of school, until 3 pm on the following saturday. (d) communication via electronic means in accordance with order 10.   communication via electronic means in accordance with order 10.
spend time arrangements after x’s relocation to the greater sydney area   each alternate weekend from friday after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to sunday at 5 pm, (b) commencing in the second week of the second new south wales (“nsw”) school term in 2024, each alternate thursday from after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to sunday 5 pm, (c) commencing in the second week of the first nsw school term in 2025, each alternate wednesday after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to monday before school (or 9 am if a non-school day), (d) during all new south wales school holiday periods, inclusive of the longer december/january school holiday period, during the first half of school holidays in odd numbered years commencing from the date of these orders, and during the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (e) on days of special significance to the parties and/or x by agreement and failing agreement on the following special occasions: (i) on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   commencing in the second week of the second new south wales (“nsw”) school term in 2024, each alternate thursday from after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to sunday 5 pm, (c) commencing in the second week of the first nsw school term in 2025, each alternate wednesday after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to monday before school (or 9 am if a non-school day), (d) during all new south wales school holiday periods, inclusive of the longer december/january school holiday period, during the first half of school holidays in odd numbered years commencing from the date of these orders, and during the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (e) on days of special significance to the parties and/or x by agreement and failing agreement on the following special occasions: (i) on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   commencing in the second week of the first nsw school term in 2025, each alternate wednesday after school (or 3 pm if a non-school day) to monday before school (or 9 am if a non-school day), (d) during all new south wales school holiday periods, inclusive of the longer december/january school holiday period, during the first half of school holidays in odd numbered years commencing from the date of these orders, and during the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (e) on days of special significance to the parties and/or x by agreement and failing agreement on the following special occasions: (i) on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   during all new south wales school holiday periods, inclusive of the longer december/january school holiday period, during the first half of school holidays in odd numbered years commencing from the date of these orders, and during the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (e) on days of special significance to the parties and/or x by agreement and failing agreement on the following special occasions: (i) on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   on days of special significance to the parties and/or x by agreement and failing agreement on the following special occasions: (i) on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   on new year's eve, commencing at 6 pm on new year's eve and concluding at 6 pm on new year's day in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter. (ii) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  ) if the father's birthday falls on a day and the father is not already spending time with x, then the father spends time with x on his birthday from 4 pm until 9 pm, (iii) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  i) if x's birthday falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father or the mother then they shall spend time with x on x's birthday from 6 pm until 9 pm, (iv) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  ) if father's day falls on a day when x is not in the care of the father then x shall spend time with the father on father's day commencing at 6 pm the day before father's day until 6 pm on father's day, (v) if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   if mother’s day falls on a day when the mother does not have care of x, the mother will have care of x commencing at 6 pm the day before mother’s day until 6 pm on mother’s day notwithstanding any other order. (vi) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  ) on the first day of eid al-fitr, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-fitr in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and (vii) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  i) on the first day of eid al-adha, commencing from 5 pm the day prior until 6 pm on the first day of eid al-adha in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (viii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  ii) from 9 am on the twenty-sixth day of ramadan (the night of power) until 5 pm one day later in even-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, and, (ix) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.  ) from 9 am on the ninth day of thul-hijjah (the day of arafat), until 5 pm one day later in odd-numbered years and alternating with the mother each year thereafter, (x) at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.   at such other times and by such other means as may be agreed between the parties.
schooling
communication   list the other parent as well as themselves as a primary emergency contact in the event of an emergency involving x anytime a situation arises requiring an emergency contact, together with one alternative contact in the event that neither parent is able to be reached on such occasion, (b) authorise such agency to communicate with each party on matters relating to x’s welfare and education, including school events, (c) authorise such agency to provide notices, newsletters and reports directly to each party, and (d) authorise such agency to contact each party in the event of an emergency.   authorise such agency to communicate with each party on matters relating to x’s welfare and education, including school events, (c) authorise such agency to provide notices, newsletters and reports directly to each party, and (d) authorise such agency to contact each party in the event of an emergency.   authorise such agency to provide notices, newsletters and reports directly to each party, and (d) authorise such agency to contact each party in the event of an emergency.   authorise such agency to contact each party in the event of an emergency.
restraints   physically disciplining x, (b) making any critical, disrespectful, disparaging, or derogatory remarks about the other parent or any member of the other parent's family or household to x, or in the presence or hearing of x or allowing any third party to do so and such order is to include verbal, written or electronic means including email, text message, facebook and other forms of social media.   making any critical, disrespectful, disparaging, or derogatory remarks about the other parent or any member of the other parent's family or household to x, or in the presence or hearing of x or allowing any third party to do so and such order is to include verbal, written or electronic means including email, text message, facebook and other forms of social media.
implementation of orders
costs
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
introduction
issues in dispute   what orders should be made in relation to parental responsibility? (b) in which city x should live? (c) which parent should x live with? (d) what time should x spend with the parent with whom he does not live?   in which city x should live? (c) which parent should x live with? (d) what time should x spend with the parent with whom he does not live?   which parent should x live with? (d) what time should x spend with the parent with whom he does not live?   what time should x spend with the parent with whom he does not live?
evidence
background to the parties’ relationship
parenting arrangement since separation
current circumstances   the mother is 50 years old. she and x live at an undisclosed location in victoria. she shares her temporary accommodation with two other women. at the time of the hearing, she has been living at her current shared accommodation for two weeks. (b) she is currently not employed and receives centrelink benefits to support herself and x. (c) the mother’s native language is country j language. she speaks basic english and does not read english well. (d) the father was 38 years old at the time of the final hearing. he is employed as a tradesperson. he works from 8 am to 4 pm, five days a week. (e) he has remarried and lives with ms f and her two children, t, age 16, and u, age 13. they live in a home in suburb s owned by ms f. (f) the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.   she is currently not employed and receives centrelink benefits to support herself and x. (c) the mother’s native language is country j language. she speaks basic english and does not read english well. (d) the father was 38 years old at the time of the final hearing. he is employed as a tradesperson. he works from 8 am to 4 pm, five days a week. (e) he has remarried and lives with ms f and her two children, t, age 16, and u, age 13. they live in a home in suburb s owned by ms f. (f) the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.   the mother’s native language is country j language. she speaks basic english and does not read english well. (d) the father was 38 years old at the time of the final hearing. he is employed as a tradesperson. he works from 8 am to 4 pm, five days a week. (e) he has remarried and lives with ms f and her two children, t, age 16, and u, age 13. they live in a home in suburb s owned by ms f. (f) the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.   the father was 38 years old at the time of the final hearing. he is employed as a tradesperson. he works from 8 am to 4 pm, five days a week. (e) he has remarried and lives with ms f and her two children, t, age 16, and u, age 13. they live in a home in suburb s owned by ms f. (f) the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.   he has remarried and lives with ms f and her two children, t, age 16, and u, age 13. they live in a home in suburb s owned by ms f. (f) the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.   the father currently pays $528 per month in child support for x.
procedural history
the evidence in dispute
... 48. [mr nihal] he locked me into storage on one occasion. someone 51. called police and they found me locked in the storage and took photos of all mybruises [sic]. ... as indicated my children in [country j] has been assaulted. [mr nihal] he showed me a video of his brother in [country j] sexually assaulting my son [mr l]. (as per the original)   her adult children could have sworn affidavits to verify the events deposed, but they did not. (b) police records had been subpoenaed. she agreed that there were no police records or entry to support her contention that the police found her locked in a storage unit and took photos as alleged in paragraph 50 of her earlier affidavit.   police records had been subpoenaed. she agreed that there were no police records or entry to support her contention that the police found her locked in a storage unit and took photos as alleged in paragraph 50 of her earlier affidavit.   the mother had, by hand, deleted the words “i have not re-partnered”, which appeared at paragraph 88 of the earlier affidavit. it was omitted from the updated affidavit.
records from the victorian police and child protection authorities have been subpoenaed. the police recorded the mother making a complaint against a “new husband” in mid-2022. that record also alleged that mr p had engaged in family violence, including that he slapped x on the face in 2021. a further entry dated mid-2022 recorded:
met with mother... she also spoke about her current husband and how she was worried for [x]’s safety around him. she confirmed that police attended last night, and her husband was excluded from the home. she further confirmed that she was not planning on resuming the relationship...
under cross-examination, she denied that she had a current partner or husband. she only disclosed that she had moved to melbourne and remarried upon being asked specifically. she then revealed that she had been in that marriage for a three-year period under cross-examination. it was not a matter disclosed to the family report writer either. she denied that mr p had ever hit x, notwithstanding the record taken by the domestic violence service, q centre.   she deposed in her affidavit that she was living in a small apartment with x but looking for a larger apartment. however, in subpoenaed documents, such as the doctor’s records, she reported herself as homeless and staying in temporary community housing. this was not the case when the family report was written, and it led the family report writer to give evidence that she was increasingly concerned about the transitional nature of the mother’s accommodation and its impact on x.
expert evidence   the family report writer was unavailable to give evidence until late on the final day of the hearing. she advised that her time was limited. (b) the parties had filed updated affidavits and large tender bundles had been prepared. the family report writer said she had only had time to “skim” some of that material. (c) a range of new matters and developments were put to the family report writer under cross-examination. for example, x’s subpoenaed school records. she said it was the first time she was aware of some issues put to her. (d) she gave evidence that she would not change her recommendations without further information. (e) she was opposed to x being separated from his mother and clarified that she was not making a recommendation that x move to sydney without the mother. (f) while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.   the parties had filed updated affidavits and large tender bundles had been prepared. the family report writer said she had only had time to “skim” some of that material. (c) a range of new matters and developments were put to the family report writer under cross-examination. for example, x’s subpoenaed school records. she said it was the first time she was aware of some issues put to her. (d) she gave evidence that she would not change her recommendations without further information. (e) she was opposed to x being separated from his mother and clarified that she was not making a recommendation that x move to sydney without the mother. (f) while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.   a range of new matters and developments were put to the family report writer under cross-examination. for example, x’s subpoenaed school records. she said it was the first time she was aware of some issues put to her. (d) she gave evidence that she would not change her recommendations without further information. (e) she was opposed to x being separated from his mother and clarified that she was not making a recommendation that x move to sydney without the mother. (f) while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.   she gave evidence that she would not change her recommendations without further information. (e) she was opposed to x being separated from his mother and clarified that she was not making a recommendation that x move to sydney without the mother. (f) while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.   she was opposed to x being separated from his mother and clarified that she was not making a recommendation that x move to sydney without the mother. (f) while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.   while i was satisfied that the family report writer was open to persuasion about different scenarios that were put to her in cross-examination, and that she gave thoughtful evidence, i am not satisfied that she had adequate time to consider those new matters in the context of the recommendations contained in the family report.
proposals   the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x. (b) by no later than 22 january 2024, x is returned to the greater sydney area, and thereafter, both parties are restrained from locating him outside of the greater sydney area. (c) x be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) if the mother resides in sydney, x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from after school friday to commencement of school monday, and (ii) half school holidays. (e) if the mother remains in melbourne, then x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays. (f) the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   by no later than 22 january 2024, x is returned to the greater sydney area, and thereafter, both parties are restrained from locating him outside of the greater sydney area. (c) x be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) if the mother resides in sydney, x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from after school friday to commencement of school monday, and (ii) half school holidays. (e) if the mother remains in melbourne, then x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays. (f) the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   x be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) if the mother resides in sydney, x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from after school friday to commencement of school monday, and (ii) half school holidays. (e) if the mother remains in melbourne, then x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays. (f) the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   if the mother resides in sydney, x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from after school friday to commencement of school monday, and (ii) half school holidays. (e) if the mother remains in melbourne, then x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays. (f) the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   during the school term, each alternate weekend from after school friday to commencement of school monday, and (ii) half school holidays.  ) half school holidays.   if the mother remains in melbourne, then x live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays. (f) the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   during the school term, each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 5 pm sunday, and (ii) half school holidays.   the father will be responsible for all travel expenses for x to spend time with the mother as proposed above. (g) x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   x be permitted to communicate with the party he is not living with every second day between 6 pm and 6.30 pm. (h) the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   the father hold x’s passport, and the father be permitted to travel internationally with x.   she have sole parental responsibility for x. (b) x lives with her in melbourne. (c) x spends time with the father each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 4 pm sunday. (d) x communicates with the father by facetime each tuesday and thursday between 6 pm and 6.30 pm.   x lives with her in melbourne. (c) x spends time with the father each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 4 pm sunday. (d) x communicates with the father by facetime each tuesday and thursday between 6 pm and 6.30 pm.   x spends time with the father each alternate weekend from 10 am saturday to 4 pm sunday. (d) x communicates with the father by facetime each tuesday and thursday between 6 pm and 6.30 pm.   x communicates with the father by facetime each tuesday and thursday between 6 pm and 6.30 pm.   the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for x. (b) within four weeks, x be relocated to live in sydney. (c) x is to be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) in the event the mother does not relocate with x to sydney, x shall live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows: (i) during the school term, commencing from 10 am on saturday until 5 pm on sunday and every alternate week thereafter, and (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (e) in the event the mother resides in sydney: (i) x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (f) at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   within four weeks, x be relocated to live in sydney. (c) x is to be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) in the event the mother does not relocate with x to sydney, x shall live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows: (i) during the school term, commencing from 10 am on saturday until 5 pm on sunday and every alternate week thereafter, and (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (e) in the event the mother resides in sydney: (i) x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (f) at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   x is to be enrolled at d school commencing term 1, 2024. (d) in the event the mother does not relocate with x to sydney, x shall live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows: (i) during the school term, commencing from 10 am on saturday until 5 pm on sunday and every alternate week thereafter, and (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (e) in the event the mother resides in sydney: (i) x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (f) at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   in the event the mother does not relocate with x to sydney, x shall live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows: (i) during the school term, commencing from 10 am on saturday until 5 pm on sunday and every alternate week thereafter, and (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (e) in the event the mother resides in sydney: (i) x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (f) at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   during the school term, commencing from 10 am on saturday until 5 pm on sunday and every alternate week thereafter, and (ii) half of all school holiday periods.  ) half of all school holiday periods.   in the event the mother resides in sydney: (i) x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods. (f) at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   x should live with the mother and spend time with the father initially for three nights each fortnight, incrementally increasing each month. (ii) half of all school holiday periods.   at least 21 days from the date of the orders, the mother is to file and serve a treatment record from her most recent treating medical health practitioner. (g) the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   the mother is to attend a parenting after separation course. (h) the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.   the mother shall engage with services such as intensive family support services in the home.
legislative framework   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subject to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subject to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   parents enjoy as much residential freedom as is compatible with their parenting obligations (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at 223-223 and 231-232, (“ams v aif”)). (b) only if the welfare of the child would be adversely affected should any parent’s right of freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest (u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 at [89], (“u v u”)). (c) the court’s power to make a coercive order as to where a parent is to live should be exercised only in rare and extreme circumstances, namely, for a parent to perform their role as primacy carer, and in the absence of alternative options (oswald & karrington [2016] famcafc 152).   only if the welfare of the child would be adversely affected should any parent’s right of freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest (u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 at [89], (“u v u”)). (c) the court’s power to make a coercive order as to where a parent is to live should be exercised only in rare and extreme circumstances, namely, for a parent to perform their role as primacy carer, and in the absence of alternative options (oswald & karrington [2016] famcafc 152).   the court’s power to make a coercive order as to where a parent is to live should be exercised only in rare and extreme circumstances, namely, for a parent to perform their role as primacy carer, and in the absence of alternative options (oswald & karrington [2016] famcafc 152).
there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children’s ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children. the tension at the intersection of those conflicting interests is even greater when an order is sought, not just to restrain one parent’s move further away, but to compel the parent who has already moved away to return and establish a new residence closer to the other parent. (citations omitted)
it follows from my exposition of the legislation, that earlier core principles: that the child’s best interests remain the paramount but not sole consideration, that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate “compelling” reasons, that a judicial officer must consider all proposals, and may himself or herself be required to formulate proposals in the child’s best interests, and the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the “right” of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement, remain valid. (as per the original)
the child
likes living with his mum and spoke about playing games with his mum. [x] said he has no bad memories of either his mum or dad. [x] also said that “mum says good things about dad” and “dad says good things about mum”.
concerns about x   there are at least seven entries in 2023 of x attending school with no food or inappropriate food in his bag. (b) x missed 41 days of school in 2023. of these absences, seven unexplained absences occurred in the two months before the final hearing. he was also recorded as arriving late on another 14 occasions. (c) x complains he was bullied at school because of his hair. (d) the father is concerned that x is sent to school unwashed and in dirty clothes, although there was no evidence of this.   x missed 41 days of school in 2023. of these absences, seven unexplained absences occurred in the two months before the final hearing. he was also recorded as arriving late on another 14 occasions. (c) x complains he was bullied at school because of his hair. (d) the father is concerned that x is sent to school unwashed and in dirty clothes, although there was no evidence of this.   x complains he was bullied at school because of his hair. (d) the father is concerned that x is sent to school unwashed and in dirty clothes, although there was no evidence of this.   the father is concerned that x is sent to school unwashed and in dirty clothes, although there was no evidence of this.   in july 2023, x sent him a series of voice messages over a number of days wherein he complained that his mother had hurt him. (b) on 9 october 2023, in the presence of the contact supervisor, x alleged that he had been hit hard by his mother. x it is alleged said, “she hits me all the time”. a report to a child protection agency was made by the supervisor. (c) the school records note that, on 23 february 2023, following a disciplinary incident, x said his mother was going to slap him.   on 9 october 2023, in the presence of the contact supervisor, x alleged that he had been hit hard by his mother. x it is alleged said, “she hits me all the time”. a report to a child protection agency was made by the supervisor. (c) the school records note that, on 23 february 2023, following a disciplinary incident, x said his mother was going to slap him.   the school records note that, on 23 february 2023, following a disciplinary incident, x said his mother was going to slap him.
since his contact with [x] has resumed, [mr nihal] stated that [x] often tells him that [ms nihal] [the mother] hurts him, and he believes he has witnessed [ms nihal] [the mother] punching [x] during one of their video calls. [mr nihal] stated that [x] “says [ms nihal] [the mother] hurts him all of the time and that he hates her”. [mr nihal] has also stated that there had been occasions where [ms nihal] [the mother] has wanted to relinquish care of [x] and has threatened to harm him. [mr nihal] stated that he had made several reports to child protection with his concerns, but he is unsure whether any action has been taken. he spoke about significant concerns about her parenting capacity and stated that [x] is not safe in her care.
x’s parents
the mental health of the parties
throughout the five years i have known [mr nihal], i have never experienced him to be emotionally, physically or psychologically abusive or violent in any way. in fact, i have never seen or heard [mr nihal] raise his voice at, or physically discipline, either of my children. i have however, observed [mr nihal] sit my children down and explain to them, in a calm and gentle manner, what they have done wrong when they have misbehaved.
her erratic behaviour, including contacting his workplaces and making up stories about him, threatening his current wife with text messages and, allegedly, sending topless photos of herself to his family.
in my opinion [mr nihal] is not suffering from any diagnosable mental health conditions currently nor recently. in session his mental state is consistently observed to be stable, without clinically significant distress. he appears to be functioning well across main life domains including work, parenting and family. it is likely he experienced clinically significant depression and anxiety four to six years ago due to severe problems in the previous relationship, no access to his son and the loss of his parents. it is clear the previous relationship was extremely unhealthy, unstable and damaging for all involved including [mr nihal]. nevertheless [mr nihal] appears to have coped with the mental health and other challenges stemming from that relationship well and has made a full recovery mentally. currently he appears to be functioning well socially, including in the parenting, intimate relationship, family and work domains. prognosis [mr nihal] is currently a healthy and mutually supportive relationship, stable home environment, stable employment, and has regular contact with his son. these are strong factors protective of his mental health and functioning going forward. combined with the opinion that he is not currently suffering from any diagnosable mental health disorder, i expect it is highly probable he will continue to be well mentally, function as well as a parent and deal effectively with the current challenges going forward. (as per the original)   the note from a consultation with her gp on 16 october 2023 recorded she was suffering from anxiety and fear. the letter was written to centrelink on her behalf, seeking an exemption due to stress, homelessness, and anxiety. the medical record gave no indication that the mother was medicated for her anxiety nor that she had been referred for a mental health assessment or treatment. (b) before the court was a translation of the voice message that the mother left on the father’s phone in late 2022. the mother accepted that she had left the message. i place no great weight on the content of the message, but it is telling in terms of her vulnerability. in conclusion, the mother says:   before the court was a translation of the voice message that the mother left on the father’s phone in late 2022. the mother accepted that she had left the message. i place no great weight on the content of the message, but it is telling in terms of her vulnerability. in conclusion, the mother says:
i have been forgetting a lot, i forget things ... and this is too much, it’s not easy. i have become tired... it’s just that now i don’t feel i am coping. i try my best, about the documents, certificate, doctor, i just can’t do this. i don’t care about anything when it comes to my child. there is school, seeing teachers, talking to them. i cannot express myself very well but i explain everything [to them], i ask them how he is going, whether he is making friends or not, what he is like. he is a great kid. everyone praises him. apart from that, if you think that you can take good care of him, i am willing to step back. take him. (as per the original)   the mother’s own evidence raised concerns about her engagement in everyday activities. she is not employed, she lives in temporary accommodation, she could not identify any activities that she was involved in, whether for education or leisure, nor could she identify any regular activities that x was involved in, apart from sports. these matters were put to the family report writer, who advised that she would have concerns for x if the mother did not seek help for her mental health. she recommended that the mother engage with a mental health worker, a family support service, and obtain amental health assessment so she can consider whether medication is an option for her to manage her mental health.
capacity to adequately care for x   the mother described herself as being homeless as recently as late 2023. she is supported by domestic violence services but has no long-term secure housing. she estimates that in the last three years since moving to melbourne, she has lived in at least four addresses. australia is currently experiencing a housing crisis. the mother gave evidence that she stayed in the last temporary accommodation for seven weeks and inspected at least 10 homes over that period to no avail. she has been in her current temporary accommodation for two weeks at the time of the hearing. it is shared with two other women and x shares a room with her. the family report writer expressed increasing concern about the transitional nature of the mother’s accommodation and the impact this has on x. i share those concerns. (b) it is likely that the mother’s accommodation difficulties have an impact on other aspects of her parenting, such as her ability to provide wholesome school lunches for x or send him to school with no food or water. (c) the father was also concerned that x was being bullied at school because of his haircut. the mother cut his hair and x was unhappy with the cut. the father ultimately paid for a haircut. the mother denied this was an issue for x, which might also reflect the outcome of the mother’s currently impaired parenting capacity. as a positive though, it demonstrates the positive influence the father’s involvement in x’s life can have. (d) whilst i am unable to find that the mother has used inappropriate physical discipline on x, it is possible that her current levels of stress and anxiety could result in a less measured approach to x’s discipline.   it is likely that the mother’s accommodation difficulties have an impact on other aspects of her parenting, such as her ability to provide wholesome school lunches for x or send him to school with no food or water. (c) the father was also concerned that x was being bullied at school because of his haircut. the mother cut his hair and x was unhappy with the cut. the father ultimately paid for a haircut. the mother denied this was an issue for x, which might also reflect the outcome of the mother’s currently impaired parenting capacity. as a positive though, it demonstrates the positive influence the father’s involvement in x’s life can have. (d) whilst i am unable to find that the mother has used inappropriate physical discipline on x, it is possible that her current levels of stress and anxiety could result in a less measured approach to x’s discipline.   the father was also concerned that x was being bullied at school because of his haircut. the mother cut his hair and x was unhappy with the cut. the father ultimately paid for a haircut. the mother denied this was an issue for x, which might also reflect the outcome of the mother’s currently impaired parenting capacity. as a positive though, it demonstrates the positive influence the father’s involvement in x’s life can have. (d) whilst i am unable to find that the mother has used inappropriate physical discipline on x, it is possible that her current levels of stress and anxiety could result in a less measured approach to x’s discipline.   whilst i am unable to find that the mother has used inappropriate physical discipline on x, it is possible that her current levels of stress and anxiety could result in a less measured approach to x’s discipline.
other family relationships
section 60cc considerations
section 60cc(2)(a) – “meaningful relationship”   his initial difficulties locating x and the mother. (b) the mother’s failure to facilitate facetime calls following the orders made on 26 july 2022. (c) that the mother did not facilitate supervised visits between him and x, citing x’s ill health. (d) the mother’s failure to consult with him on matters such as x’s schooling. (e) her failure to provide details of x’s school, notwithstanding a court order to do so.   the mother’s failure to facilitate facetime calls following the orders made on 26 july 2022. (c) that the mother did not facilitate supervised visits between him and x, citing x’s ill health. (d) the mother’s failure to consult with him on matters such as x’s schooling. (e) her failure to provide details of x’s school, notwithstanding a court order to do so.   that the mother did not facilitate supervised visits between him and x, citing x’s ill health. (d) the mother’s failure to consult with him on matters such as x’s schooling. (e) her failure to provide details of x’s school, notwithstanding a court order to do so.   the mother’s failure to consult with him on matters such as x’s schooling. (e) her failure to provide details of x’s school, notwithstanding a court order to do so.   her failure to provide details of x’s school, notwithstanding a court order to do so.   she left the relationship due to what she says was ongoing family violence and the safety concerns she had. (b) she held fears for her safety and, as a result, wanted to keep her location secret from the father. (c) that she had already moved countries for the marriage and had left behind three children. she no longer has the benefit of financial resources she sent or brought to australia. her attempt to reunify with her children had failed and no doubt she feared losing x to the father, especially in the context of her anxiety.   she held fears for her safety and, as a result, wanted to keep her location secret from the father. (c) that she had already moved countries for the marriage and had left behind three children. she no longer has the benefit of financial resources she sent or brought to australia. her attempt to reunify with her children had failed and no doubt she feared losing x to the father, especially in the context of her anxiety.   that she had already moved countries for the marriage and had left behind three children. she no longer has the benefit of financial resources she sent or brought to australia. her attempt to reunify with her children had failed and no doubt she feared losing x to the father, especially in the context of her anxiety.
section 60cc(2)(b) – “abuse” and “family violence”   family violence by the mother: (i) the father asserts that he was yelled at and physically harmed by the mother. (ii) the father says the mother often threw items at him. (iii) the father asserts he was verbally abused by the mother. (iv) the father says the mother assaulted him after threatening to harm him and ms f. he alleged that the mother also threatened him with a weapon. he concedes that she assaulted the father and says this occurred when he was attempting to force her into sexual contact. (v) the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x. (b) family violence by the father: (i) the mother alleged that the father engaged in coercive and controlling behaviour upon her arrival in australia. (ii) the mother alleges she was a victim of family violence perpetrated by the father, including kicking, punching, verbal abuse, and sexual assault, and that this commenced upon her arrival. (iii) the mother says that family violence is what led her to move to melbourne. she gave evidence she did so at the suggestion of the domestic violence service in sydney. (iv) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.   the father asserts that he was yelled at and physically harmed by the mother. (ii) the father says the mother often threw items at him. (iii) the father asserts he was verbally abused by the mother. (iv) the father says the mother assaulted him after threatening to harm him and ms f. he alleged that the mother also threatened him with a weapon. he concedes that she assaulted the father and says this occurred when he was attempting to force her into sexual contact. (v) the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x.  ) the father says the mother often threw items at him. (iii) the father asserts he was verbally abused by the mother. (iv) the father says the mother assaulted him after threatening to harm him and ms f. he alleged that the mother also threatened him with a weapon. he concedes that she assaulted the father and says this occurred when he was attempting to force her into sexual contact. (v) the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x.  i) the father asserts he was verbally abused by the mother. (iv) the father says the mother assaulted him after threatening to harm him and ms f. he alleged that the mother also threatened him with a weapon. he concedes that she assaulted the father and says this occurred when he was attempting to force her into sexual contact. (v) the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x.  ) the father says the mother assaulted him after threatening to harm him and ms f. he alleged that the mother also threatened him with a weapon. he concedes that she assaulted the father and says this occurred when he was attempting to force her into sexual contact. (v) the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x.   the father asserts the mother made threats to harm herself and to leave with x.   family violence by the father: (i) the mother alleged that the father engaged in coercive and controlling behaviour upon her arrival in australia. (ii) the mother alleges she was a victim of family violence perpetrated by the father, including kicking, punching, verbal abuse, and sexual assault, and that this commenced upon her arrival. (iii) the mother says that family violence is what led her to move to melbourne. she gave evidence she did so at the suggestion of the domestic violence service in sydney. (iv) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.   the mother alleged that the father engaged in coercive and controlling behaviour upon her arrival in australia. (ii) the mother alleges she was a victim of family violence perpetrated by the father, including kicking, punching, verbal abuse, and sexual assault, and that this commenced upon her arrival. (iii) the mother says that family violence is what led her to move to melbourne. she gave evidence she did so at the suggestion of the domestic violence service in sydney. (iv) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.  ) the mother alleges she was a victim of family violence perpetrated by the father, including kicking, punching, verbal abuse, and sexual assault, and that this commenced upon her arrival. (iii) the mother says that family violence is what led her to move to melbourne. she gave evidence she did so at the suggestion of the domestic violence service in sydney. (iv) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.  i) the mother says that family violence is what led her to move to melbourne. she gave evidence she did so at the suggestion of the domestic violence service in sydney. (iv) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.  ) the mother alleges that the father made threats to harm both her and her children. (v) she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.   she also alleged that the father engaged in tracking behaviour, although there were no details deposed or evidence led in support of this. (vi) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.  ) the father denies perpetrating family violence. however, he concedes being charged and convicted of offences.
conclusions   the mother complains of the family violence incident in early 2014. she says she withdrew her complaint because she had nowhere to go. (b) the father said he was not prepared to make a complaint about the mother’s violence to the police because he was on a temporary visa and did not want any problems with him or the mother. (c) the father conceded he had given the police inaccurate versions of an event. (d) the father said he had not defended the police charges because the wife told him she needed police records in order to preserve her visa. (e) the father, when he gave evidence, conceded some of the allegations of family violence. he says that the mother gave false information and exaggerated the claims, and whilst he did not agree with some aspects of the police allegations, he was overwhelmed by the criminal justice system and pled guilty.   the father said he was not prepared to make a complaint about the mother’s violence to the police because he was on a temporary visa and did not want any problems with him or the mother. (c) the father conceded he had given the police inaccurate versions of an event. (d) the father said he had not defended the police charges because the wife told him she needed police records in order to preserve her visa. (e) the father, when he gave evidence, conceded some of the allegations of family violence. he says that the mother gave false information and exaggerated the claims, and whilst he did not agree with some aspects of the police allegations, he was overwhelmed by the criminal justice system and pled guilty.   the father conceded he had given the police inaccurate versions of an event. (d) the father said he had not defended the police charges because the wife told him she needed police records in order to preserve her visa. (e) the father, when he gave evidence, conceded some of the allegations of family violence. he says that the mother gave false information and exaggerated the claims, and whilst he did not agree with some aspects of the police allegations, he was overwhelmed by the criminal justice system and pled guilty.   the father said he had not defended the police charges because the wife told him she needed police records in order to preserve her visa. (e) the father, when he gave evidence, conceded some of the allegations of family violence. he says that the mother gave false information and exaggerated the claims, and whilst he did not agree with some aspects of the police allegations, he was overwhelmed by the criminal justice system and pled guilty.   the father, when he gave evidence, conceded some of the allegations of family violence. he says that the mother gave false information and exaggerated the claims, and whilst he did not agree with some aspects of the police allegations, he was overwhelmed by the criminal justice system and pled guilty.
both parties raised significant concerns about significant verbal, psychological and emotional abuse perpetrated by the other party, some of which has been perpetrated post-separation. the collateral evidence, including numerous intervention orders, stays in refuges, and reports from child protection appear to support the position of [ms nihal] [the mother], however, it is difficult to determine the full and accurate picture, but the nature of the abuse is very serious and concerning and more particularly so when [x] appears to be have been witness to some of this abuse. regardless of who the primary perpetrator is, it is important to note that children exposed to family violence have the potential to have a significant impact on their physical, social, and emotional development.
parental responsibility
x’s living arrangements
the mother’s proposal   x has always lived with the mother, and they share a strong bond. (b) he would remain at his current school where the family report writer notes:   he would remain at his current school where the family report writer notes:   appears settled and comfortable in his current school, talking positively about his experience there and his teachers with the report writer. the report writer would be hesitant to make any significant change to the status quo without evident of harm or harm risk to his ongoing safety. in his short life, [x] has experienced a lot of change and potential exposure to family violence. it is integral that he now has structure and routine as much as possible, as well as safety and stability.   remaining in melbourne will provide x with some stability and avoid further upheaval. (d) the mother would remain living along distance from the mother which might cause her less fear for her safety.   the mother would remain living along distance from the mother which might cause her less fear for her safety.   the lack of support networks and family the mother has in victoria. (b) the inability of the father to provide the mother with respite and ongoing support with x’s parenting if they remain in melbourne. (c) the unknown state of the mother’s mental health and wellbeing, in particular, the anxiety attacks she suffers from and how this might impact on her parenting capacity. (d) the mother may not promote a relationship between x and the father while he remains so far away. (e) there is a current and ongoing concern that the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s basic needs like food and housing and education. (f) the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   the inability of the father to provide the mother with respite and ongoing support with x’s parenting if they remain in melbourne. (c) the unknown state of the mother’s mental health and wellbeing, in particular, the anxiety attacks she suffers from and how this might impact on her parenting capacity. (d) the mother may not promote a relationship between x and the father while he remains so far away. (e) there is a current and ongoing concern that the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s basic needs like food and housing and education. (f) the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   the unknown state of the mother’s mental health and wellbeing, in particular, the anxiety attacks she suffers from and how this might impact on her parenting capacity. (d) the mother may not promote a relationship between x and the father while he remains so far away. (e) there is a current and ongoing concern that the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s basic needs like food and housing and education. (f) the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   the mother may not promote a relationship between x and the father while he remains so far away. (e) there is a current and ongoing concern that the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s basic needs like food and housing and education. (f) the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   there is a current and ongoing concern that the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s basic needs like food and housing and education. (f) the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   the mother’s mental health may worsen, and this will further impact upon her parenting capacity and her ability to attend to x’s day-to-day needs. (g) the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   the father cannot provide the same safety net from sydney. for example, the mother does not pack food for x to take to school. the father is too far away to assist. (h) there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.   there are obvious practical difficulties and expenses in x spending time with the father if he remains living in sydney. these difficulties have been present for to some time.
the father’s proposal  the father has secure, appropriate, and long-term housing for x. (b) the father is financially secure. (c) the father, with the support of ms f, his wife, will ensure that x’s day-to-day needs are met. (d) the father has demonstrated a willingness to support x’s relationship with the mother.   the father is financially secure. (c) the father, with the support of ms f, his wife, will ensure that x’s day-to-day needs are met. (d) the father has demonstrated a willingness to support x’s relationship with the mother.   the father, with the support of ms f, his wife, will ensure that x’s day-to-day needs are met. (d) the father has demonstrated a willingness to support x’s relationship with the mother.   the father has demonstrated a willingness to support x’s relationship with the mother.   the father’s capacity to care for x and how x would fit into his household is untested. (b) x may find the separation from his mother and life in a new household distressing because he has always lived with his mother. this view is strongly supported by the family report writer. (c) the impact it would have on the mother and her ability to maintain a meaningful relationship with x because: (i) she might remain in a financially precarious position. this raises concerns about her ability to travel to sydney to visit x on a regular basis, and (ii) of the negative impact it might have on her mental health which, in turn, impacts on her parenting capacity.   x may find the separation from his mother and life in a new household distressing because he has always lived with his mother. this view is strongly supported by the family report writer. (c) the impact it would have on the mother and her ability to maintain a meaningful relationship with x because: (i) she might remain in a financially precarious position. this raises concerns about her ability to travel to sydney to visit x on a regular basis, and (ii) of the negative impact it might have on her mental health which, in turn, impacts on her parenting capacity.   the impact it would have on the mother and her ability to maintain a meaningful relationship with x because: (i) she might remain in a financially precarious position. this raises concerns about her ability to travel to sydney to visit x on a regular basis, and (ii) of the negative impact it might have on her mental health which, in turn, impacts on her parenting capacity.   she might remain in a financially precarious position. this raises concerns about her ability to travel to sydney to visit x on a regular basis, and (ii) of the negative impact it might have on her mental health which, in turn, impacts on her parenting capacity.  ) of the negative impact it might have on her mental health which, in turn, impacts on her parenting capacity.
conclusions about which parent x should live with   x’s poor attendance at school, including late arrivals in circumstances where the mother is not employed, and they walk to school. (b) x regularly attending school with inadequate water and without food or water. (c) x complains that the mother harshly disciplines him. (d) the lack of activities or social engagement for x and the mother. (e) the lack of family supports in place for x in melbourne. (f) the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.   x regularly attending school with inadequate water and without food or water. (c) x complains that the mother harshly disciplines him. (d) the lack of activities or social engagement for x and the mother. (e) the lack of family supports in place for x in melbourne. (f) the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.   x complains that the mother harshly disciplines him. (d) the lack of activities or social engagement for x and the mother. (e) the lack of family supports in place for x in melbourne. (f) the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.   the lack of activities or social engagement for x and the mother. (e) the lack of family supports in place for x in melbourne. (f) the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.   the lack of family supports in place for x in melbourne. (f) the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.   the absence of details about future plans for the mother and x.
should the mother be required to relocate with x to sydney?   she has never been engaged in employment in melbourne, (b) she has no permanent accommodation in melbourne, and (c) she has no family and social ties in melbourne.   she has no permanent accommodation in melbourne, and (c) she has no family and social ties in melbourne.   she has no family and social ties in melbourne.
she has a particularly strong bond with the child and, if the court were to order the child relocate to sydney, despite her fears, she would do so. however, she believes this would relocate her to a world of fear from which she has successfully fled. it is relevant to consider what effect this may have upon her parenting. (as per the original)  tations omitted)   the mother would need to find new accommodation in a different city and one that is experiencing similar housing challenges to those the mother has been dealing with in melbourne. (b) her mental health may deteriorate because she is living in closer proximity to the father. (c) the mother would move away from the support services she has relied upon in melbourne and would have to find new ones in sydney. (d) the mother has no readily apparent financial resources and may find the requirement to move and re-establish her life in sydney financially challenging. (e) there will be further disruption to her life.   her mental health may deteriorate because she is living in closer proximity to the father. (c) the mother would move away from the support services she has relied upon in melbourne and would have to find new ones in sydney. (d) the mother has no readily apparent financial resources and may find the requirement to move and re-establish her life in sydney financially challenging. (e) there will be further disruption to her life.   the mother would move away from the support services she has relied upon in melbourne and would have to find new ones in sydney. (d) the mother has no readily apparent financial resources and may find the requirement to move and re-establish her life in sydney financially challenging. (e) there will be further disruption to her life.   the mother has no readily apparent financial resources and may find the requirement to move and re-establish her life in sydney financially challenging. (e) there will be further disruption to her life.   there will be further disruption to her life.   the mother would receive enhanced support from the father. (b) there will be greater opportunities for x to pursue extracurricular activities by reasons of the father’s income and resources. (c) the father would have more ability to have oversight and involvement in x’s day-to-day care, such as his attendance at school. (d) the geographical distance between the parents would no longer impact on x’s relationship with his father if relocation is supported by the court.   there will be greater opportunities for x to pursue extracurricular activities by reasons of the father’s income and resources. (c) the father would have more ability to have oversight and involvement in x’s day-to-day care, such as his attendance at school. (d) the geographical distance between the parents would no longer impact on x’s relationship with his father if relocation is supported by the court.   the father would have more ability to have oversight and involvement in x’s day-to-day care, such as his attendance at school. (d) the geographical distance between the parents would no longer impact on x’s relationship with his father if relocation is supported by the court.   the geographical distance between the parents would no longer impact on x’s relationship with his father if relocation is supported by the court.
conclusions about relocation
the time x should spend with the father
the icl’s costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 31 january 2024
dated: 31 january 2024
[1] grammatical and literal errors have been corrected from the transcript for comprehension. references have been included and if the transcript contains an incorrect or incomplete reference, it has been corrected.