last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
emery & dustin [2024] fedcfamc2f 80
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility   notify the father of any proposed decision in relation to the long-term care of the child in writing before a final decision is made, except in the case of an emergency, (b) take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decision provided, and (c) advise the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   take into consideration any views expressed by the father in respect of such proposed decision provided, and (c) advise the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   advise the father of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.
spend time with arrangements  in each term 1 and term 3 school holiday period, from after school on the last day of term, until the start of school on the first day of the following term. (b) in each term 4 holiday period, for half the holidays, being the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even-numbered years.   in each term 4 holiday period, for half the holidays, being the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even-numbered years.
extracurricular activities   notify the other parent in writing of any proposed activity at least fourteen (14) days before the activity commences, and (b) take into consideration any views expressed by the other parent in respect of such proposed activity, and (c) advise the other parent of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable, and (d) if the child is ultimately enrolled or registered in an activity, provide the other parent with all the details pertaining to the activity, so that the other parent has the opportunity to facilitate the child’s attendance.   take into consideration any views expressed by the other parent in respect of such proposed activity, and (c) advise the other parent of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable, and (d) if the child is ultimately enrolled or registered in an activity, provide the other parent with all the details pertaining to the activity, so that the other parent has the opportunity to facilitate the child’s attendance.   advise the other parent of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable, and (d) if the child is ultimately enrolled or registered in an activity, provide the other parent with all the details pertaining to the activity, so that the other parent has the opportunity to facilitate the child’s attendance.   if the child is ultimately enrolled or registered in an activity, provide the other parent with all the details pertaining to the activity, so that the other parent has the opportunity to facilitate the child’s attendance.   providing particulars of the activity, including the nature of the activity, and (b) any details which would allow the other parent to facilitate (if the other parent so chooses) the child’s involvement in that activity.   any details which would allow the other parent to facilitate (if the other parent so chooses) the child’s involvement in that activity.
international travel   particulars of the trip, including the proposed itinerary and proposed period of travel, (b) at least ten (10) days before departure, a final itinerary including contact telephone numbers and addresses of where the child will be staying, and (c) copies of return airline booking and details of flights once booked (and at least ten (10) days before departure).   at least ten (10) days before departure, a final itinerary including contact telephone numbers and addresses of where the child will be staying, and (c) copies of return airline booking and details of flights once booked (and at least ten (10) days before departure).   copies of return airline booking and details of flights once booked (and at least ten (10) days before departure).
changeovers  other than for the purpose of changeover provided for in order 14 above, neither parent shall attend the other parent’s home without the prior approval of that other parent, (b) each parent shall behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent and any other person or persons who may be present, (c) each parent shall conduct themselves in a child-focussed manner, (d) each parent shall limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, and (e) neither parent shall discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent shall behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent and any other person or persons who may be present, (c) each parent shall conduct themselves in a child-focussed manner, (d) each parent shall limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, and (e) neither parent shall discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent shall conduct themselves in a child-focussed manner, (d) each parent shall limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, and (e) neither parent shall discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent shall limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, and (e) neither parent shall discuss issues of any controversy between them.   neither parent shall discuss issues of any controversy between them.
school   before enrolling the child to attend the school, the parents have agreed on arrangements for the payment of school fees and have agreed to be bound by that agreement, (b) the child is accepted for enrolment at that school, and (c) the time the child attends the school is to commence at the earliest calendar year in which he is accepted for enrolment.   the child is accepted for enrolment at that school, and (c) the time the child attends the school is to commence at the earliest calendar year in which he is accepted for enrolment.   the time the child attends the school is to commence at the earliest calendar year in which he is accepted for enrolment.
general orders
restraints   denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (b) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child, or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (c) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (d) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (e) causing the child to be a medium in any way between their mother and their father.   discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child, or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (c) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (d) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (e) causing the child to be a medium in any way between their mother and their father.   permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (d) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (e) causing the child to be a medium in any way between their mother and their father.   communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (e) causing the child to be a medium in any way between their mother and their father.   causing the child to be a medium in any way between their mother and their father.
costs
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
issues in contention   they are unable to communicate and foster a positive and productive coparenting relationship, and, therefore, an order for equal shared parental responsibility is not reasonably practicable, (b) subsequently, there is a need to insulate x from the parental conflict, and (c) neither party poses a physical risk to x’s safety.   subsequently, there is a need to insulate x from the parental conflict, and (c) neither party poses a physical risk to x’s safety.   neither party poses a physical risk to x’s safety.   who should exercise parental responsibility over x, (b) whether x should live with the father or continue to live with the mother, (c) the amount of time the parent with whom x does not live with spends with him, and (d) whether the parents should be permitted to travel overseas with x.   whether x should live with the father or continue to live with the mother, (c) the amount of time the parent with whom x does not live with spends with him, and (d) whether the parents should be permitted to travel overseas with x.   the amount of time the parent with whom x does not live with spends with him, and (d) whether the parents should be permitted to travel overseas with x.   whether the parents should be permitted to travel overseas with x.   changeovers, including location and the parties’ conduct, (b) future schooling arrangements for x, (c) general orders about communicating with each other and non-denigration orders, and (d) the icl’s costs be split between the parties.   future schooling arrangements for x, (c) general orders about communicating with each other and non-denigration orders, and (d) the icl’s costs be split between the parties.   general orders about communicating with each other and non-denigration orders, and (d) the icl’s costs be split between the parties.   the icl’s costs be split between the parties.
evidence
relevant facts   the mother is currently living with x, m and l in a home situated at p street, suburb q (“the suburb q property”). (b) the mother has not re-partnered. she is currently employed as an administration officer and works in the cbd. she claimed she has flexible working arrangements available to her and does not need to travel for her job. (c) the father currently lives at the suburb o property and has been in a relationship with ms h since late 2022. (d) ms h deposed that she stays with the father when she travels to sydney for work. she gave evidence that this could be anywhere between two or three weeks a month. (e) the father continues to work at the r company, where he has been appointed as a professional. however, he gave evidence that he is reducing his workload with the intention of ‘easing’ into retirement.   the mother has not re-partnered. she is currently employed as an administration officer and works in the cbd. she claimed she has flexible working arrangements available to her and does not need to travel for her job. (c) the father currently lives at the suburb o property and has been in a relationship with ms h since late 2022. (d) ms h deposed that she stays with the father when she travels to sydney for work. she gave evidence that this could be anywhere between two or three weeks a month. (e) the father continues to work at the r company, where he has been appointed as a professional. however, he gave evidence that he is reducing his workload with the intention of ‘easing’ into retirement.   the father currently lives at the suburb o property and has been in a relationship with ms h since late 2022. (d) ms h deposed that she stays with the father when she travels to sydney for work. she gave evidence that this could be anywhere between two or three weeks a month. (e) the father continues to work at the r company, where he has been appointed as a professional. however, he gave evidence that he is reducing his workload with the intention of ‘easing’ into retirement.   ms h deposed that she stays with the father when she travels to sydney for work. she gave evidence that this could be anywhere between two or three weeks a month. (e) the father continues to work at the r company, where he has been appointed as a professional. however, he gave evidence that he is reducing his workload with the intention of ‘easing’ into retirement.   the father continues to work at the r company, where he has been appointed as a professional. however, he gave evidence that he is reducing his workload with the intention of ‘easing’ into retirement.
proposals  the mother have sole parental responsibility for x and live with her. (b) the father spend time with x: (i) during school terms: (a) each alternate weekend from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) each wednesday afternoon from after school until 7 pm. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in odd numbered years, and for the second half in even numbered years. (iii) on special occasions: (a) for at least four hours on x and the father’s birthdays. (b) on father’s day from 10 am to 6 pm.   the father spend time with x: (i) during school terms: (a) each alternate weekend from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) each wednesday afternoon from after school until 7 pm. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in odd numbered years, and for the second half in even numbered years. (iii) on special occasions: (a) for at least four hours on x and the father’s birthdays. (b) on father’s day from 10 am to 6 pm.   during school terms: (a) each alternate weekend from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) each wednesday afternoon from after school until 7 pm. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in odd numbered years, and for the second half in even numbered years. (iii) on special occasions: (a) for at least four hours on x and the father’s birthdays. (b) on father’s day from 10 am to 6 pm.  ) during each school holiday: for the first half in odd numbered years, and for the second half in even numbered years. (iii) on special occasions: (a) for at least four hours on x and the father’s birthdays. (b) on father’s day from 10 am to 6 pm.  i) on special occasions: (a) for at least four hours on x and the father’s birthdays. (b) on father’s day from 10 am to 6 pm.   the father have sole parental responsibility for x and live with him. (b) the mother spend time with x: (i) during school terms: (a) week 1: from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) week 2: from after school thursday to before school friday. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in even numbered years, and for the second half off numbered years. (iii) during christmas holidays in 2023, 2024 and 2024: with the mother on the first, third and fifth weeks in even numbered years, and with the father on the first, third and fifth weeks in odd numbered years. (iv) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026. (c) no overseas travel with x until he turns 18 years old, or until country j becomes a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction (“the hague convention”).   the mother spend time with x: (i) during school terms: (a) week 1: from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) week 2: from after school thursday to before school friday. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in even numbered years, and for the second half off numbered years. (iii) during christmas holidays in 2023, 2024 and 2024: with the mother on the first, third and fifth weeks in even numbered years, and with the father on the first, third and fifth weeks in odd numbered years. (iv) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026. (c) no overseas travel with x until he turns 18 years old, or until country j becomes a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction (“the hague convention”).   during school terms: (a) week 1: from after school friday to before school monday, and (b) week 2: from after school thursday to before school friday. (ii) during each school holiday: for the first half in even numbered years, and for the second half off numbered years. (iii) during christmas holidays in 2023, 2024 and 2024: with the mother on the first, third and fifth weeks in even numbered years, and with the father on the first, third and fifth weeks in odd numbered years. (iv) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026.  ) during each school holiday: for the first half in even numbered years, and for the second half off numbered years. (iii) during christmas holidays in 2023, 2024 and 2024: with the mother on the first, third and fifth weeks in even numbered years, and with the father on the first, third and fifth weeks in odd numbered years. (iv) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026.  i) during christmas holidays in 2023, 2024 and 2024: with the mother on the first, third and fifth weeks in even numbered years, and with the father on the first, third and fifth weeks in odd numbered years. (iv) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026.  ) during christmas holidays from 2026: for the first half in the following even numbered years, and for the second half in the following odd numbered years. (v) on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026.   on special occasions, including for x and the parties’ birthdays, mother’s day and christmas eve and day until 2026.   no overseas travel with x until he turns 18 years old, or until country j becomes a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction (“the hague convention”).   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x and live with her. (b) the father spend time with x: (i) during school terms: each alternative weekend from after school on thursday to before school on monday. (ii) during school holidays: (a) for terms 1 and 3, from after school on the last day of term to the first day of the start of the following term. (b) in every term 4, for the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years. (iii) if x is not otherwise spending time with the father, from after school friday to before school the following monday on the weekend of father’s day. (c) each parent notify the other within 24 hours of enrolling x in any activity or other commitment, and that neither party is obliged to facilitate x’s participation in such activities or commitments. (d) both parties be restrained from removing x from australia.   the father spend time with x: (i) during school terms: each alternative weekend from after school on thursday to before school on monday. (ii) during school holidays: (a) for terms 1 and 3, from after school on the last day of term to the first day of the start of the following term. (b) in every term 4, for the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years. (iii) if x is not otherwise spending time with the father, from after school friday to before school the following monday on the weekend of father’s day. (c) each parent notify the other within 24 hours of enrolling x in any activity or other commitment, and that neither party is obliged to facilitate x’s participation in such activities or commitments. (d) both parties be restrained from removing x from australia.   during school terms: each alternative weekend from after school on thursday to before school on monday. (ii) during school holidays: (a) for terms 1 and 3, from after school on the last day of term to the first day of the start of the following term. (b) in every term 4, for the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years. (iii) if x is not otherwise spending time with the father, from after school friday to before school the following monday on the weekend of father’s day.  ) during school holidays: (a) for terms 1 and 3, from after school on the last day of term to the first day of the start of the following term. (b) in every term 4, for the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years. (iii) if x is not otherwise spending time with the father, from after school friday to before school the following monday on the weekend of father’s day.  i) if x is not otherwise spending time with the father, from after school friday to before school the following monday on the weekend of father’s day.   each parent notify the other within 24 hours of enrolling x in any activity or other commitment, and that neither party is obliged to facilitate x’s participation in such activities or commitments. (d) both parties be restrained from removing x from australia.   both parties be restrained from removing x from australia.
the expert report  a change of residence for x would not be warranted unless the evidence substantiated the father’s allegations about the mother’s emotionally destructive parenting practices and discounted the mother’s allegations of the father’s violence. (2) on a final basis, x should live with one parent and spend time with the other parent on alternate weekends “friday pm to monday am”, as well as half the school holidays. (3) in order to eliminate unnecessary handovers, the visitation schedule should apportion school holidays so as to allow the parents to celebrate christmas day and other special days with x in alternate years. (4) the residential parent should exercise sole parental responsibility. (5) both parents should attend a post-separation parenting course such as keeping kids in mind. (6) both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   on a final basis, x should live with one parent and spend time with the other parent on alternate weekends “friday pm to monday am”, as well as half the school holidays. (3) in order to eliminate unnecessary handovers, the visitation schedule should apportion school holidays so as to allow the parents to celebrate christmas day and other special days with x in alternate years. (4) the residential parent should exercise sole parental responsibility. (5) both parents should attend a post-separation parenting course such as keeping kids in mind. (6) both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   in order to eliminate unnecessary handovers, the visitation schedule should apportion school holidays so as to allow the parents to celebrate christmas day and other special days with x in alternate years. (4) the residential parent should exercise sole parental responsibility. (5) both parents should attend a post-separation parenting course such as keeping kids in mind. (6) both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   the residential parent should exercise sole parental responsibility. (5) both parents should attend a post-separation parenting course such as keeping kids in mind. (6) both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   both parents should attend a post-separation parenting course such as keeping kids in mind. (6) both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   both parents should seek individual counselling assistance to improve their parental reflective function. (7) the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   the parties should engage in reportable intensive family therapy (“rift”).   on 22 august 2022, the father engaged with ms s for family therapy to assist him to improve his parenting approach and his coparenting relationship with the mother. (b) in october 2022, both parties agreed to undertake rift. an agreement was eventually reached to undergo rift with the family therapist. (c) on or around july 2023, the mother enrolled in post-separation therapy with the aim to improve her communication and co-parenting relationship with the father. her first appointment was scheduled for august 2023.   in october 2022, both parties agreed to undertake rift. an agreement was eventually reached to undergo rift with the family therapist. (c) on or around july 2023, the mother enrolled in post-separation therapy with the aim to improve her communication and co-parenting relationship with the father. her first appointment was scheduled for august 2023.   on or around july 2023, the mother enrolled in post-separation therapy with the aim to improve her communication and co-parenting relationship with the father. her first appointment was scheduled for august 2023.   that x continues to live with the mother if the court was satisfied that he was not at risk of physical or emotional harm as alleged by the father. (b) that x spends one afternoon during the week and overnight with the parent he is not living with, provided the court was satisfied that it would not interrupt x’s routine and reduce the risk of his exposure to the acrimony between the parties. she preferred, however, an arrangement that saw the parent that x is not living with to have extended time during holidays to maximise the possibility of having contact with extended family. (c) to ensure that the parties have as little opportunity as possible to interact with each other, she suggested that they have alternating holidays rather than half each. (d) that the parties keep their own schedule with x when he spends his weekend with them.   that x spends one afternoon during the week and overnight with the parent he is not living with, provided the court was satisfied that it would not interrupt x’s routine and reduce the risk of his exposure to the acrimony between the parties. she preferred, however, an arrangement that saw the parent that x is not living with to have extended time during holidays to maximise the possibility of having contact with extended family. (c) to ensure that the parties have as little opportunity as possible to interact with each other, she suggested that they have alternating holidays rather than half each. (d) that the parties keep their own schedule with x when he spends his weekend with them.   to ensure that the parties have as little opportunity as possible to interact with each other, she suggested that they have alternating holidays rather than half each. (d) that the parties keep their own schedule with x when he spends his weekend with them.   that the parties keep their own schedule with x when he spends his weekend with them.
background
the law
x
both parents describe [x] as a child with an easy temperament who is not difficult to parent. in person [x] impressed me as a friendly child who is eager to please adults but at the same time able to sweetly assert his own strong will. categorical classification of children’s attachments is not valid outside laboratory conditions, but it would be fair to say that in this short observation [x] behaved like a securely-attached child. he was observed to display secure base behaviour towards both parents and formed a ready rapport with me, a stranger in a strange place. he clearly expects adults to be kind.
x’s extended family
x’s parents  from the mother: (a) in late 2021, the father was filming her with x, which resulted in the police being called to the home. (b) the father attempted to remove x from her care and on one occasion, blocked the mother from leaving with his own car. (2) from the father: (a) that the mother involved m and l in the dispute by encouraging them to treat him with contempt. he claimed that she encouraged them to speak in country j language when in his presence to further isolate him. (b) when he saw x in july 2023, he claimed that x appeared tired, unsettled, and was behaving poorly. he allegedly said to the father: “daddy, i need to spend 6 days with mummy and one with you. i love mummy more than you.” under cross-examination, he complained that the messages x received in the mother’s home was damaging. (c) in early 2022, the mother sent the father a video recording (apparently taken in late 2021) of x being asked if the father hit him. the father claimed that x was observed to be “extremely distressed and crying”.   in late 2021, the father was filming her with x, which resulted in the police being called to the home. (b) the father attempted to remove x from her care and on one occasion, blocked the mother from leaving with his own car.   the father attempted to remove x from her care and on one occasion, blocked the mother from leaving with his own car.   from the father: (a) that the mother involved m and l in the dispute by encouraging them to treat him with contempt. he claimed that she encouraged them to speak in country j language when in his presence to further isolate him. (b) when he saw x in july 2023, he claimed that x appeared tired, unsettled, and was behaving poorly. he allegedly said to the father: “daddy, i need to spend 6 days with mummy and one with you. i love mummy more than you.” under cross-examination, he complained that the messages x received in the mother’s home was damaging. (c) in early 2022, the mother sent the father a video recording (apparently taken in late 2021) of x being asked if the father hit him. the father claimed that x was observed to be “extremely distressed and crying”.   that the mother involved m and l in the dispute by encouraging them to treat him with contempt. he claimed that she encouraged them to speak in country j language when in his presence to further isolate him. (b) when he saw x in july 2023, he claimed that x appeared tired, unsettled, and was behaving poorly. he allegedly said to the father: “daddy, i need to spend 6 days with mummy and one with you. i love mummy more than you.” under cross-examination, he complained that the messages x received in the mother’s home was damaging. (c) in early 2022, the mother sent the father a video recording (apparently taken in late 2021) of x being asked if the father hit him. the father claimed that x was observed to be “extremely distressed and crying”.   when he saw x in july 2023, he claimed that x appeared tired, unsettled, and was behaving poorly. he allegedly said to the father: “daddy, i need to spend 6 days with mummy and one with you. i love mummy more than you.” under cross-examination, he complained that the messages x received in the mother’s home was damaging. (c) in early 2022, the mother sent the father a video recording (apparently taken in late 2021) of x being asked if the father hit him. the father claimed that x was observed to be “extremely distressed and crying”.   in early 2022, the mother sent the father a video recording (apparently taken in late 2021) of x being asked if the father hit him. the father claimed that x was observed to be “extremely distressed and crying”.   z] opined that even if the mother’s motivation was sincere maternal protectiveness, her behaviour was counter-productive and inappropriate. by her actions [ms emery] drew [x] into the family law dispute, highlighting to him the parental acrimony as well as (potentially) setting up a pattern of [x] endorsing the mother’s negative conclusions about his father in order to please her... (the expert report, paragraph 6)   the father threw out a container of food that had been in the fridge. (b) an argument ensued when the father, who was preparing food had a kitchen knife in his hand. (c) the mother says that the presence of the knife frightened her. (d) the mother instructed l to call the police. (e) the police attended whilst the children were home. no action was taken. (f) the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   an argument ensued when the father, who was preparing food had a kitchen knife in his hand. (c) the mother says that the presence of the knife frightened her. (d) the mother instructed l to call the police. (e) the police attended whilst the children were home. no action was taken. (f) the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   the mother says that the presence of the knife frightened her. (d) the mother instructed l to call the police. (e) the police attended whilst the children were home. no action was taken. (f) the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   the mother instructed l to call the police. (e) the police attended whilst the children were home. no action was taken. (f) the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   the police attended whilst the children were home. no action was taken. (f) the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   the mother then used the fridge located in the garage for her and the children’s food.   by the mother: (a) in late 2021, the mother claimed that the father came into x’s bedroom, allegedly filming her and x. he shouted at her, “christ, you stupid woman. you have the heater on with a high temperature. x’s room has no fresh air. you are killing him.” (b) she complains about the father’s level of care for x. for example, that: (i) in late 2021, while in the father’s care, x developed an illness. (ii) in late 2021, the mother alleged that x was returned to her care covered in mosquito bites. (iii) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands. (c) in april 2023, the mother emailed the father as she was concerned that x had told her that ms h had changed in front of him. (d) she contends that the father displays a negative attitude towards her and is unable to support x’s country j heritage. she deposed that after an altercation in late 2021:   in late 2021, the mother claimed that the father came into x’s bedroom, allegedly filming her and x. he shouted at her, “christ, you stupid woman. you have the heater on with a high temperature. x’s room has no fresh air. you are killing him.” (b) she complains about the father’s level of care for x. for example, that: (i) in late 2021, while in the father’s care, x developed an illness. (ii) in late 2021, the mother alleged that x was returned to her care covered in mosquito bites. (iii) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands. (c) in april 2023, the mother emailed the father as she was concerned that x had told her that ms h had changed in front of him. (d) she contends that the father displays a negative attitude towards her and is unable to support x’s country j heritage. she deposed that after an altercation in late 2021:   she complains about the father’s level of care for x. for example, that: (i) in late 2021, while in the father’s care, x developed an illness. (ii) in late 2021, the mother alleged that x was returned to her care covered in mosquito bites. (iii) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands. (c) in april 2023, the mother emailed the father as she was concerned that x had told her that ms h had changed in front of him. (d) she contends that the father displays a negative attitude towards her and is unable to support x’s country j heritage. she deposed that after an altercation in late 2021:   in late 2021, while in the father’s care, x developed an illness. (ii) in late 2021, the mother alleged that x was returned to her care covered in mosquito bites. (iii) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands.  ) in late 2021, the mother alleged that x was returned to her care covered in mosquito bites. (iii) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands.  i) in early 2023, the mother sought medical attention for a skin irritation on x’s hands.   in april 2023, the mother emailed the father as she was concerned that x had told her that ms h had changed in front of him. (d) she contends that the father displays a negative attitude towards her and is unable to support x’s country j heritage. she deposed that after an altercation in late 2021:   she contends that the father displays a negative attitude towards her and is unable to support x’s country j heritage. she deposed that after an altercation in late 2021:
... [mr dustin] made a phone call during which he screamed into the phone, loudly enough for me to hear, ‘she set up the marriage....to hell with her cohorts...[country j] renegade...fucking bitch’. (as per the original)   the negative view that the father took of the mother was one also adopted at times by members of the paternal family. upon x’s return from the region t trip, the father sent the mother text messages from his family addressed to her. in these messages, the mother is referred to as “mentally retarded”, “stupid [country j person]”, “an idiot”, and “abuser”. the father conceded in cross-examination that he had passed these messages on to the mother and admitted that doing so was inappropriate and something he now regretted. he further conceded that the messages were “insulting and racist”.   by the father:   he contended that from february 2021 to october 2021, the mother spent most of her days in bed on her phone. in those circumstances, he claimed to have taken responsibility for most aspects of x’s care. (b) he complained of the mother enrolling x at suburb q school without consulting with him first. (c) the mother’s failure to play an active role in milestone events for x was also a source of complaint by the father. he cited her failure to attend his first day at school and a class family picnic arranged for parents and children.   he complained of the mother enrolling x at suburb q school without consulting with him first. (c) the mother’s failure to play an active role in milestone events for x was also a source of complaint by the father. he cited her failure to attend his first day at school and a class family picnic arranged for parents and children.   the mother’s failure to play an active role in milestone events for x was also a source of complaint by the father. he cited her failure to attend his first day at school and a class family picnic arranged for parents and children.
96 much of the conflict between the parties reflected their very different attitudes to the roles and responsibilities of parenting. understandably, when x returned from the father’s care, the mother raised any concerns she had regarding x’s physical wellbeing. however, the father takes a more robust approach to parenting children, and, while taking precautions, he viewed minor ailments such as scratches and bites as an inevitable part of a child’s enjoyment of the outdoors. it was not asserted, nor was there evidence to suggest, that x was at an unacceptable risk of harm in the father’s care.
what parenting orders are in x’s best interests?   the parents consult the other in relation to the decision to be made, (2) the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (3) the decision be made jointly by those persons.   the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (3) the decision be made jointly by those persons.   the decision be made jointly by those persons.
living arrangements
will either parent likely ensure that x enjoys a meaningful relationship with the other?
his demeanour during the sessions was highly engaged and at times charismatic, but i observed his communication style to occasionally be controlling, demanding, and condescending, albeit always polite.   dustin]’s empathic concern for his son can be eclipsed at times by his own strong opinions, including a heartfelt commitment to his advocated solution to his child’s predicament. likewise, he displayed limited ability to imagine that [x] might have needs, thoughts or feelings which were opaque to him, especially when a conflict of interests was implied. for example, [mr dustin] was dismissive about the likely impacts on [x] of sibling separation, with reference to a shallow analysis of surface features...
expressed reluctance in using the our family wizard. she lacked confidence that it would effectively facilitate communication with [mr dustin] ad conveyed her reluctance to engage in any communication with him, both presently and in the future. [ms emery] also described feeling intimidated by [mr dustin], which resulted in her inability to participate in joint sessions with him. furthermore, she disclosed that the relationship with him was reportedly marred by historical domestic violence. (as per the original)
i will encourage contact with her and ensure that he spends time with his mum. i would like to think he could go to her home as often as possible if only her attitude was more cooperative and child focussed. (emphasis added)
if [mr dustin] is right in thinking that [ms emery] will resolutely undermine the father‑son relationship, then a change of principal residence will not resolve the problem: why should [mr dustin] suppose that [ms emery] would behave differently if [x] spent fewer days per fortnight with her? if such a bleak scenario came to pass, [x] might eventually resolve his predicament by rejecting one parent. which parent would be rejected is not certain. perhaps the parent he blames (rightly or wrongly) for causing the problem, perhaps the parent whose displeasure he fears less, perhaps the more coercive, punitive parent. however, when such rejections occur they tends [sic] to be sudden and difficult to reverse before the child is an adult. as a pre-emptive strike best efforts should be made to prevent [x] having any need to resort to that drastic solution. estrangement from either side of his family during childhood would represent a significant loss of social capital for [x]. (as per the original)   the father provides a good balance for x. he is focussed on ensuring that x is exposed to an array of activities and experiences. (b) living in the father’s household, x would grow up surrounded and supported by members of his extended paternal family. if the father is unavailable to care for x, there are other suitable family members who can fill the void. (c) the father is financially secure. (d) the father would comfortably navigate x’s social networks and activities, as well as support his participation in them.   living in the father’s household, x would grow up surrounded and supported by members of his extended paternal family. if the father is unavailable to care for x, there are other suitable family members who can fill the void. (c) the father is financially secure. (d) the father would comfortably navigate x’s social networks and activities, as well as support his participation in them.   the father is financially secure. (d) the father would comfortably navigate x’s social networks and activities, as well as support his participation in them.   the father would comfortably navigate x’s social networks and activities, as well as support his participation in them.   she has been the primary carer for x since birth. (b) x would remain living with his siblings, m and l. he enjoys a close relationship with them, particularly m. (c) x would continue to attend suburb q school where he appears to be progressing well. (d) he will not be estranged from his country j heritage in the care of the mother. (e) she is much younger than the father, and more likely to be in a position to provide consistent care for x until her turns 18.   x would remain living with his siblings, m and l. he enjoys a close relationship with them, particularly m. (c) x would continue to attend suburb q school where he appears to be progressing well. (d) he will not be estranged from his country j heritage in the care of the mother. (e) she is much younger than the father, and more likely to be in a position to provide consistent care for x until her turns 18.   x would continue to attend suburb q school where he appears to be progressing well. (d) he will not be estranged from his country j heritage in the care of the mother. (e) she is much younger than the father, and more likely to be in a position to provide consistent care for x until her turns 18.   he will not be estranged from his country j heritage in the care of the mother. (e) she is much younger than the father, and more likely to be in a position to provide consistent care for x until her turns 18.   she is much younger than the father, and more likely to be in a position to provide consistent care for x until her turns 18.   an arrangement where x remains in the mother’s care will best promote his stability. (b) whilst x has and continues to be exposed to the parental conflict, orders can be made restricting the face to face contact and direct communication between these parents, especially at changeovers. (c) the father will continue to provide a supportive and loving home environment for x when he spends time with him. indeed, many of the activities that the father enthusiastically supported x participating in, are usually enjoyed on weekends and during holiday periods.   whilst x has and continues to be exposed to the parental conflict, orders can be made restricting the face to face contact and direct communication between these parents, especially at changeovers. (c) the father will continue to provide a supportive and loving home environment for x when he spends time with him. indeed, many of the activities that the father enthusiastically supported x participating in, are usually enjoyed on weekends and during holiday periods.   the father will continue to provide a supportive and loving home environment for x when he spends time with him. indeed, many of the activities that the father enthusiastically supported x participating in, are usually enjoyed on weekends and during holiday periods.
spend time with arrangements
given their mutual animosity, [ms emery] and [mr dustin] should not meet again in the presence of [x] anytime soon. any time before the cosmos collapses would be too soon. scientists debate whether our universe will end in a big crunch or a big freeze, but seem to agree that it will not be for several trillion years. in the meantime, [x] can be shielded from direct exposure to parental acrimony if all handovers are to and from school. this arrangement will also work for school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 if parents take turns having [x] for the whole of the break, thereby reducing direct handovers to once per annum at the mid-point of the 6 week christmas holiday period. any unavoidable changeover outside of school terms should occur on neutral ground.   she would prefer the father to spend time with x each alternate weekend from friday after school until monday before school, although ultimately indicated she could consent to his time commencing on thursday after school. (b) she agreed to each party having x for the whole of each school holiday period but sought to vary the single expert’s proposal by alternating the parent x spends time with in the term 1, 2 and 3 holiday periods, rather than school holidays in terms 1 and 3 with the father, and term 2 with the mother. (c) that in addition to special provisions being made for x to spend time with the father on father’s day, she sought that there be a mirror order in terms of mother’s day. there is no reason why provision should not be made for this to happen, and i will do so.   she agreed to each party having x for the whole of each school holiday period but sought to vary the single expert’s proposal by alternating the parent x spends time with in the term 1, 2 and 3 holiday periods, rather than school holidays in terms 1 and 3 with the father, and term 2 with the mother. (c) that in addition to special provisions being made for x to spend time with the father on father’s day, she sought that there be a mirror order in terms of mother’s day. there is no reason why provision should not be made for this to happen, and i will do so.   that in addition to special provisions being made for x to spend time with the father on father’s day, she sought that there be a mirror order in terms of mother’s day. there is no reason why provision should not be made for this to happen, and i will do so.
the day-to-day activities that x will participate in
international travel with x
conclusion
associate: dated: 29 january 2024
dated: 29 january 2024