last updated: 6 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rowland & rowland [2024] fedcfamc2f 7
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  the wife shall transfer all of her right, title and interest in the property situated at b street, suburb c, nsw (folio identifier ...) (“the suburb c property”) to the husband. (b) the husband shall be solely responsible for the pexa and legal costs associated with the transfer of and discharge of the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage over the suburb c property. (c) simultaneously with the wife’s compliance, the husband shall: (i) refinance the mortgage secured over the suburb c property into his sole name, and (ii) pay the wife a sum of $142,439.   the husband shall be solely responsible for the pexa and legal costs associated with the transfer of and discharge of the commonwealth bank of australia mortgage over the suburb c property. (c) simultaneously with the wife’s compliance, the husband shall: (i) refinance the mortgage secured over the suburb c property into his sole name, and (ii) pay the wife a sum of $142,439.   simultaneously with the wife’s compliance, the husband shall: (i) refinance the mortgage secured over the suburb c property into his sole name, and (ii) pay the wife a sum of $142,439.   refinance the mortgage secured over the suburb c property into his sole name, and (ii) pay the wife a sum of $142,439.  ) pay the wife a sum of $142,439.   nominate three (3) agents to the husband, and the husband to select one (1) of the wife’s nominated agents within a further seven (7) days. (b) nominate to the husband three (3) solicitors to act on the sale and the husband select one (1) of the wife’s nominated solicitors within a further seven (7) days.   nominate to the husband three (3) solicitors to act on the sale and the husband select one (1) of the wife’s nominated solicitors within a further seven (7) days.   the identity of the agent engaged for the sale, (b) the identity of the solicitor instructed to act on the sale, and (c) the process and progress of the sale including but not limited to: (i) the mechanism for sale, (ii) the sale or reserve price that is set, (iii) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.   the identity of the solicitor instructed to act on the sale, and (c) the process and progress of the sale including but not limited to: (i) the mechanism for sale, (ii) the sale or reserve price that is set, (iii) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.   the process and progress of the sale including but not limited to: (i) the mechanism for sale, (ii) the sale or reserve price that is set, (iii) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.   the mechanism for sale, (ii) the sale or reserve price that is set, (iii) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.  ) the sale or reserve price that is set, (iii) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.  i) the date of the listing of the suburb c property on the market and/or the date set for any auction.   making the key available to the agent, (b) allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (c) doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, and (d) ensuring the suburb c property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers.   allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all reasonable times requested by the agent, (c) doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, and (d) ensuring the suburb c property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers.   doing or saying anything to hinder or prevent a sale being effected, and (d) ensuring the suburb c property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers.   ensuring the suburb c property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by the agent and prospective purchasers.   in payment to discharge the mortgage to the commonwealth bank of australia, (b) in payment of the agent’s commission and auction expenses, (c) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of the sale, (d) the sum of $142,439 to the wife, and (e) the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of the agent’s commission and auction expenses, (c) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of the sale, (d) the sum of $142,439 to the wife, and (e) the balance remaining to the husband.   in payment of legal and all other proper costs of the sale, (d) the sum of $142,439 to the wife, and (e) the balance remaining to the husband.   the sum of $142,439 to the wife, and (e) the balance remaining to the husband.   the balance remaining to the husband.   be solely responsible for and pay as and when they fall due all mortgage repayments over the suburb c property, and the husband shall indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the payments of such liabilities, (b) be solely responsible for and pay for all outgoings, including but not limited to telephone, gas and electricity accounts, municipal and water rates, insurance and maintenance in relation to the suburb c property, (c) be solely responsible for and pay for the building and contents insurance for the suburb c property at its current level and pay for all necessary repairs, and (d) indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the payment of all such liabilities in relation to the upkeep and maintenance of the suburb c property.   be solely responsible for and pay for all outgoings, including but not limited to telephone, gas and electricity accounts, municipal and water rates, insurance and maintenance in relation to the suburb c property, (c) be solely responsible for and pay for the building and contents insurance for the suburb c property at its current level and pay for all necessary repairs, and (d) indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the payment of all such liabilities in relation to the upkeep and maintenance of the suburb c property.   be solely responsible for and pay for the building and contents insurance for the suburb c property at its current level and pay for all necessary repairs, and (d) indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the payment of all such liabilities in relation to the upkeep and maintenance of the suburb c property.   indemnify and keep indemnified the wife in respect of the payment of all such liabilities in relation to the upkeep and maintenance of the suburb c property.   the suburb c property, subject to compliance with order 1, (b) the g trust, (c) the shares in h pty ltd, (d) the shares in j pty ltd, (e) the shares in d pty ltd, (f) his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   the g trust, (c) the shares in h pty ltd, (d) the shares in j pty ltd, (e) the shares in d pty ltd, (f) his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   the shares in h pty ltd, (d) the shares in j pty ltd, (e) the shares in d pty ltd, (f) his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   the shares in j pty ltd, (e) the shares in d pty ltd, (f) his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   the shares in d pty ltd, (f) his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   his superannuation entitlements, (g) any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   any furniture, household items and personal effects in his possession, and (h) any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   any funds held in any bank account in his sole name or the name of any company that he retains shares in pursuant to these orders.   the shares in k pty ltd and any of its associated companies, (b) the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, (d) any furniture, household items and personal effects in her possession, and (e) any funds held in any bank account in her sole name or the name of any company or trust that she retains pursuant to these orders.   the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, (d) any furniture, household items and personal effects in her possession, and (e) any funds held in any bank account in her sole name or the name of any company or trust that she retains pursuant to these orders.   her superannuation entitlements, (d) any furniture, household items and personal effects in her possession, and (e) any funds held in any bank account in her sole name or the name of any company or trust that she retains pursuant to these orders.   any furniture, household items and personal effects in her possession, and (e) any funds held in any bank account in her sole name or the name of any company or trust that she retains pursuant to these orders.   any funds held in any bank account in her sole name or the name of any company or trust that she retains pursuant to these orders.   a registrar of the court or such other person appointed by the court be authorised to do all such acts and things and execute all such documents on behalf of either or both parties pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), and (b) if either party procures compliance with this order by obtaining execution of documents pursuant to this order, then the party procuring such execution of documents will be indemnified by the party for his or her costs and expenses incurred in obtaining such compliance.   if either party procures compliance with this order by obtaining execution of documents pursuant to this order, then the party procuring such execution of documents will be indemnified by the party for his or her costs and expenses incurred in obtaining such compliance.
reasons for judgment
introduction
issues in dispute   what assets and liabilities should be included in the property pool available for distribution? in determining this question, the court is required to determine the following matters: (i) what value to allocate to the rowland family trust. (ii) whether the value of the missing jewellery (allegedly valued and insured for $70,000 according to the wife) and artwork be treated as an asset in the husband’s possession. (iii) whether the consideration paid to the husband for the sale of his share in l pty ltd should be treated as a premature distribution of property and either “added back” or otherwise considered under sections 79(4) and 75(2)(o) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). (iv) what is the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd and/or d pty ltd? (v) should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back? (b) how should the contributions of the parties, both financial and non-financial, be assessed, and whether a further adjustment should be made due to both the future needs and financial resources of the parties.   what value to allocate to the rowland family trust. (ii) whether the value of the missing jewellery (allegedly valued and insured for $70,000 according to the wife) and artwork be treated as an asset in the husband’s possession. (iii) whether the consideration paid to the husband for the sale of his share in l pty ltd should be treated as a premature distribution of property and either “added back” or otherwise considered under sections 79(4) and 75(2)(o) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). (iv) what is the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd and/or d pty ltd? (v) should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back?  ) whether the value of the missing jewellery (allegedly valued and insured for $70,000 according to the wife) and artwork be treated as an asset in the husband’s possession. (iii) whether the consideration paid to the husband for the sale of his share in l pty ltd should be treated as a premature distribution of property and either “added back” or otherwise considered under sections 79(4) and 75(2)(o) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). (iv) what is the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd and/or d pty ltd? (v) should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back?  i) whether the consideration paid to the husband for the sale of his share in l pty ltd should be treated as a premature distribution of property and either “added back” or otherwise considered under sections 79(4) and 75(2)(o) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”). (iv) what is the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd and/or d pty ltd? (v) should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back?  ) what is the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd and/or d pty ltd? (v) should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back?   should the estimated capital gains tax (“cgt”) arising from the sale of the husband’s l pty ltd shares (“the l pty ltd share sale”) be added back?   how should the contributions of the parties, both financial and non-financial, be assessed, and whether a further adjustment should be made due to both the future needs and financial resources of the parties.
evidence  amended initiating application filed 22 august 2023 (b) financial statement filed 21 august 2023 (c) affidavit of ms rowland filed 21 august 2023 (d) affidavit of mr e (property valuer) filed 21 august 2023 (e) affidavit of mr m (business valuer) filed 6 february 2023 (“the business valuation report”)   financial statement filed 21 august 2023 (c) affidavit of ms rowland filed 21 august 2023 (d) affidavit of mr e (property valuer) filed 21 august 2023 (e) affidavit of mr m (business valuer) filed 6 february 2023 (“the business valuation report”)   affidavit of ms rowland filed 21 august 2023 (d) affidavit of mr e (property valuer) filed 21 august 2023 (e) affidavit of mr m (business valuer) filed 6 february 2023 (“the business valuation report”)   affidavit of mr e (property valuer) filed 21 august 2023 (e) affidavit of mr m (business valuer) filed 6 february 2023 (“the business valuation report”)   affidavit of mr m (business valuer) filed 6 february 2023 (“the business valuation report”)   amended response to initiating application filed 21 august 2023 (b) financial statement filed 21 august 2023 (c) affidavit of mr rowland filed 21 august 2023   financial statement filed 21 august 2023 (c) affidavit of mr rowland filed 21 august 2023   affidavit of mr rowland filed 21 august 2023
relevant facts and procedural background   their daughters, x and y, born in 2012, both 11 years old, and (b) z, born in 2015 and currently eight years old.   z, born in 2015 and currently eight years old.   p pty ltd, which is the trading entity through which the wife operated her business. (b) n pty ltd, which is wholly owned by k pty ltd as trustee for the rowland family trust. (c) the rowland family trust, which the parties and their accountant, mr o are appointers. (d) k pty ltd, which is the corporate trustee of the rowland family trust and owns all the shares in n pty ltd. the wife is the sole director and shareholder of this entity. (e) g pty ltd, which is the trustee of the g trust, and of which the husband is the sole director and shareholder. (f) g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.   n pty ltd, which is wholly owned by k pty ltd as trustee for the rowland family trust. (c) the rowland family trust, which the parties and their accountant, mr o are appointers. (d) k pty ltd, which is the corporate trustee of the rowland family trust and owns all the shares in n pty ltd. the wife is the sole director and shareholder of this entity. (e) g pty ltd, which is the trustee of the g trust, and of which the husband is the sole director and shareholder. (f) g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.   the rowland family trust, which the parties and their accountant, mr o are appointers. (d) k pty ltd, which is the corporate trustee of the rowland family trust and owns all the shares in n pty ltd. the wife is the sole director and shareholder of this entity. (e) g pty ltd, which is the trustee of the g trust, and of which the husband is the sole director and shareholder. (f) g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.   k pty ltd, which is the corporate trustee of the rowland family trust and owns all the shares in n pty ltd. the wife is the sole director and shareholder of this entity. (e) g pty ltd, which is the trustee of the g trust, and of which the husband is the sole director and shareholder. (f) g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.   g pty ltd, which is the trustee of the g trust, and of which the husband is the sole director and shareholder. (f) g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.   g trust, which the parties and mr o are appointers.
proposals   the suburb c property be sold, and after deducting sale costs and discharging the mortgage, that: (i) the wife receive a payment of $70,000, and (ii) the remaining balance be divided as to 60% to the wife and 40% to the husband. (b) the wife relinquishes her right, title and interest in the g trust. (c) the husband relinquishes his right, title and interest in the rowland family trust. (d) the wife transfers her right, title and interest in her shareholding in h pty ltd to the husband. (e) the parties otherwise retain their right, title and interest in any property under their sole name.   the wife receive a payment of $70,000, and (ii) the remaining balance be divided as to 60% to the wife and 40% to the husband.  ) the remaining balance be divided as to 60% to the wife and 40% to the husband.   the wife relinquishes her right, title and interest in the g trust. (c) the husband relinquishes his right, title and interest in the rowland family trust. (d) the wife transfers her right, title and interest in her shareholding in h pty ltd to the husband. (e) the parties otherwise retain their right, title and interest in any property under their sole name.   the husband relinquishes his right, title and interest in the rowland family trust. (d) the wife transfers her right, title and interest in her shareholding in h pty ltd to the husband. (e) the parties otherwise retain their right, title and interest in any property under their sole name.   the wife transfers her right, title and interest in her shareholding in h pty ltd to the husband. (e) the parties otherwise retain their right, title and interest in any property under their sole name.   the parties otherwise retain their right, title and interest in any property under their sole name.   the net property pool be divided equally between the parties, and to achieve this: (i) the wife transfers her right, title and interest in the suburb c property to the husband, provided that the husband refinance the mortgage under his sole name. (ii) the husband retains, at the exclusion of the wife, the following: (a) g trust, (b) the shares in h pty ltd, (c) the shares in j pty ltd, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) any property under his sole name. (iii) the wife retains, at the exclusion of the husband, the following: (a) the shares in k pty ltd and any of its associated companies, (b) the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, and (d) any property under her sole name.   the wife transfers her right, title and interest in the suburb c property to the husband, provided that the husband refinance the mortgage under his sole name. (ii) the husband retains, at the exclusion of the wife, the following: (a) g trust, (b) the shares in h pty ltd, (c) the shares in j pty ltd, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) any property under his sole name. (iii) the wife retains, at the exclusion of the husband, the following: (a) the shares in k pty ltd and any of its associated companies, (b) the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, and (d) any property under her sole name.  ) the husband retains, at the exclusion of the wife, the following: (a) g trust, (b) the shares in h pty ltd, (c) the shares in j pty ltd, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) any property under his sole name. (iii) the wife retains, at the exclusion of the husband, the following: (a) the shares in k pty ltd and any of its associated companies, (b) the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, and (d) any property under her sole name.  i) the wife retains, at the exclusion of the husband, the following: (a) the shares in k pty ltd and any of its associated companies, (b) the rowland family trust, (c) her superannuation entitlements, and (d) any property under her sole name.   at the exclusion of the wife, the husband retains his right, title and interest in the g trust, (b) at the exclusion of the husband, the wife retains her right, title and interest in the rowland family trust, and (c) the parties retain their individual superannuation entitlements.   at the exclusion of the husband, the wife retains her right, title and interest in the rowland family trust, and (c) the parties retain their individual superannuation entitlements.   the parties retain their individual superannuation entitlements.
the law
it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. (as per the original)   identify and value, as at the date of hearing, the parties’ property, liabilities and financial resources. (b) identify and assess the parties’ contributions pursuant to section 79. (c) identify and assess the parties’ ongoing needs, taking into account the relevant factors under sections 79 and 75(2). (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   identify and assess the parties’ contributions pursuant to section 79. (c) identify and assess the parties’ ongoing needs, taking into account the relevant factors under sections 79 and 75(2). (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   identify and assess the parties’ ongoing needs, taking into account the relevant factors under sections 79 and 75(2). (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
is it just and equitable to make a property settlement order?
global or asset by asset approach/one or more pool approach?
what is the property of the marriage?
ownership
description
applicants value
respondents value
assets
1
j
b, suburb c nsw
$ 2,350,000
2
h
g pty limited
$ 0
3
g trust
4
shares in j pty ltd
$ nk
5
w
k pty ltd
6
rowland family trust
$ 1,298,180
$ 1,416,459
7
household contents, artwork and jewellery
$ 70,000
$ 10,000
8
household contents
$ 20,000
9
mobile home
$ 5,000
10
savings
$ 19,654
11
savings husband
$ 46,394
12
motor vehicle
$ 50,000
13
d pty ltd 25% share
$ unknown
$ 40,000
total
$ 3,859,228
$ 3,957,507
addbacks
14
value of l pty ltd
$ 882,876
15
difference between value and purchase price of motor vehicle from l pty ltd
$ 15,000
16
legal fees paid
$ 148,193
17
$ 85,000
$ 1,131,069
$ 233,193
liabilities
18
cba mortgage over b street, suburb c
$ 1,396,780
$ 1,396,581
19
debt owed to k pty ltd
$ 214,087
20
cgt on sale of shares in l pty ltd
$
$ 77,428
$ 1,610,867
$ 1,688,096
superannuation
member
name of fund
type of interest
21
super fund 1
$ 94,130
22
super fund 2
$ 53,883
$ 148,013
the value of the husband’s interest in j pty ltd (item 4) and d pty ltd (item 13)   the husband’s own evidence that he was always responsible for the set-up, growth and day-to-day running of the l pty ltd operation in new south wales, as the other shareholders live and work in melbourne, victoria. (b) the new directors and shareholders of d pty ltd were subcontractors of l pty ltd. (c) the wife has observed that l pty ltd clients are contracting d pty ltd to undertake jobs.   the new directors and shareholders of d pty ltd were subcontractors of l pty ltd. (c) the wife has observed that l pty ltd clients are contracting d pty ltd to undertake jobs.   the wife has observed that l pty ltd clients are contracting d pty ltd to undertake jobs.   the directors and shareholders are different people (apart, of course, from the husband). (b) the husband gave evidence that his relationship with the l pty ltd partners had deteriorated – a fact conceded to by the wife. (c) the correspondence and negotiations entered into about the l pty ltd share sale were based on a formula set out in the l pty ltd shareholder agreement (“the shareholder agreement”), and they appeared to be arms-length negotiations arising from a breakdown of the relationship between shareholders. (d) l pty ltd was a much larger enterprise and estimations of its equity value had regard to a pool of assets and liabilities that could not be applied to d pty ltd (for example, calculations of trade debtors, cash at bank, plant and equipment, and stock).   the husband gave evidence that his relationship with the l pty ltd partners had deteriorated – a fact conceded to by the wife. (c) the correspondence and negotiations entered into about the l pty ltd share sale were based on a formula set out in the l pty ltd shareholder agreement (“the shareholder agreement”), and they appeared to be arms-length negotiations arising from a breakdown of the relationship between shareholders. (d) l pty ltd was a much larger enterprise and estimations of its equity value had regard to a pool of assets and liabilities that could not be applied to d pty ltd (for example, calculations of trade debtors, cash at bank, plant and equipment, and stock).   the correspondence and negotiations entered into about the l pty ltd share sale were based on a formula set out in the l pty ltd shareholder agreement (“the shareholder agreement”), and they appeared to be arms-length negotiations arising from a breakdown of the relationship between shareholders. (d) l pty ltd was a much larger enterprise and estimations of its equity value had regard to a pool of assets and liabilities that could not be applied to d pty ltd (for example, calculations of trade debtors, cash at bank, plant and equipment, and stock).   l pty ltd was a much larger enterprise and estimations of its equity value had regard to a pool of assets and liabilities that could not be applied to d pty ltd (for example, calculations of trade debtors, cash at bank, plant and equipment, and stock).
the value of the rowland family trust (item 6)
the value of household contents, artwork, and jewellery (items 7 and 8)
cgt arising from the l pty ltd share sale (item 20)
the manner in which a particular liability should be treated is, ultimately, dependent upon the nature of the liability, the circumstances surrounding the liability and the dictates of justice and equity shaped by each.
addbacks (items 14 to 17)   the difference between the valuation of the husband’s share in l pty ltd according to the business valuation report and the amount his share was sold for. she cited the amount of $882,876, although it is not clear how she arrived at this figure. (b) the difference between the value and purchase price of the motor vehicle from l pty ltd. the wife cited the amount of $15,000, although, again, it is not clear how she arrived at this figure.   the difference between the value and purchase price of the motor vehicle from l pty ltd. the wife cited the amount of $15,000, although, again, it is not clear how she arrived at this figure.   a finding is made that the husband embarked on a course of conduct to reduce or minimise the value of the asset pool or acted recklessly, negligently, or wantonly with the assets with the effect of reducing their value (see kowaliw & kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092), or (b) a finding is made that an amount of money has been dissipated by the husband prematurely to his benefit (see townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505).   a finding is made that an amount of money has been dissipated by the husband prematurely to his benefit (see townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505).
the l pty ltd share sale (item 14)
our client does not consent to your client’s unilateral disposal of his business and requires full disclosure of the proposed sale together with the shareholder agreement referenced by you. our client will rely on the greater of the business valuation or proposed sale price of the business for a property adjustment between the parties in the event that the sale is consented to. (as per the original)
my client is focused on getting the best price he can for the shares and to that end his accountant is verifying the calculation before a counteroffer is made by my client. your client is invited to assist in any way to ensure the best price is achieved. (as per the original)
the sale is for fair value and based on the formulae in the shareholders agreement. to keep you updated, my client has not accepted the offer and is trying to negotiate the best price possible. ... once the final payout figure for the shares is determined i will send through an updated balance sheet... (as per the original)
did the husband embark on a course of conduct to reduce or minimise the value of the assets pool, or act recklessly, negligently, or wantonly with the assets with the l pty ltd shares with the effect of reducing their value?   the l pty ltd share sale was solely the choice of the husband, and it was a premature distribution of the assets of the parties. (b) she advised the husband that she did not consent to him selling his share, yet he proceeded to, nonetheless. (c) in doing so, he knowingly sold the shares undervalue. she asked the court to find that:   she advised the husband that she did not consent to him selling his share, yet he proceeded to, nonetheless. (c) in doing so, he knowingly sold the shares undervalue. she asked the court to find that:   in doing so, he knowingly sold the shares undervalue. she asked the court to find that:
the true value of the shares as of june 2023 would have been approximately $882,876 in accordance with the business valuation report [12/2022, p. 8]”. (as per the original)
however, when the single expert gave oral evidence, he accepted that the proportional value of the husband’s shareholding was in fact $818,938.   the single expert based his valuation on three and a half times earnings before interest and taxes (“ebit”) but for the purposes of the negotiations, the husband’s share value was calculated at a capitalisation rate of two and a half per cent, which was under value. the single expert noted that it also ignored the enterprise value of around $677,000.   there was a buyer mechanism for the l pty ltd partners to purchase his shares, and he sold his shares in accordance with the shareholder’s agreement. (b) he held a minority interest in the entity and that limited his ability to sell his shares for a higher price because he was obliged to sell the shares to the majority shareholders under the shareholder’s agreement. (c) the wife was provided with advance notice of the proposed l pty ltd share sale. she was offered the opportunity to participate in the negotiation process. the details of the proposed and ultimate sale were both disclosed to her in writing. at no time did she take any steps to stop the l pty ltd share sale from occurring. in fact, she acquiesced to it.   he held a minority interest in the entity and that limited his ability to sell his shares for a higher price because he was obliged to sell the shares to the majority shareholders under the shareholder’s agreement. (c) the wife was provided with advance notice of the proposed l pty ltd share sale. she was offered the opportunity to participate in the negotiation process. the details of the proposed and ultimate sale were both disclosed to her in writing. at no time did she take any steps to stop the l pty ltd share sale from occurring. in fact, she acquiesced to it.   the wife was provided with advance notice of the proposed l pty ltd share sale. she was offered the opportunity to participate in the negotiation process. the details of the proposed and ultimate sale were both disclosed to her in writing. at no time did she take any steps to stop the l pty ltd share sale from occurring. in fact, she acquiesced to it.
conclusion
the price will be determined from negotiations and the leverage of the parties, which can be different to value. it doesn’t make the value wrong, because the market value is – is hypothetical buyers and sellers... (transcript day 1, page 76)
has the husband dissipated an amount of money prematurely to his benefit?   $225,233 was retained as a set-off against the husband’s director’s loans, the value of the motor vehicle 1 (“the l pty ltd motor vehicle”) retained by the husband ($50,000), and the part payment of $50,000 received in april 2023. (b) $50,000 was retained and held, subject to the husband complying with the restraint part of the deed, which ended in september 2023. presumably, this amount was paid and reflected in the husband’s financial statement as savings. (c) a cash payment of the balance of $174,766.20.   $50,000 was retained and held, subject to the husband complying with the restraint part of the deed, which ended in september 2023. presumably, this amount was paid and reflected in the husband’s financial statement as savings. (c) a cash payment of the balance of $174,766.20.   a cash payment of the balance of $174,766.20.   $45,000 towards his legal fees for these proceedings. (b) $10,000 towards his legal fees for the shareholder dispute. (c) $50,000 towards setting up his new business, and (d) balance remaining of $69,766.   $10,000 towards his legal fees for the shareholder dispute. (c) $50,000 towards setting up his new business, and (d) balance remaining of $69,766.   $50,000 towards setting up his new business, and (d) balance remaining of $69,766.   balance remaining of $69,766.
addback of $225,233 for the director’s loan repayment, the l pty ltd motor vehicle and $50,000 early release
were there any other expenses drawn from the director’s loan account that were unusual in nature or would lead me to add them back in?
addback of the cash payments totalling $224,767  item 13 - the value of d pty ltd $40,000 (b) item 17 - legal fees paid by the husband $55,000 (c) item 11 - the husband’s savings $46,394   item 17 - legal fees paid by the husband $55,000 (c) item 11 - the husband’s savings $46,394   item 11 - the husband’s savings $46,394
addback arising from the l pty ltd motor vehicle (item 15)
conclusions
item
court determination
joint
b street, suburb c nsw
husband
g pty ltd
$ -
wife
household contents
motor vehicle 1
total:
$ 3,899,228
cba mortgage over b street, suburb c
total net property:
$ 2,521,554
total net property & superannuation:
$ 2,669,567
contributions
is there any adjustment to be made between the parties for relevant matters under s 75(2)?
conclusion
assets & addbacks
$5,000
$50,000
d pty ltd pty ltd 25% share
$ 1,486,027
$ 2,646,394
total: (superannuation & property)  perannuation & property)
$ 1,539,910
$ 2,740,524
cba mortgage over suburb c property
total liabilities:
net position:
$ 1,325,823
$ 1,343,744
combined pool:
associate: dated: 31 january 2024
dated: 31 january 2024