last updated: 23 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
estes & estes [2024] fedcfamc2f 189
orders
the court orders that:
procedural
parental responsibility
care arrangements  in alternate weeks, on a “week-about” basis, with changeover taking place at the commencement of school/9.00 am each friday with such time to continue during school holidays except where specifically provided for otherwise in these orders, and (b) with the parent they are not otherwise living with each week on wednesday (or such other day as agreed by the parties in writing) from after school to 7.00 pm with such time suspended during school holidays.   with the parent they are not otherwise living with each week on wednesday (or such other day as agreed by the parties in writing) from after school to 7.00 pm with such time suspended during school holidays.   from after school to 7.00 pm if a school day, (b) if not on a school day then from 4.00 pm on the birthday to 9.00 am the following morning.   if not on a school day then from 4.00 pm on the birthday to 9.00 am the following morning.   from 6.00 pm the day before good friday to 6.00 pm easter saturday with the father, and (b) from 6.00 pm easter saturday to 6.00 pm easter monday with the mother.   from 6.00 pm easter saturday to 6.00 pm easter monday with the mother.   from 10.00 am on 23 december to 10.00 am christmas day with the mother in odd-numbered years and the father in even-numbered years, and (b) from 10.00 am christmas day to 10.00 am 27 december with the mother in even-numbered years and the father in odd-numbered years.   from 10.00 am christmas day to 10.00 am 27 december with the mother in even-numbered years and the father in odd-numbered years.
children’s communication
changeover
communication  advise the other immediately in the event that either child suffers any serious illness or injury including details as to any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice attended, (c) authorise any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice upon or at which child may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other party in respect to the children’s medical condition and/or requirements, (d) authorise all schools at which either child may attend from time to time, to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all school reports, school notices and newsletters, school photographs and examples of school work in relation to the child, (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to the children’s progress at school, and inform each other of any emergency, remedial or correctional treatment required by either child as soon as is practicable, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.   authorise any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice upon or at which child may attend from time to time, to communicate with the other party in respect to the children’s medical condition and/or requirements, (d) authorise all schools at which either child may attend from time to time, to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all school reports, school notices and newsletters, school photographs and examples of school work in relation to the child, (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to the children’s progress at school, and inform each other of any emergency, remedial or correctional treatment required by either child as soon as is practicable, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.   authorise all schools at which either child may attend from time to time, to: (i) provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all school reports, school notices and newsletters, school photographs and examples of school work in relation to the child, (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to the children’s progress at school, and inform each other of any emergency, remedial or correctional treatment required by either child as soon as is practicable, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.   provide the other, at the expense of the other, copies of all school reports, school notices and newsletters, school photographs and examples of school work in relation to the child, (ii) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to the children’s progress at school, and inform each other of any emergency, remedial or correctional treatment required by either child as soon as is practicable, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.  ) communicate with the other, either by telephone, in writing or by personal attendance, in respect to the children’s progress at school, and inform each other of any emergency, remedial or correctional treatment required by either child as soon as is practicable, and (iii) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.  i) permit the other to attend all school functions to which parents are normally invited, subject to any school policy.
extra-curricular activities  sporting fixtures, (b) extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance, (c) school functions and events that allow for parent attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and canteen duties.   extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance, (c) school functions and events that allow for parent attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and canteen duties.   school functions and events that allow for parent attendance including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and canteen duties.
medical
injunction
travel  ensure that the children’s recommended travel vaccinations are up to date at the travelling parent’s cost, (b) provide the non-travelling parent with evidence of prepaid return airfares and full particulars of all accommodation the children will be staying in no later than 21 days prior to the intended travel, (c) obtain travel insurance that provides for unlimited medical coverage for the children and covid-19 insurance cover and provide the non-travelling parent with a copy of the certificate of currency of insurance no later than 21 days prior to the intended travel, (d) is restrained from taking the children to a country/location which is listed on the smartraveller website as “do not travel” and/or “reconsider your need to travel”, (e) indemnifies the non-travelling parent in relation to any and all costs associated with the travel and anything that occurs to the children during the travel, and (f) ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   provide the non-travelling parent with evidence of prepaid return airfares and full particulars of all accommodation the children will be staying in no later than 21 days prior to the intended travel, (c) obtain travel insurance that provides for unlimited medical coverage for the children and covid-19 insurance cover and provide the non-travelling parent with a copy of the certificate of currency of insurance no later than 21 days prior to the intended travel, (d) is restrained from taking the children to a country/location which is listed on the smartraveller website as “do not travel” and/or “reconsider your need to travel”, (e) indemnifies the non-travelling parent in relation to any and all costs associated with the travel and anything that occurs to the children during the travel, and (f) ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   obtain travel insurance that provides for unlimited medical coverage for the children and covid-19 insurance cover and provide the non-travelling parent with a copy of the certificate of currency of insurance no later than 21 days prior to the intended travel, (d) is restrained from taking the children to a country/location which is listed on the smartraveller website as “do not travel” and/or “reconsider your need to travel”, (e) indemnifies the non-travelling parent in relation to any and all costs associated with the travel and anything that occurs to the children during the travel, and (f) ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   is restrained from taking the children to a country/location which is listed on the smartraveller website as “do not travel” and/or “reconsider your need to travel”, (e) indemnifies the non-travelling parent in relation to any and all costs associated with the travel and anything that occurs to the children during the travel, and (f) ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   indemnifies the non-travelling parent in relation to any and all costs associated with the travel and anything that occurs to the children during the travel, and (f) ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   ensure that the children and the non-travelling parent are able to communicate with each other at all reasonable times.   the parent intending to travel with the children prepare the passport applications including obtaining the required passport photos at their cost and provide the completed application to the other parent for signing, (b) the other parent sign the passport application forms within 14 days of receiving the application forms from the parent intending to travel, and (c) the non-travelling parent reimburse the applying/travelling parent an amount equivalent to one half of the standard non-urgent passport application fee for each child within 21 days of receiving a copy of the receipt for the payment of the fees.   the other parent sign the passport application forms within 14 days of receiving the application forms from the parent intending to travel, and (c) the non-travelling parent reimburse the applying/travelling parent an amount equivalent to one half of the standard non-urgent passport application fee for each child within 21 days of receiving a copy of the receipt for the payment of the fees.   the non-travelling parent reimburse the applying/travelling parent an amount equivalent to one half of the standard non-urgent passport application fee for each child within 21 days of receiving a copy of the receipt for the payment of the fees.   the mother provide the father with the children’s passports within 7 days of receiving the information from the father referred to in orders 19(b)-(c) of these orders, (b) the father return the children’s passports to the mother within 7 days of returning home from the international travel, and (c) and the mother provide a certified copy of the children’s passports to the father.   the father return the children’s passports to the mother within 7 days of returning home from the international travel, and (c) and the mother provide a certified copy of the children’s passports to the father.   and the mother provide a certified copy of the children’s passports to the father.
obligations, consequences of contravention and assistance with orders
reasons for judgment
judge a. humphreys:
introduction
the issues  should x and y live with the mother in the environs of town c or town d or continue to live with both parents in proximity to their current homes and school in the area of suburb e? (b) if x and y live near town c or town d with the mother, what time should they spend with the father during school term periods (in addition to time on alternate weekends) and during school holidays? (c) if x and y do not live in the areas of town d or town c with the mother, should the parties be restrained from moving the children’s place of residence outside a particular radius from suburb e?   if x and y live near town c or town d with the mother, what time should they spend with the father during school term periods (in addition to time on alternate weekends) and during school holidays? (c) if x and y do not live in the areas of town d or town c with the mother, should the parties be restrained from moving the children’s place of residence outside a particular radius from suburb e?   if x and y do not live in the areas of town d or town c with the mother, should the parties be restrained from moving the children’s place of residence outside a particular radius from suburb e?
background and procedural history  the former family home in suburb e was sold and the mother moved with the children to a rental property nearby in suburb k. the father remained living in the former family home, and (b) the children began spending equal time with their parents, with the mother from after school on monday until before school on wednesday, with the father from after school on wednesday to before school on friday, and with each parent on alternate weekends. this arrangement saw the children spend one period of five consecutive nights and one period of two consecutive nights with each parent each fortnight.   the children began spending equal time with their parents, with the mother from after school on monday until before school on wednesday, with the father from after school on wednesday to before school on friday, and with each parent on alternate weekends. this arrangement saw the children spend one period of five consecutive nights and one period of two consecutive nights with each parent each fortnight.   the parents continue to share parental responsibility for the children, (b) if the mother and children do not relocate, the children spend equal time with each parent on a “week about” basis, spending one evening each week with the other parent for dinner, (c) if the children relocate with the mother, they spend time with the father on alternate weekends with an option of a third weekend each month, for half of all school holidays and that they communicate with him by video twice each week, (d) if the children do relocate, the relocation not occur until after the end of the 2023 year and the children continue to spend equal time with both parents in the meantime, as recommended at (b) above, (e) if the mother relocates without the children, they live with the father and spend time with the mother as recommended in respect of the father at (c) above, (f) the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   if the mother and children do not relocate, the children spend equal time with each parent on a “week about” basis, spending one evening each week with the other parent for dinner, (c) if the children relocate with the mother, they spend time with the father on alternate weekends with an option of a third weekend each month, for half of all school holidays and that they communicate with him by video twice each week, (d) if the children do relocate, the relocation not occur until after the end of the 2023 year and the children continue to spend equal time with both parents in the meantime, as recommended at (b) above, (e) if the mother relocates without the children, they live with the father and spend time with the mother as recommended in respect of the father at (c) above, (f) the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   if the children relocate with the mother, they spend time with the father on alternate weekends with an option of a third weekend each month, for half of all school holidays and that they communicate with him by video twice each week, (d) if the children do relocate, the relocation not occur until after the end of the 2023 year and the children continue to spend equal time with both parents in the meantime, as recommended at (b) above, (e) if the mother relocates without the children, they live with the father and spend time with the mother as recommended in respect of the father at (c) above, (f) the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   if the children do relocate, the relocation not occur until after the end of the 2023 year and the children continue to spend equal time with both parents in the meantime, as recommended at (b) above, (e) if the mother relocates without the children, they live with the father and spend time with the mother as recommended in respect of the father at (c) above, (f) the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   if the mother relocates without the children, they live with the father and spend time with the mother as recommended in respect of the father at (c) above, (f) the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   the parties attend an accredited parenting after separation program, and (g) the parties utilise an online app for their communication.   the parties utilise an online app for their communication.
the children’s current circumstances
the parties’ current circumstances
the mother and mr j
the father
the final hearing
proposals
the mother’s proposal and position
what we like to do and what we like to have in life... what our back up would be and what we would do if we don’t get to move. we’d still like to move from where we are and move out a little bit further where we can get as much regional life as we can... bigger block and more space for the kids.  .] lots more room for our children and future children to play, ride bikes, have animals and get outside and have less screen time. [y] especially needs to be able to get outside and burn off his energy. we would be able to get a dog or two and hope to have a few cows and sheep as we would have the room for them living on an acreage.   each alternate weekend from after school friday until 5:00pm sunday (extending to monday if monday is a non-school day), (b) up to one additional weekend per month in the event that the father will be spending the weekend at his holiday [home] located at [town f] and the father provides the mother with no less than 10 days written notice and: (i) such weekend does not fall on the mother’s birthday, mother’s day or any other special day, (ii) the children do not have a prior commitment arranged with the mother/extended maternal family before receiving the notice and which cannot be rescheduled, (iii) in the event the children have a friend’s birthday party to attend, the father takes them to such party or event.   up to one additional weekend per month in the event that the father will be spending the weekend at his holiday [home] located at [town f] and the father provides the mother with no less than 10 days written notice and: (i) such weekend does not fall on the mother’s birthday, mother’s day or any other special day, (ii) the children do not have a prior commitment arranged with the mother/extended maternal family before receiving the notice and which cannot be rescheduled, (iii) in the event the children have a friend’s birthday party to attend, the father takes them to such party or event.   such weekend does not fall on the mother’s birthday, mother’s day or any other special day, (ii) the children do not have a prior commitment arranged with the mother/extended maternal family before receiving the notice and which cannot be rescheduled, (iii) in the event the children have a friend’s birthday party to attend, the father takes them to such party or event.  ) the children do not have a prior commitment arranged with the mother/extended maternal family before receiving the notice and which cannot be rescheduled, (iii) in the event the children have a friend’s birthday party to attend, the father takes them to such party or event.  i) in the event the children have a friend’s birthday party to attend, the father takes them to such party or event.   in all term 1 and 3 school holiday periods with the mother for the first half and the father for the second half, (b) with the father for all of the term 2 school holidays from the conclusion of school on the last day of term 2 until 5pm on the last friday of the school holiday period, (c) in all term 4/summer school holiday periods as follows: (i) from after school on the last day of school at the conclusion of term 4 to 10am christmas day with the mother in odd numbered years and the father in even numbered years, and (ii) from 10am christmas day to 7pm 1 january with the mother in even numbered years and the father in odd numbered years, and (iii) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.   with the father for all of the term 2 school holidays from the conclusion of school on the last day of term 2 until 5pm on the last friday of the school holiday period, (c) in all term 4/summer school holiday periods as follows: (i) from after school on the last day of school at the conclusion of term 4 to 10am christmas day with the mother in odd numbered years and the father in even numbered years, and (ii) from 10am christmas day to 7pm 1 january with the mother in even numbered years and the father in odd numbered years, and (iii) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.   in all term 4/summer school holiday periods as follows: (i) from after school on the last day of school at the conclusion of term 4 to 10am christmas day with the mother in odd numbered years and the father in even numbered years, and (ii) from 10am christmas day to 7pm 1 january with the mother in even numbered years and the father in odd numbered years, and (iii) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.   from after school on the last day of school at the conclusion of term 4 to 10am christmas day with the mother in odd numbered years and the father in even numbered years, and (ii) from 10am christmas day to 7pm 1 january with the mother in even numbered years and the father in odd numbered years, and (iii) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.  ) from 10am christmas day to 7pm 1 january with the mother in even numbered years and the father in odd numbered years, and (iii) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.  i) for the balance of the term 4/summer school holiday period on a week-about basis so that the father has the first week from 7pm on 1 january with the father in even numbered years and the mother in odd numbered years.
the mother’s alternate proposal and position
the father’s proposal and position
evidence
the mother
i will sell my home in [suburb m] and then we will use that money towards buying or building a new home, hopefully in [town c] (where all our family live) or somewhere on the outskirts of town where we can find the perfect acreage.
it is untrue that all of the mother’s family, mr j’s family and/or the children’s family live in town c.
the mother’s witnessmr j
all three of us are often at school events together with the children, including just recently [in late] 2023 when the three of us (me, [the mother] and [the father]) went to the school together to farewell [y] as he left on his first school camp. another example was earlier in the year when the three of us adults and both children were at the school for “meet the teacher”. while at school, [x], [y], [the father] and i were playing [games] together.
...if we were able to move to regional victoria, we would be able to afford a larger block of land and a larger house (to accommodate our hopefully growing family), we are hoping to purchase an acreage where we will have an abundance of room to have a few farm animals such as sheep, cows, chickens, dogs and maybe a horse as [the mother] has always wanted, i have grown up with and that kids keep asking for.
the father’s witnesses
mr gg
ms hh
mr kk
family report
the law
...it would be preferable that such references to “permission” to relocate be avoided. the word has a tendency to distract attention from the jurisdiction actually being exercised. ... to treat the determination of the residence of the child, and the connected issue of custody, as dependent upon the giving or withholding of “permission” to a parent to relocate his or her residence may divert attention from the child’s welfare, to the competing needs and demands of the parents in conflict.
these rights, and the right of freedom of mobility of a parent, only defer to the paramount consideration of a child’s best interests where those interests would be so adversely affected as to justify such interference, and then the interference is legitimate only to the extent that it is necessary to avoid such adverse effects.
objects and principles  the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
best interests of children
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
additional considerations
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives  her father (the maternal grandfather), who lives in town c with his wife, the mother’s step-mother. he is 67. the mother deposes her father’s health has deteriorated and she wants to live closer to him to help look after him as he gets older and to spend quality time with him and her step-mother now they are retired. she did not provide evidence in respect of her father’s health. the father deposed the mother saw the father only three or four times a year, sometimes visiting on their way home from town g but that he believes the mother has become closer to her father since the breakdown of their relationship, (b) her sister, ms u, who lives and works in town c, (c) her mother (the maternal grandmother) and step-father in melbourne. the mother speaks regularly with her mother by phone and her mother occasionally looks after the children, for example if she has a function to attend, (d) another sister, ms ll, who lives in melbourne, with her husband and their three sons, including twin boys aged eight years and similar in age to y. the father gave unchallenged evidence the cousins are very close. the mother gave evidence she does not see a lot of ms ll. the father maintains some contact with ms ll and her family and deposed she is not supportive of the children moving to regional victoria as their children will see less of one another, and (e) a stepsister and her family who live in south australia. their ability to see one another has been impacted by covid-19 travel restrictions in recent years.   her sister, ms u, who lives and works in town c, (c) her mother (the maternal grandmother) and step-father in melbourne. the mother speaks regularly with her mother by phone and her mother occasionally looks after the children, for example if she has a function to attend, (d) another sister, ms ll, who lives in melbourne, with her husband and their three sons, including twin boys aged eight years and similar in age to y. the father gave unchallenged evidence the cousins are very close. the mother gave evidence she does not see a lot of ms ll. the father maintains some contact with ms ll and her family and deposed she is not supportive of the children moving to regional victoria as their children will see less of one another, and (e) a stepsister and her family who live in south australia. their ability to see one another has been impacted by covid-19 travel restrictions in recent years.   her mother (the maternal grandmother) and step-father in melbourne. the mother speaks regularly with her mother by phone and her mother occasionally looks after the children, for example if she has a function to attend, (d) another sister, ms ll, who lives in melbourne, with her husband and their three sons, including twin boys aged eight years and similar in age to y. the father gave unchallenged evidence the cousins are very close. the mother gave evidence she does not see a lot of ms ll. the father maintains some contact with ms ll and her family and deposed she is not supportive of the children moving to regional victoria as their children will see less of one another, and (e) a stepsister and her family who live in south australia. their ability to see one another has been impacted by covid-19 travel restrictions in recent years.   another sister, ms ll, who lives in melbourne, with her husband and their three sons, including twin boys aged eight years and similar in age to y. the father gave unchallenged evidence the cousins are very close. the mother gave evidence she does not see a lot of ms ll. the father maintains some contact with ms ll and her family and deposed she is not supportive of the children moving to regional victoria as their children will see less of one another, and (e) a stepsister and her family who live in south australia. their ability to see one another has been impacted by covid-19 travel restrictions in recent years.   a stepsister and her family who live in south australia. their ability to see one another has been impacted by covid-19 travel restrictions in recent years.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
x  is sensitive and a people pleaser. she does not like to upset anyone and will say or do whatever she thinks will make that person happy. she particularly tends to worry about her father’s happiness. [x] is quiet and will keep a lot to herself. she has a couple of close friends. she goes with the flow and would hate to think she has upset anybody. [...] [x] has struggled a little at school from an early age and with home learning during the covid lockdowns that set her back. she is in a program at school to get extra help with her reading and writing. [x] has recently been diagnosed with a learning difficulty in [late] 2023. this was diagnosed through an educational psychologist after it was noted that she was now at least 12 months behind in school in quite a few areas of learning. i have been worried about how [x] has been coping emotionally in light of the separation, my wish to relocate, the death of her paternal grandmother and her constant worry about her father and him being alone. before [the father’s] mother died, she had told [x] that if she moved she wouldn’t be able to see her friends and father and family again. this created a lot of fear and stress for [x].
y e mother] described [y] as being full of personality, who can be quite out there, he is always smiling, can be quite positive, does not get embarrassed easily, plays with different kids daily at school, very close to his sister, she is his security blanket, he loves outdoors, he loves animals, always energy to burn, he prefers to be outside which [the mother] said was the opposite to how [x] is. [the father] described [y] as more outgoing but can be reserved, can be shy, being a funny little character, both children like cuddles. [y] loves [extra-curricular activities and sports] which he is not fully invested in yet. [y] is strong willed (he said [x] is the opposite) [...]   is confident and mostly outgoing. [y] is more than happy to blurt out what he thinks. he is full of energy and always on the go. he loves to be outdoors. [y] does not really have many close friends and has struggled with his emotions. he has often mentioned to me that he had no-one to play with at school and just wandered around by himself during lunch and recess. his first two years of school were during the covid lockdowns and this year is his first real year at school. he is quite a smart child and does well at school academically but can be disruptive at times and struggles a little socially.
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
when we mentioned the possibility of moving to [x], she was initially hesitant and had believed what her paternal grandmother had said to her about never being able to see her dad, friends and family again. over time, she has seemed more positive about possibly relocating and seems to understand that she would still see her father often and still see her extended family (located in melbourne) and friends. [x] understands that this is a decision that the court will make and that it is not up to her.   is supportive and excited at the idea of moving, he wakes up each morning asking if today is the day we get to move to the country. i have also explained to [y] that ultimately the court will decide and when we know the decision we will let him know. he tends to get confused by this sometimes and does not understand why we can’t just go today.   is the opposite to [x] about relocation, as clearly [the mother] has appealed to [y]’s love of outdoors and what such a move would provide him with. it is my view, that [y] has little concept of what such a move would be like, as [y] would no longer spend half of his time with [the father]. [y] feels excited about living on a farm, but also sad about not seeing [the father] as much. it is my view that [y] is impressionable, easily influenced, especially in terms of ‘his world’ and what sounds like very positive changes for him.
weight to be given to children’s views
it is my view, that [x] and [y] are too young without enough mature experience (which some children at 12 and upwards may have) to be able to make informed views about relocation, whereas their views on shared care have come about from their experiences of living in a shared care arrangement. while [x] and [y]’s views need to be listened to, other factors also need to be considered.   the family report writer reported “[the mother] said she has had many discussions with [x] about living up there”, (b) as indicated described earlier in my reasons, mr j gave evidence there is a regular discussion in their home about moving to the country and acknowledged the children hear those discussions.   as indicated described earlier in my reasons, mr j gave evidence there is a regular discussion in their home about moving to the country and acknowledged the children hear those discussions.
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
a relocation for [x] and [y] would mean a major change for them, not just in their living arrangements (including losing the shared care time with [the father]) but also in their environment moving from city living to country living.   and [y] are both at developmental ages, where they have developed and maintained strong secure and trusting relationships with [the mother] and [the father], so in terms of relocation, these relationships would be able to be maintained with the facilitation, encouragement and support of [the mother] and [the father].
regarding relocation to [town c], [x] wants to see each parent equally, so such a major move leaves [x] very unsure about this. [x] lacks confidence, so in my view, she may not make friends easily or quickly. this may raise anxiety in [x], possibly leaving her with some grief, maybe some fearful feelings, as she may well grieve losing half her time with [the father]. for [x], it appeared that relocation raises apprehension, doubts about the unknown future with a relocation. [...] [x] lacks confidence, is reserved and may not make new friends easily. it is my view, that in the short-term, [x] may not manage a relocation without suffering anxiety, some grief at losing [the father] as well as her extended family members and her friends at school.  .] in the short-term, [y] may manage a relocation as for him it would be exciting, a new adventure with the prospect he would live on ‘a farm’ and have animals. in addition, [y] is outgoing, confident, he has been positively influenced by [the mother], and may well make new friends without too much trouble.
it is difficult to predict how relocation may affect [x] and [y] long-term as it would depend on several factors such as where they live, how much time they spend with [the father], how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships.
benefits for [x] and [y] with relocation may be that they are able to live on a larger area of land where they could accommodate pets. there may be more in terms of losses for [x] and [y] particularly with a drastic reduction in times they would spend with [the father].
while the children will likely (at least initially) be sad in relation to spending less time with their father, they will adapt to the change in their care arrangements if relocation is permitted – in much the same way as they adapted to seeing each parent less and living between two households after their parents’ separation.
my family are still based in melbourne (mother and stepdad as well as one sister and her family) are very supportive of our potential relocation and would still spend quality time with [x] and [y] on weekends the kids are in my care whether that be when we are visiting melbourne or when they are spending the weekend or school holidays up at our new residence. and: i do not see this relocation affecting [their paternal] relationships. [x] and [y] will still be able to freely communicate with their extended melbourne family members through electronic means, such as their ipads and will still see them for special occasions and when they are spending time in melbourne.
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs  i again note the evidence of mr j about their wish to relocate to the country being openly discussed in their home on a regular basis in the presence of the children, (b) the mother gave evidence she informed the children the parties were attending court, and that they knew she was attending court the day she gave her oral evidence, (c) the mother acknowledged she took the children to aa school without informing the father. she informed him in late 2023 that she was taking the children out of school for a holiday. the children then informed the father they were going to visit the school the mother wanted them to attend if they moved to the country. it was put to the father that he had acted in the same way by attending ff school without informing the mother. i do not agree, given the father attended at ff school without the children, for the purpose of making enquiries about that school as an option for the children’s secondary school education, and (d) the mother admitted a sale authority was signed for the suburb m property in late 2023 and this had not been mentioned in her trial affidavit affirmed on the same day. it was put to the mother in cross-examination that the father first learned of the proposed sale by seeing the “for sale” sign at the front of the property and then heard from y that he had to clean his room for photographs to be taken of the house for sale. the mother was asked if it might have been better if she informed the father rather than the children carrying this message. the mother answered that the children weren’t told to keep it a secret and also responded defensively that the father had not informed her when he last moved. i consider it is important for both parents to keep the other informed of such matters, so they can each support and reassure the children with impending changes in their lives.   the mother gave evidence she informed the children the parties were attending court, and that they knew she was attending court the day she gave her oral evidence, (c) the mother acknowledged she took the children to aa school without informing the father. she informed him in late 2023 that she was taking the children out of school for a holiday. the children then informed the father they were going to visit the school the mother wanted them to attend if they moved to the country. it was put to the father that he had acted in the same way by attending ff school without informing the mother. i do not agree, given the father attended at ff school without the children, for the purpose of making enquiries about that school as an option for the children’s secondary school education, and (d) the mother admitted a sale authority was signed for the suburb m property in late 2023 and this had not been mentioned in her trial affidavit affirmed on the same day. it was put to the mother in cross-examination that the father first learned of the proposed sale by seeing the “for sale” sign at the front of the property and then heard from y that he had to clean his room for photographs to be taken of the house for sale. the mother was asked if it might have been better if she informed the father rather than the children carrying this message. the mother answered that the children weren’t told to keep it a secret and also responded defensively that the father had not informed her when he last moved. i consider it is important for both parents to keep the other informed of such matters, so they can each support and reassure the children with impending changes in their lives.   the mother acknowledged she took the children to aa school without informing the father. she informed him in late 2023 that she was taking the children out of school for a holiday. the children then informed the father they were going to visit the school the mother wanted them to attend if they moved to the country. it was put to the father that he had acted in the same way by attending ff school without informing the mother. i do not agree, given the father attended at ff school without the children, for the purpose of making enquiries about that school as an option for the children’s secondary school education, and (d) the mother admitted a sale authority was signed for the suburb m property in late 2023 and this had not been mentioned in her trial affidavit affirmed on the same day. it was put to the mother in cross-examination that the father first learned of the proposed sale by seeing the “for sale” sign at the front of the property and then heard from y that he had to clean his room for photographs to be taken of the house for sale. the mother was asked if it might have been better if she informed the father rather than the children carrying this message. the mother answered that the children weren’t told to keep it a secret and also responded defensively that the father had not informed her when he last moved. i consider it is important for both parents to keep the other informed of such matters, so they can each support and reassure the children with impending changes in their lives.   the mother admitted a sale authority was signed for the suburb m property in late 2023 and this had not been mentioned in her trial affidavit affirmed on the same day. it was put to the mother in cross-examination that the father first learned of the proposed sale by seeing the “for sale” sign at the front of the property and then heard from y that he had to clean his room for photographs to be taken of the house for sale. the mother was asked if it might have been better if she informed the father rather than the children carrying this message. the mother answered that the children weren’t told to keep it a secret and also responded defensively that the father had not informed her when he last moved. i consider it is important for both parents to keep the other informed of such matters, so they can each support and reassure the children with impending changes in their lives.
if the children are aboriginal or torres strait islander children
attitude to the children, and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court considers relevant
impact on the mother’s happiness
one of the objects of modern family law statutes ... is to enable parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, to control their own future destinies and, where desired, to form new relationships, free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court. courts recognise that unwarranted interference in the life of a custodial parent may itself occasion bitterness towards the former spouse or partner which may be transmitted to the child or otherwise impinge on the happiness of the custodial (or residence) parent in a way likely to affect the welfare or best interests of the child. this said, the touchstone for the ultimate decision must remain the welfare or best interests of the child and not, as such, the wishes and interests of the parents.
support available to the mother
...the availability of family support including such things as reliable quality child care, financial assistance, and emotional support for a parent and a child, can be very important considerations in any parenting case particularly one involving relocation, and are all matters to be balanced and weighed when considering competing proposals. but those factors, or a lack of them, do not automatically support a finding that a party’s parenting capacity will be compromised particularly when they may be counterbalanced, at least in part, by other benefits, including the sharing of day to day care of a child.
hey [...] thinking of you tomorrow, i was asked to be there to support my sister but i just couldn’t do it. i’m very disappointed in her and all that she has done to you. i believe the outcome of all of this will bring her some very deep regrets, and it will all be in the very best interest of [x] and [y] the way it should be. you’ll always be my brother in law and you’ve been the best father those kids could’ve ever had thank you for never giving up on them xoxox   one of the reasons given by the mother for seeking to move with the children to the region b is to be closer to her father and sister, and (b) affidavits had not been filed by either of them.   affidavits had not been filed by either of them.
possibility of the father’s relocation
when one parent (for whatever reason) wishes a child who is, or is to be, resident with that parent to move to a place distant from the other parent, it should not be assumed that that other parent cannot, or should not, contemplate moving to be near the child. there may be (and for all that is known, in this case there was) compelling reason for that other parent (here, the father) not to move, but it would ordinarily be expected that these reasons would be explored in evidence and the validity of any assumption that the other parent will not move would be examined. just as, in this case, the mother was asked what she would do, if she could not have the child reside with her in india, so too it might have been expected that the father would be asked what he would do, if the mother were to have the child reside with her in india. such questions should not be treated as mere forensic tests of parental devotion, to which only one answer is seen as being satisfactory proof of being a loving parent. rather, they are no more than a prelude to a deeper inquiry about where the best interests of the child may lie and what arrangements will best serve those interests. it is now recognised as self‑evidently true that, apart from some cases of abusive relationships, children benefit from the development of good relationships with both their parents. the right to know and be cared for by both parents and the right of contact on a regular basis with both parents are said to be principles underlying the objects of pt vii of the act. if effect is to be given to those principles, it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.
and gaudron j said:[33]
...it is noteworthy that in this case there was no consideration of the possibility that the father could return to india permanently to avail himself of frequent and regular contact with his daughter. the failure to explore that possibility ... seems to me to be explicable only on the basis of an assumption, inherently sexist, that a father’s choice as to where he lives is beyond challenge in a way that a mother’s is not.
parental responsibility
children’s care arrangements
... the options of the child spending “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” with each parent must be given separate and real consideration, notwithstanding that a relocation proposal may also have to be given subsequent consideration, with the advantages and disadvantages of that proposal then being balanced against the advantages and disadvantages of an “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” arrangement. ...
equal time
section 65daa(1) is expressed in imperative terms. it obliges the court to consider both the question whether it is in the best interests of the child to spend equal time with each of the parents (para (a)) and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child spend equal time with each of them (para (b)). it is only where both questions are answered in the affirmative that consideration may be given, under para (c), to the making of the order... a determination as a question of fact that it is reasonably practicable that equal time be spent with each parent is a statutory condition which must be fulfilled before the court has power to make a parenting order of that kind. it is a matter upon which power is conditioned much as it is where a jurisdictional fact must be proved to exist...
and:[37]
section 65daa(1) is concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible. since such parenting would only be possible in this case if both parents remained in mount isa, coker fm was obliged to consider the circumstances of the parties, more particularly those of the mother, in determining whether equal time parenting was reasonably practicable.
substantial and significant time  the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child's daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
evaluation of parties’ proposals
children living in region b  fulfilment of the desire of the mother and mr j to live on acreage in regional victoria and to enjoy the lifestyle they see that offers to them, with a flow on effect to the children from their happiness, (b) living on a larger property provides the children with a greater opportunity to enjoy playing outside and having pets. this is something y in particular is excited about, and (c) living closer to the maternal grandfather, their aunt ms u, and to mr j’s family, with the benefits of more regular personal interactions with those family members.   living on a larger property provides the children with a greater opportunity to enjoy playing outside and having pets. this is something y in particular is excited about, and (c) living closer to the maternal grandfather, their aunt ms u, and to mr j’s family, with the benefits of more regular personal interactions with those family members.   living closer to the maternal grandfather, their aunt ms u, and to mr j’s family, with the benefits of more regular personal interactions with those family members.   the children’s time with the father will be significantly reduced during school term periods, from equal shared care to two nights per fortnight plus an additional weekend per month (on the mother’s proposal) or for all long weekends (on the father’s proposal). the family report writer described this as “a drastic reduction” in time, (b) the children will no longer benefit from the father taking them to and from school and to their extra-curricular activities as they currently do in alternate weeks and regularly attending important school events. he may attend from time to time if he undertakes the drive to the town d or town c area, but not with the same regularity as he currently does, (c) the parties agree x has some emotional difficulties. the family report writer expressed the expert opinion x may not manage a relocation without suffering anxiety and some grief, (d) the mother was unsure when cross-examined if x could continue attending upon her existing psychologist remotely or if she would need to change psychologists. her enquiries indicated there is a psychologist available at aa school. this would require a change in support for x, who only began seeing her current psychologist in october 2023, (e) the mother deposed y has also struggled with his emotions, (f) the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the children will no longer benefit from the father taking them to and from school and to their extra-curricular activities as they currently do in alternate weeks and regularly attending important school events. he may attend from time to time if he undertakes the drive to the town d or town c area, but not with the same regularity as he currently does, (c) the parties agree x has some emotional difficulties. the family report writer expressed the expert opinion x may not manage a relocation without suffering anxiety and some grief, (d) the mother was unsure when cross-examined if x could continue attending upon her existing psychologist remotely or if she would need to change psychologists. her enquiries indicated there is a psychologist available at aa school. this would require a change in support for x, who only began seeing her current psychologist in october 2023, (e) the mother deposed y has also struggled with his emotions, (f) the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the parties agree x has some emotional difficulties. the family report writer expressed the expert opinion x may not manage a relocation without suffering anxiety and some grief, (d) the mother was unsure when cross-examined if x could continue attending upon her existing psychologist remotely or if she would need to change psychologists. her enquiries indicated there is a psychologist available at aa school. this would require a change in support for x, who only began seeing her current psychologist in october 2023, (e) the mother deposed y has also struggled with his emotions, (f) the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the mother was unsure when cross-examined if x could continue attending upon her existing psychologist remotely or if she would need to change psychologists. her enquiries indicated there is a psychologist available at aa school. this would require a change in support for x, who only began seeing her current psychologist in october 2023, (e) the mother deposed y has also struggled with his emotions, (f) the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the mother deposed y has also struggled with his emotions, (f) the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the family report writer was unable to predict how a relocation may affect the children long-term, expressing the opinion that would depend on several factors such as, how much time they spend with the father, where they live, how they manage at school and whether they develop new friendships. aside from the time the children spend with the father, which she observed will reduce drastically, there is considerable doubt about the other variables identified by the family report writer as follows: (i) the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.   the children will be required to change schools. this is in the context of x recently being diagnosed with a learning disability, with the assessment of that disability being finalised at the time of the final hearing in liaison with her classroom teacher. the mother deposed x was at least 12 months behind in some areas of learning, although when cross-examined accepted she might not be that far behind. either way, these difficulties may make it difficult for her to transition to a new school, (ii) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.  ) the children will be moving away from their existing friendships. the mother gave evidence x does not make friends easily. she said y struggles a little socially, does not really have many close friends and has often mentioned to her that he had no-one to play with at school and just wanders around by himself during lunch and recess. the mother suggested moving schools will provide the opportunity for new friendships but did not seem to consider the impact on the children if they find it difficult to adjust socially and make new friends. whilst the family report writer thought y may make new friends without too much trouble, she was of the view x may not make new friends easily given her lack of confidence, and (iii) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.  i) it is not yet known where the children will live if they move. they will require at least two moves. the suburb m property is up for sale. the mother proposes they initially live temporarily in mr j’s investment property in town d. she has also contemplated moving with the children into a property owned by her father in town bb or living with her father in town c while waiting to buy or build their “forever home”. the mother agreed this is not ideal although she does not think this puts the children under stress.
the family report writer was not cross-examined, so these matters were not explored further with her,   as the mother pointed out in her affidavit, the children have had to contend with a lot over recent times including home learning during covid-19 lockdowns (which she identified x struggled with in particular), the parties’ separation, “my wish to relocate”, and the death of their paternal grandmother. a relocation will require them to contend with the significant further changes and uncertainty identified above. the mother and mr j hope to have more children, which would bring further change for the children. it is not known how the children will cope with those changes, particularly x who the parties have identified is already struggling to cope emotionally, (h) the children will be required to travel up to five hours each alternate weekend to spend time with the father in suburb e or approximately 2.5 hours return if they spend time with him at town f. i accept the mother’s evidence the children are accustomed to undertaking regular travel to regional victoria and travel well but note this is quite different to a permanent requirement to travel each alternate weekend to spend time with a parent, (i) the children will not be able to play a sport or participate in extracurricular activities each weekend, if they spend alternate weekends in the region b and in suburb e. the mother acknowledged when cross-examined that y is keen to join a sports team. she hadn’t yet looked into activities for the children if they move and how this might work, as y had only raised the prospect of sports over the last week. she suggested the father could stay in his home at town f for the children to attend their activities on alternate weekends. however, this would see them spending time with him in holiday accommodation rather than in his home and make it more difficult to see their family and friends in suburb e, (j) the mother acknowledged when the children are older they may not want to travel every weekend. she seemed uncertain about how she might manage that, saying it is not something she has experienced before, having not yet raised teenagers, and (k) living closer to the maternal grandfather, maternal aunt (ms u) and to mr j’s family has the corresponding disadvantage of seeing the children live further away from their paternal grandfather, paternal aunt (ms hh), maternal grandmother and her husband, maternal aunt (ms ll) and the children’s cousins (ms ll’s three sons and ms hh’s daughter, jj). as mentioned earlier, i am confident the parents will each support the children’s relationships with their extended relatives on either scenario as best they can given the difficulties posed by geography. however, i find it likely the quality of the children’s existing relationships with family nearby to where they currently live is likely to be diminished if the children move away from the area of their current homes.   the children will be required to travel up to five hours each alternate weekend to spend time with the father in suburb e or approximately 2.5 hours return if they spend time with him at town f. i accept the mother’s evidence the children are accustomed to undertaking regular travel to regional victoria and travel well but note this is quite different to a permanent requirement to travel each alternate weekend to spend time with a parent, (i) the children will not be able to play a sport or participate in extracurricular activities each weekend, if they spend alternate weekends in the region b and in suburb e. the mother acknowledged when cross-examined that y is keen to join a sports team. she hadn’t yet looked into activities for the children if they move and how this might work, as y had only raised the prospect of sports over the last week. she suggested the father could stay in his home at town f for the children to attend their activities on alternate weekends. however, this would see them spending time with him in holiday accommodation rather than in his home and make it more difficult to see their family and friends in suburb e, (j) the mother acknowledged when the children are older they may not want to travel every weekend. she seemed uncertain about how she might manage that, saying it is not something she has experienced before, having not yet raised teenagers, and (k) living closer to the maternal grandfather, maternal aunt (ms u) and to mr j’s family has the corresponding disadvantage of seeing the children live further away from their paternal grandfather, paternal aunt (ms hh), maternal grandmother and her husband, maternal aunt (ms ll) and the children’s cousins (ms ll’s three sons and ms hh’s daughter, jj). as mentioned earlier, i am confident the parents will each support the children’s relationships with their extended relatives on either scenario as best they can given the difficulties posed by geography. however, i find it likely the quality of the children’s existing relationships with family nearby to where they currently live is likely to be diminished if the children move away from the area of their current homes.   the children will not be able to play a sport or participate in extracurricular activities each weekend, if they spend alternate weekends in the region b and in suburb e. the mother acknowledged when cross-examined that y is keen to join a sports team. she hadn’t yet looked into activities for the children if they move and how this might work, as y had only raised the prospect of sports over the last week. she suggested the father could stay in his home at town f for the children to attend their activities on alternate weekends. however, this would see them spending time with him in holiday accommodation rather than in his home and make it more difficult to see their family and friends in suburb e, (j) the mother acknowledged when the children are older they may not want to travel every weekend. she seemed uncertain about how she might manage that, saying it is not something she has experienced before, having not yet raised teenagers, and (k) living closer to the maternal grandfather, maternal aunt (ms u) and to mr j’s family has the corresponding disadvantage of seeing the children live further away from their paternal grandfather, paternal aunt (ms hh), maternal grandmother and her husband, maternal aunt (ms ll) and the children’s cousins (ms ll’s three sons and ms hh’s daughter, jj). as mentioned earlier, i am confident the parents will each support the children’s relationships with their extended relatives on either scenario as best they can given the difficulties posed by geography. however, i find it likely the quality of the children’s existing relationships with family nearby to where they currently live is likely to be diminished if the children move away from the area of their current homes.   the mother acknowledged when the children are older they may not want to travel every weekend. she seemed uncertain about how she might manage that, saying it is not something she has experienced before, having not yet raised teenagers, and (k) living closer to the maternal grandfather, maternal aunt (ms u) and to mr j’s family has the corresponding disadvantage of seeing the children live further away from their paternal grandfather, paternal aunt (ms hh), maternal grandmother and her husband, maternal aunt (ms ll) and the children’s cousins (ms ll’s three sons and ms hh’s daughter, jj). as mentioned earlier, i am confident the parents will each support the children’s relationships with their extended relatives on either scenario as best they can given the difficulties posed by geography. however, i find it likely the quality of the children’s existing relationships with family nearby to where they currently live is likely to be diminished if the children move away from the area of their current homes.   living closer to the maternal grandfather, maternal aunt (ms u) and to mr j’s family has the corresponding disadvantage of seeing the children live further away from their paternal grandfather, paternal aunt (ms hh), maternal grandmother and her husband, maternal aunt (ms ll) and the children’s cousins (ms ll’s three sons and ms hh’s daughter, jj). as mentioned earlier, i am confident the parents will each support the children’s relationships with their extended relatives on either scenario as best they can given the difficulties posed by geography. however, i find it likely the quality of the children’s existing relationships with family nearby to where they currently live is likely to be diminished if the children move away from the area of their current homes.
children living in proximity to suburb e  the children can continue to spend equal time with both parents, (b) they can continue to attend their current school and maintain their existing friendships, (c) the father can readily continue to take them to and from school in alternate weeks and regularly attend important school events and their extra-curricular activities, (d) x can continue to receive support with her learning difficulties from her current school and receive support from the psychologist she has recently begun attending, (e) the children can continue to experience both parents involved in all aspects of their lives as they currently do, and (f) the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   they can continue to attend their current school and maintain their existing friendships, (c) the father can readily continue to take them to and from school in alternate weeks and regularly attend important school events and their extra-curricular activities, (d) x can continue to receive support with her learning difficulties from her current school and receive support from the psychologist she has recently begun attending, (e) the children can continue to experience both parents involved in all aspects of their lives as they currently do, and (f) the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   the father can readily continue to take them to and from school in alternate weeks and regularly attend important school events and their extra-curricular activities, (d) x can continue to receive support with her learning difficulties from her current school and receive support from the psychologist she has recently begun attending, (e) the children can continue to experience both parents involved in all aspects of their lives as they currently do, and (f) the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   x can continue to receive support with her learning difficulties from her current school and receive support from the psychologist she has recently begun attending, (e) the children can continue to experience both parents involved in all aspects of their lives as they currently do, and (f) the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   the children can continue to experience both parents involved in all aspects of their lives as they currently do, and (f) the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   the children can continue to enjoy their relationships with all extended family members as they have been to date, including the maternal grandfather and their aunt, ms u, and mr j’s family on weekends and during school holidays, and   the mother (and mr j) will be disappointed in the outcome and as they will not be able to fulfil their desire of living on acreage near town c or town d, closer to the maternal grandfather, to ms u and to mr j’s family, and (b) y may be disappointed as he has been looking forward to moving to a farm, although he may be able to have pets if the mother and mr j purchase a home on a larger block (for example, in suburb cc or town ee as they have also contemplated) and the children will continue to spend time in regional victoria on weekends and holidays as they have been.   y may be disappointed as he has been looking forward to moving to a farm, although he may be able to have pets if the mother and mr j purchase a home on a larger block (for example, in suburb cc or town ee as they have also contemplated) and the children will continue to spend time in regional victoria on weekends and holidays as they have been.
determination
restraint sought by the parties
that the mother be and is hereby restrained from relocating the children’s principal place of residence further than [40] km from [suburb e centre].
each parent is permitted to relocate within [60]km from [suburb e centre].   the principle that parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please, as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to their children,[40] (b) the parties will have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, requiring them to consult with one another and make joint decisions about major long-term issues for the children,[41] including issues about:[42]   the parties will have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, requiring them to consult with one another and make joint decisions about major long-term issues for the children,[41] including issues about:[42]   the child’s education (both current and future), and [...] (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the mother’s oral evidence of the areas in which she has contemplated living with the children if her application to live in the town d or town c areas is unsuccessful, including suburb cc (a distance of approximately 25 kilometres from the father’s home and their school in suburb e)[43] or town ee (which counsel for the father submitted was 40 kilometres from suburb e)[44], and (d) neither party alleged the other parent will make unsound decisions for the children.   neither party alleged the other parent will make unsound decisions for the children.
other orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 february 2024
dated: 16 february 2024
[1] exhibit a.[2] i have marked the updated joint minute exhibit c.[3] exhibit b.[4] annexure me-1 to the mother’s trial affidavit.[5] per paragraph 4 of the updated joint minute (exhibit c), marked in blue text.[6] paragraph 5 of the updated joint minute (exhibit c).[7] [2012] famcafc 209; (2012) 48 fam lr 298 at [53] (“sayer & radcliffe and anor”).[8] morgan & miles (2007) flc 93–393 at [72]–[73] (“morgan & miles”); sayer & radcliffe and anor at [47].[9] [2022] fedcfamc1a 119; (2022) 65 fam lr 461 at [12].[10] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at [188] per kirby j at [217]–[218] per hayne j (“ams v aif”).[11] at [188].[12] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238 at [82] (“u v u”) citing ams v aif. [13] (2014) flc 93–622 at [66][14] malcolm & monroe (2011) flc 93–460 at [83] referring to ams v aif at [179] and u v u at [259]–[260].[15] taylor v barker (2007) flc 93–345 at [53] (“taylor & barker”) referring to u v u and bolitho v cohen (2005) flc 93–224.[16] sayer & radcliffe and anor at [48].[17] morgan & miles at [80]–[81]; cited with approval in sayer & radcliffe and anor at [48].[18] a v a: relocation approach (2000) flc 93–035 confirmed in taylor & barker.[19] asher & wilkinson (2020) 61 fam lr 523 at [100] referring to u v u.[20] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [30]. [21] [2019] hca 21; (2019) 266 clr 554 at [8].[22] (2009) flc 93–405.[23] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26].[24] rochford & fitzhugh [2019] famcafc 218 at [23]; godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287 at [33]–[36]; sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439 at [182].[25] exhibit b.[26] exhibit b.[27] as reflected in the joint minute.[28] taylor & barker at [113].[29] at [145], citations omitted.[30] (2009) flc 93–405 at [135].[31] (2009) flc 93–405 at [135].32 at [175]–[176], gleeson cj and mchugh j agreeing. [33] at [35].[34] this proposal did not form part of the mother’s formal application or the joint minute but is reflected in paragraph 70 of her trial affidavit.[35] at [81]–[83].[36] (2010) 240 clr 461, per french cj, gummow, kayne, kiefel and bell jj at [13].[37] at [15].[38] ulster & viney (2016) flc 93–722 at [84]–[91] (“ulster & viney”) referring to eddington and eddington (no 2) (2007) flc 93–349.[39] ulster & viney per ainslie-wallace and ryan jj at [91] and strickland j agreeing at [4].[40] franklyn & franklyn [2019] famcafc 256 [28] referring to ams v aif at [223]–[224]; [231]–[232], sampson and hartnett (no.10) (2007) flc 93–350 and zanda & zanda (2014) flc 93–607 at [132]–[136]. [41] section 65dac of the act.[42] as defined in section 4 of the act.[43] exhibit b.[44] this submission was not challenged and town ee was not included in the jointly provided maps and travel information (exhibit b).