last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
houlerman & fanning [2024] fedcfamc2f 194
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  attend upon her general practitioner for the purpose of obtaining a mental health plan to receive psychological therapy, counselling and support in relation to being the victim of domestic family violence and abuse, or, (b) attend upon victims services nsw, through victims access line, to seek counselling and support being the victim of domestic violence.   attend upon victims services nsw, through victims access line, to seek counselling and support being the victim of domestic violence.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  his case outline filed 1 february 2024, (b) further amended initiating application filed 7 november 2022, (c) his affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) child inclusive conference memorandum of ms d dated 4 june 2019, (e) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   further amended initiating application filed 7 november 2022, (c) his affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) child inclusive conference memorandum of ms d dated 4 june 2019, (e) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   his affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) child inclusive conference memorandum of ms d dated 4 june 2019, (e) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   child inclusive conference memorandum of ms d dated 4 june 2019, (e) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   her case outline filed 2 february 2024, (b) her affidavit filed 31 january 2024, (c) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   her affidavit filed 31 january 2024, (c) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   case outline filed 2 february 2024, (b) further amended initiating application filed 7 november 2022, (c) father’s affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) response filed 4 march 2021, (e) mother’s affidavit filed 29 january 2024, (f) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   further amended initiating application filed 7 november 2022, (c) father’s affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) response filed 4 march 2021, (e) mother’s affidavit filed 29 january 2024, (f) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   father’s affidavits filed 8 november 2022 and 1 february 2024, (d) response filed 4 march 2021, (e) mother’s affidavit filed 29 january 2024, (f) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   response filed 4 march 2021, (e) mother’s affidavit filed 29 january 2024, (f) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   mother’s affidavit filed 29 january 2024, (f) family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021.   exhibit a: father’s criminal history, pages 1-17, 42-49 of icl tender bundle, (b) exhibit b: cops report, pages 2-3 of mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: cops report 25 september 2018, pages 4-5 of mother’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: pages 6-7 of mother’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 11-24 of mother’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit b: cops report, pages 2-3 of mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: cops report 25 september 2018, pages 4-5 of mother’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: pages 6-7 of mother’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 11-24 of mother’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit c: cops report 25 september 2018, pages 4-5 of mother’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: pages 6-7 of mother’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 11-24 of mother’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit d: pages 6-7 of mother’s tender bundle, (e) exhibit e: pages 11-24 of mother’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit e: pages 11-24 of mother’s tender bundle, (f) exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit f: colour photograph at page 29 of mother’s affidavit of 29 january 2024, (g) exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit g: supervised contact record of 6 december 2019, pages 20-25 of icl tender bundle, (h) exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit h: email correspondence, pages 18-19 of icl tender bundle, (i) exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit i: pages 26-27 of icl tender bundle, (j) exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit j: pages 28-39 of icl tender bundle, (k) exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit k: icl aide memoire, meeting with children on 31 january 2024, (l) exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit l: psychological report of ms e, psychologist, december 2022, (m) exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit m: family report of ms d dated 14 january 2021, (n) exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit n: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 4 june 2019, and, (o) exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.   exhibit o: page 31 of icl tender bundle.
evidence
oral evidence of the father
oral evidence of the mother
child inclusive conference  fanning] alleged that [mr houlerman] was physically abusive, verbally abusive and controlling during their relationship. [ms fanning] said that [mr houlerman] would push, shove and try to hit her in the face. [ms fanning] said that this would occur “every other week.” [ms fanning] stated that the physical violence worsened during the course of the relationship. [ms fanning] alleged that [mr houlerman] had thrown household items and had called her names, for example, “slut, bitch.” [ms fanning] said that [mr houlerman] would restrict her access to money. [ms fanning] said that after she separated from [mr houlerman] that he would threaten her current partner ([mr l], born [...] 1986) saying that he would stick a knife in [mr l’s] throat. [ms fanning] expressed concern for her safety and that of [mr l] if [mr houlerman] were to find out where she lived or where the children went to school.   fanning] expressed concern in relation to the children’s physical well-being with [mr houlerman]. [ms fanning] alleged that [mr houlerman] is an “agro angry person” and that there is a potential that he would be violent if he spent time with the children. [ms fanning] alleged that [mr houlerman] would hit [x] “over the back of his head.” [ms fanning] expressed concern about the children’s emotional well-being. [ms fanning] stated that [mr houlerman] is “too all over the place” and she is concerned that he would be angry and aggravated with them.   houlerman] did not report any concerns in relation to himself in regards to drug or alcohol use. [mr houlerman] stated that he used to use “[...]” (marijuana), [and other illicit drugs]. [mr houlerman] said that he stopped taking drugs in 2008. [mr houlerman] said that he used to be a problematic drinker but this was no longer an issue because he no longer drank alcohol.   houlerman] reported that he had experienced depression and anxiety after the breakdown of his relationship with [ms fanning]. [mr houlerman] said that he had attended counselling sessions with [dr r] through a medical practice in [suburb f]. [mr houlerman] reported that he was diagnosed with [a mental health condition] in either 1996 or 1998 and that he takes [medication] to manage this condition. [mr houlerman] reported that he did not think his mental health condition would affect his parenting ability. [ms fanning] reported that she had concerns about [mr houlerman’s] mental health. [ms fanning] said that [mr houlerman] had been diagnosed with [a mental health condition], depression and anxiety. [ms fanning] stated that [mr houlerman] does not take his prescribed medication for treatment of [his mental health condition]. [ms fanning] that [mr houlerman’s] housemate had to seek assistance from the doctor to get [mr houlerman] back on his medication.
family report
... [ms fanning] reported she has concerns about [mr houlerman’s] mental health. she said [mr houlerman] had been diagnosed with [a mental health condition], depression and anxiety. she stated there is “a list of things” [mr houlerman] has in relation to his mental health. [ms fanning] stated [mr houlerman] “keeps going off his medication for [his mental health condition],” and [mr houlerman’s] “girlfriend” sought advice from the doctor to “get him ([mr houlerman]) to go back on his [...] medication. [sic] [ms fanning] said she is concerned about the impact on the children if [mr houlerman] is spending time with them and he is not taking the appropriate medication.
... [ms fanning] stated she stopped communicating with [mr houlerman] because of the “threatening” messages from [mr houlerman], for example, [mr houlerman] telling her he was going to “stick a knife” in her partner's throat.
... [mr houlerman] reported that he had been diagnosed with depression and in a previous interview reported that he had been diagnosed with [a mental health condition]. [mr houlerman] reported that he did not believe that either condition affected his parenting ability. [ms fanning] expressed concerns about [mr houlerman’s] mental health and the impact that it had on his parenting ability. [the mental health condition] can cause the sufferer to experience a disconnection from reality. psychosis, also experienced by those with [the mental health condition] affects how the person with the condition thinks, feels, and behaves. experiencing symptoms of [psychosis] can lead to confusion, for both the person experiencing the symptoms and for those around them and to the sufferer to feel misunderstood. psychotic episodes, and the feelings that come with them, can impact a person's ability to relate to family, friends and colleagues, and it may affect their ability to manage the requirements of running a household. people with psychosis often have hallucinations, that involve seeing or hearing things that seem very real, but others cannot sense. some people may have delusions or paranoia that can lead people to think they are being spied on, or that others are plotting against them. psychosis can result in suicidal thoughts, dangerous and violent behaviour, hospitalisations and arrests. with drug induced psychosis it is more likely that symptoms will subside after the drug wears off, with [the mental health condition], however, treatment usually consists of ongoing use of an anti‑psychotic medication. untreated depression can cause a person to neglect the needs of children and could make them irritable when responding to the demands of caring for children. exposure to an untreated mental illness could have a detrimental impact on children and can be associated with a range of ongoing mental health difficulties, such as depression, anxiety or difficulty with social engagement. children can also be adversely affected through ongoing contact with a person who has an untreated mental illness including the need to become a carer for that parent, isolation and feelings of guilt. children may also experience negative interactions in social situations with the parent with [a mental health condition] and perceive that parent as not supporting them. for children between the ages of five and ten, they may be confused by the behaviour of the parent with [a mental health condition] because they are unable to fully comprehend why the behaviour is occurring and may blame themselves. social support is important for children's emotional well-being when a parent is experiencing a mental illness as it may ameliorate some of the negative effects. it is unclear why [mr houlerman] did not report his previous diagnosis of [a mental health condition] during his interview on 2 november 2020. however, [mr houlerman] reported that he is engaged with mental health professionals and that he feels that his mental health condition is unlikely to affect his parenting capacity. if the court determines that [mr houlerman] is managing his mental illness adequately it is unlikely to be an issue that affects consideration of parenting proposals in this matter. if, on the other hand, [mr houlerman] has been diagnosed with [a mental health condition] and it is untreated it is recommended that he spend no time with the children until his condition is treated and stabilised. ... in interview, [ms fanning] suggested the children spend no time with [mr houlerman]. if [ms fanning’s] allegations about family violence or [mr houlerman’s] consumption of drugs are found to have veracity then this would appear to be suitably protective of the children. ...  unsel] the father came to this court and the hearing before his honour with non-compliance in – i’m sorry, non-compliance in relation to the alcohol testing. that is, the test results showed an insufficient sample had been provided, and he came before the court in relation to a drug testing that was positive for [illicit drugs]. do those matters cause you any concern in relation to the father’s drug and alcohol difficulties? [witness] if the drug and alcohol difficulties are still ongoing, they do concern me about parenting capacity, yes. [counsel] because in addition, the father, during the course of his evidence, gave some examples of his continuing use of alcohol which – and if his honour was to make findings that the father has not been open and frank about the extent of his use of alcohol, would that cause you any concerns in relation to the father’s parenting? [witness] yes, it does, because it can affect medication, if medication is being taken for mental health, and it also can negatively affect parenting capacity and the ability to care for the children. [counsel] in relation to some orders that were made on 31 march 2022, there was a further order that the father shall undertake a mental health assessment and provide a full mental health assessment, obviously, in relation to his mental health issues, to this court and the father failed to provide to the court a full mental health assessment as was ordered. does that cause you any concerns regarding the father’s mental health issues? [witness] it would just speak to not having the information about his mental health condition, so it would be difficult to understand how that is affecting him on a day-to-day basis, and how he responds to medication, if he’s taking any, or how he views – or the symptoms he experiences from his mental health condition. so it just doesn’t give a full picture of how he is coping with his mental health conditions.  unsel] and if there were safety concerns or if the court was to find that there were safety concerns regarding [mr houlerman] and the children, would you agree that supervised contact would mitigate the concerns raised in this matter, being family violence, drug use, alcohol abuse and mental health issues? [witness] it can but, again, i think that in the circumstances where – where there has been exposure to violence, there would need to be some repair of that relationship before the supervised time commenced – would be a recommendation. i – i don’t think it would be helpful for the children to – especially the older – especially [x], to just start supervised time without any intervention.  s honour] [ms d], what’s your view in relation to long-term supervision – that is, if the children were to have supervised time with the father, say at a contact centre, long term? is that viable? [witness] possibly for – like, long term, over a year, possibly not. i think that the – the environment, while good, it’s not a natural environment for the children and i think as children age, they get a bit – well, in my experience – bored or frustrated with the environment, that it is contained and it – a lot of them are aimed at younger children. so there is a – those sort of feelings of frustration and boredom of having to go there.  s honour] if you assume that the father has still got significant problems with drug use or alcohol use or mental health issues, does supervised time ameliorate those matters or not? [witness] more with the drug and alcohol use it would because it’s a contained period of time. it’s generally two hours a fortnight. so that can contain. mental health is a bit more ambiguous. it depends on the – the status of the person with the mental health issue. for example, with [a mental health condition], if they’re having an episode where psychosis is involved, that can be experienced as frightening by the children. so that – that’s a bit more ambiguous as to whether – whether a short period of time would ameliorate the risk there.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) (the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration) ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence (a primary consideration)  when the father was intoxicated he was extremely aggressive and would attempt to start fights, whether against family members, a friend and even strangers, (b) being extremely aggressive towards the mother over minor disagreements, including yelling and screaming at the mother and then damaging property around the home, (c) being extremely jealous and possessive over the mother, including walking up to the mother and physically removing her from a conversation with a male friend, (d) swearing at police officers when the police attended the parties’ home, (e) when the child x was about 1.5 years old when that child was trying to climb the baby gate the father smacked him and yelled at him, and the child started crying. the father became angered after the mother had intervened and asked him not to physically discipline this child, (f) thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   being extremely aggressive towards the mother over minor disagreements, including yelling and screaming at the mother and then damaging property around the home, (c) being extremely jealous and possessive over the mother, including walking up to the mother and physically removing her from a conversation with a male friend, (d) swearing at police officers when the police attended the parties’ home, (e) when the child x was about 1.5 years old when that child was trying to climb the baby gate the father smacked him and yelled at him, and the child started crying. the father became angered after the mother had intervened and asked him not to physically discipline this child, (f) thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   being extremely jealous and possessive over the mother, including walking up to the mother and physically removing her from a conversation with a male friend, (d) swearing at police officers when the police attended the parties’ home, (e) when the child x was about 1.5 years old when that child was trying to climb the baby gate the father smacked him and yelled at him, and the child started crying. the father became angered after the mother had intervened and asked him not to physically discipline this child, (f) thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   swearing at police officers when the police attended the parties’ home, (e) when the child x was about 1.5 years old when that child was trying to climb the baby gate the father smacked him and yelled at him, and the child started crying. the father became angered after the mother had intervened and asked him not to physically discipline this child, (f) thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   when the child x was about 1.5 years old when that child was trying to climb the baby gate the father smacked him and yelled at him, and the child started crying. the father became angered after the mother had intervened and asked him not to physically discipline this child, (f) thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   thereafter the father began using physical discipline against x when he was annoyed that the child was not listening or acting in a normal childlike manner. the father would either smack, hit the child on the backside or hit (a slap) him across the head. the mother observed such physical discipline by the father on x on over 10 occasions, (g) when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   when the father’s employment was terminated by his employer, the father started yelling at him and threw keys at him, (h) screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   screaming at the children x and y resulting in their experiencing distress and crying, (i) on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   on 8 may 2016 (mother’s day) the father became enraged and began yelling and throwing things around. the children witnessed this and were screaming and crying and the mother was extremely worried and scared. the mother left the premises with the children and fled the family home, staying in a hotel for an evening. due to the father’s erratic behaviour, the mother was fearful of any repercussions from the father and therefore did not report this incident to the police, (j) in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   in about mid-2016 the mother questioned the father about his lack of financial contribution towards the household. the father became angered and started yelling and pushing the mother. he then slapped the mother with an open palm, (k) when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   when the parties were residing at the suburb q home, on over 10 occasions the father physically assaulted the mother. at times the parties had a disagreement, the father pushed, slapped and screamed at the mother. during this time the father was also extremely aggressive towards x. x had been diagnosed with adhd. if x did not immediately listen to the father, the father would get aggravated and then scream at him. there were occasions when the father would get angry, and yell at and hit y, (l) post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   post separation, in about mid-2016, the mother permitted the father to have phone calls with the children however during these calls the father would spend more time harassing and interrogating the mother than speaking with the children, (m) in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   in around mid-2016 the mother permitted a visit between the children and the father at a play centre. the father’s demeanour became markedly agitated and escalated significantly when the children were using play equipment. the mother decided to leave the premises with the children and the father pursued her outside, audibly shouting and screaming, demanding to know where they were going with explicit language, and the children were visibly distressed.   the mother’s above evidence relating to the father’s family violence and adverse behaviour, (b) the father’s adverse behaviour at the centrelink office discussed above. the family report writer had stated that the father’s behaviour in the centrelink office displayed a series of limited coping mechanisms in respect to distress experienced by the father in relation to the death of his family members, (c) the father’s evidence relating to his inability to resolve disputation without abuse or violence, (d) the father’s evidence that he does get agitated with police, (e) the father’s presentation in the witness box when being cross-examined was, on occasion, one of hostility and frustration, particularly when being cross-examined in relation to alleged adverse behaviour by him. counsel for the father conceded that the father’s mood in the witness had on occasion escalated (whilst submitting that his mood had been impacted by his experience of grief from having lost close family members, and he was having regular counselling), (f) the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.   the father’s adverse behaviour at the centrelink office discussed above. the family report writer had stated that the father’s behaviour in the centrelink office displayed a series of limited coping mechanisms in respect to distress experienced by the father in relation to the death of his family members, (c) the father’s evidence relating to his inability to resolve disputation without abuse or violence, (d) the father’s evidence that he does get agitated with police, (e) the father’s presentation in the witness box when being cross-examined was, on occasion, one of hostility and frustration, particularly when being cross-examined in relation to alleged adverse behaviour by him. counsel for the father conceded that the father’s mood in the witness had on occasion escalated (whilst submitting that his mood had been impacted by his experience of grief from having lost close family members, and he was having regular counselling), (f) the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.   the father’s evidence relating to his inability to resolve disputation without abuse or violence, (d) the father’s evidence that he does get agitated with police, (e) the father’s presentation in the witness box when being cross-examined was, on occasion, one of hostility and frustration, particularly when being cross-examined in relation to alleged adverse behaviour by him. counsel for the father conceded that the father’s mood in the witness had on occasion escalated (whilst submitting that his mood had been impacted by his experience of grief from having lost close family members, and he was having regular counselling), (f) the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.   the father’s evidence that he does get agitated with police, (e) the father’s presentation in the witness box when being cross-examined was, on occasion, one of hostility and frustration, particularly when being cross-examined in relation to alleged adverse behaviour by him. counsel for the father conceded that the father’s mood in the witness had on occasion escalated (whilst submitting that his mood had been impacted by his experience of grief from having lost close family members, and he was having regular counselling), (f) the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.   the father’s presentation in the witness box when being cross-examined was, on occasion, one of hostility and frustration, particularly when being cross-examined in relation to alleged adverse behaviour by him. counsel for the father conceded that the father’s mood in the witness had on occasion escalated (whilst submitting that his mood had been impacted by his experience of grief from having lost close family members, and he was having regular counselling), (f) the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.   the father’s evidence that he had only participated in an anger management course when incarcerated for a period during a period from 2006 to 2008, (discussed above). he was not aware of men’s behaviour change programs and he denied that he had an anger management problem.  unsel] when you say you’ve pretty much stayed on – [witness] yes. [counsel] have you stayed on it since then? [witness] generally yes. probably sometimes i don’t take it or i take less or more. like tonight i’ll probably end up taking [more] tablets, after dealing with you.   the father has perpetrated significant family violence and other adverse behaviour (see the court’s findings above) to which the children have been exposed on occasion, and in relation to which he lacks adequate insight, (b) there is a real possibility that the father’s mental health may not be adequately managed. the father has had significant mental health issues. historically he has been diagnosed with a mental health condition, anxiety and depression. whilst it appears that he is having regular psychological treatment, he has failed to comply with a march 2022 court order that he obtain and provide a full mental health assessment. he is exercising his own discretion as to whether or not he ingests medication for his mental health condition in the absence of any proffered health professional evidence in this regard. the family report writer observed that it is possible that psychotic episodes can be experienced by a person suffering the mental health condition. (c) there is a real possibility that the father may continue to have significant issues relating to the ingestion of illicit drugs and alcohol. (d) the father probably has an anger management problem which remains untreated. he lacks the ability to consistently deal with disputation without resort to anger or violence. in certain situations (e.g. in disputation with institutions such as centrelink, the police and with domestic partners) he can become emotionally triggered and react with anger and on occasion with violence. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s behaviour at centrelink) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and participation in an anger management course in jail. the father’s difficulties with emotional dysregulation date back a significant period. (e) there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or excessive physical chastisement, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. this risk is heightened for the eldest child x in particular who is vulnerable by reason of his asd diagnosis. as for the other two children, the court observes the mother is concerned that they are exhibiting behaviours consistent with neurodivergence. the father has permissive attitudes in relation to the application of physical chastisement of children. (f) there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.   there is a real possibility that the father’s mental health may not be adequately managed. the father has had significant mental health issues. historically he has been diagnosed with a mental health condition, anxiety and depression. whilst it appears that he is having regular psychological treatment, he has failed to comply with a march 2022 court order that he obtain and provide a full mental health assessment. he is exercising his own discretion as to whether or not he ingests medication for his mental health condition in the absence of any proffered health professional evidence in this regard. the family report writer observed that it is possible that psychotic episodes can be experienced by a person suffering the mental health condition. (c) there is a real possibility that the father may continue to have significant issues relating to the ingestion of illicit drugs and alcohol. (d) the father probably has an anger management problem which remains untreated. he lacks the ability to consistently deal with disputation without resort to anger or violence. in certain situations (e.g. in disputation with institutions such as centrelink, the police and with domestic partners) he can become emotionally triggered and react with anger and on occasion with violence. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s behaviour at centrelink) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and participation in an anger management course in jail. the father’s difficulties with emotional dysregulation date back a significant period. (e) there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or excessive physical chastisement, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. this risk is heightened for the eldest child x in particular who is vulnerable by reason of his asd diagnosis. as for the other two children, the court observes the mother is concerned that they are exhibiting behaviours consistent with neurodivergence. the father has permissive attitudes in relation to the application of physical chastisement of children. (f) there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.   there is a real possibility that the father may continue to have significant issues relating to the ingestion of illicit drugs and alcohol. (d) the father probably has an anger management problem which remains untreated. he lacks the ability to consistently deal with disputation without resort to anger or violence. in certain situations (e.g. in disputation with institutions such as centrelink, the police and with domestic partners) he can become emotionally triggered and react with anger and on occasion with violence. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s behaviour at centrelink) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and participation in an anger management course in jail. the father’s difficulties with emotional dysregulation date back a significant period. (e) there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or excessive physical chastisement, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. this risk is heightened for the eldest child x in particular who is vulnerable by reason of his asd diagnosis. as for the other two children, the court observes the mother is concerned that they are exhibiting behaviours consistent with neurodivergence. the father has permissive attitudes in relation to the application of physical chastisement of children. (f) there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.   the father probably has an anger management problem which remains untreated. he lacks the ability to consistently deal with disputation without resort to anger or violence. in certain situations (e.g. in disputation with institutions such as centrelink, the police and with domestic partners) he can become emotionally triggered and react with anger and on occasion with violence. there is a significant risk that the father will act in a dysregulated manner, including verbally abusive, intimidatory and/or and dangerous behaviour (e.g. the father’s behaviour at centrelink) towards third parties in the presence of the children. of significant concern is that such inadequate impulse control and emotional dysregulation continues despite past psychological treatment and participation in an anger management course in jail. the father’s difficulties with emotional dysregulation date back a significant period. (e) there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or excessive physical chastisement, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. this risk is heightened for the eldest child x in particular who is vulnerable by reason of his asd diagnosis. as for the other two children, the court observes the mother is concerned that they are exhibiting behaviours consistent with neurodivergence. the father has permissive attitudes in relation to the application of physical chastisement of children. (f) there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.   there is a significant risk that the father will perpetrate significant verbal abuse and/or excessive physical chastisement, with anger, towards the children, as they mature and exhibit potentially challenging behaviours. this risk is heightened for the eldest child x in particular who is vulnerable by reason of his asd diagnosis. as for the other two children, the court observes the mother is concerned that they are exhibiting behaviours consistent with neurodivergence. the father has permissive attitudes in relation to the application of physical chastisement of children. (f) there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.   there is a real risk that the mother’s mental health would be adversely affected with resultant detrimental effects upon her parenting capacity which would negatively affect the children. the family report writer had stated that the mother’s account to her indicated that she continues to be fearful of the father. the court would assess that the mother has no significant capacity to co-parent with the father in view of her fear of the father. the father probably lacks insight in relation to the mother’s fear of him.  ] it has long been recognised that the permanent imposition of supervision upon the interaction between children and a parent is undesirable, though sometimes warranted (see slater & light [2013] famcafc 4, (2013) 48 fam lr 573 at 583–584, champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 at [209]–[215], moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [119], h & k [2001] famca 687 at [40]–[41], b and b [1993] famca 143, (1993) flc 92-357 at [79,780]).  ] boland j commented on the general undesirability of long term supervised contact and similarly expressed may j’s concern about orders providing for their own review:  9] the undesirability of, and the practical difficulties associated with long term supervision in a children’s contact centre are referred to in the guideline for family law courts and children’s contact services january 2007, part c 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 (published by the attorney-general’s department, the family court of australia and the federal magistrates court of australia). in fitzpatrick & fitzpatrick [2005] famca 394, (2005) flc 93-227, may j, having found that the evidence in the case “objectively viewed reveals the potential for an unacceptable risk to the children if contact with the father is not supervised...”, then referred to the difficulty associated with long term supervised contact and said “the necessity for contact to be supervised apparently indefinitely leads to the need to finely balance what is in the children’s best interests”. her honour then explained “[w]hilst supervised contact in this case will protect the children from any potential physical harm, the effect on their emotional well-being cannot be ignored”. (see also w & w [abuse allegations: unacceptable risk] [2005] famca 892, (2005) flc 93-235, (2005) 34 fam lr 129 at paragraph 114).
given the obligation to protect children from abuse, the family court should be careful to ensure that any order for supervised access is not attended by any risk of infringement of the child's right to safety, in the widest sense of that word. supervised access of its very nature acknowledges the presence of a risk to the child. the family law council in its paper “access – some options for reform” (1987) recommended that: –
“orders for supervision of access should never be made in circumstances where supervision is regarded as being necessary for the protection of the child.”
we would not elevate such a recommendation to the status of a legal principle for the reason that, in some circumstances such as in the case of an inexperienced parent or a very young child, supervision may be necessary for a relatively short period of time. a list of appropriate circumstances for supervised access orders was outlined in that report. relevantly for present purposes, is the situation where supervised access is intended to assist the re-establishment of a relationship between the access parent and the child. in our opinion, a trial judge who has made a finding that an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse exists, or that sexual abuse did occur, should look to the level of trauma, in the widest sense, that has been occasioned to the child or children or may be occasioned in the future, to determine whether supervised access is appropriate. if there is an unacceptable risk of the child or children being exposed to physical, emotional or psychological harm by reason of contact with the abusing parent, then an order for supervised access is not appropriate because of the court's obligation to protect children from such harm. in circumstances where abuse has occurred or where there is an unacceptable risk of such abuse, access should be suspended until such time as the access parent can show that there is no longer an unacceptable risk in access recommencing. in some cases this will involve an acknowledgment by the access parent that abuse has occurred, together with evidence of appropriate treatment. in most cases, other family members must have the opportunity to resolve the effects of the trauma to the children and the children have the opportunity to recover from the effects of any such abuse. without that ``time out'' and counselling/treatment, the children's feelings of distress and fear may well be restimulated by contact with the access parent, despite the alleged assurance of safety provided by a supervisor. supervised access may then be capable of being ordered for the time-limited purpose of re-establishing a relationship between the access parent and the children. supervised access is not appropriate as a long term measure. suspension of access for a period of time may be important for the custodial parent as well as for the children. it is not unreasonable for the court to take into account in assessing whether an unacceptable risk exists, the need of a custodial parent to be assured of the children's protection. as primary caregiver, anxiety about the children's exposure to potential harm is likely to impact adversely on that parent's ability to care for the children.   the family report writer had recommended that before supervised time could occur there should be some intervention, given the children’s views (discussed below) to enable the re-establishment of the children’s relationship with the father, in this context she had referred to the need to repair the relationships where there had been exposure to violence. assuming such intervention may well involve some form of therapeutic intervention, the court has a real concern that in view of the father’s lack of insight in relation to previously perpetrated family violence, previously perpetrated violence in the context of past domestic relationships, and permissive views in relation to physical chastisement, his participation in such intervention would not be fruitful, (b) the court has expressed its concerns above in relation to the father’s use of illicit drugs, alcohol and his mental health, in particular its concerns as to whether these matters are adequately managed. the family report writer appeared to suggest that supervision could detect a parent affected by illicit drug or alcohol use, and the court observes that the father is prepared to be subject to a formal court ordered restraint in relation to using illicit drugs or consuming alcohol prior to spending time with the children. however, the family report writer had expressed her concerns that supervision of a child’s time with a parent suffering mental health issues could be problematical, and used the example of a parent suffering a mental health condition having a psychotic episode which could be experienced by a child as frightening. in this case, again, for example, the father has failed to provide a full mental health assessment in relation to, inter alia, whether his mental health condition is adequately managed. (c) the above legal authorities indicate that long-term supervision of the child’s time with a parent is generally undesirable and has practical difficulties. the authorities refer to supervised time usually being intended to assist in the re-establishment of a relationship between the child and a parent. (the court nevertheless acknowledges that those authorities indicate that provided the trial judge provides cogent reasons, an order for long-term supervision is at least theoretically open to be made). in this case, having regard to the current unacceptable risk of harm posed to the children, as discussed above, in spending unsupervised time with the father, and in circumstances where the father lacks insight into his past related behaviour, if an open‑ended order for supervision was made, it is difficult to see when such an order could be lifted and the children then able to spend unsupervised time with the father. (d) the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.   the court has expressed its concerns above in relation to the father’s use of illicit drugs, alcohol and his mental health, in particular its concerns as to whether these matters are adequately managed. the family report writer appeared to suggest that supervision could detect a parent affected by illicit drug or alcohol use, and the court observes that the father is prepared to be subject to a formal court ordered restraint in relation to using illicit drugs or consuming alcohol prior to spending time with the children. however, the family report writer had expressed her concerns that supervision of a child’s time with a parent suffering mental health issues could be problematical, and used the example of a parent suffering a mental health condition having a psychotic episode which could be experienced by a child as frightening. in this case, again, for example, the father has failed to provide a full mental health assessment in relation to, inter alia, whether his mental health condition is adequately managed. (c) the above legal authorities indicate that long-term supervision of the child’s time with a parent is generally undesirable and has practical difficulties. the authorities refer to supervised time usually being intended to assist in the re-establishment of a relationship between the child and a parent. (the court nevertheless acknowledges that those authorities indicate that provided the trial judge provides cogent reasons, an order for long-term supervision is at least theoretically open to be made). in this case, having regard to the current unacceptable risk of harm posed to the children, as discussed above, in spending unsupervised time with the father, and in circumstances where the father lacks insight into his past related behaviour, if an open‑ended order for supervision was made, it is difficult to see when such an order could be lifted and the children then able to spend unsupervised time with the father. (d) the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.
however, the family report writer had expressed her concerns that supervision of a child’s time with a parent suffering mental health issues could be problematical, and used the example of a parent suffering a mental health condition having a psychotic episode which could be experienced by a child as frightening. in this case, again, for example, the father has failed to provide a full mental health assessment in relation to, inter alia, whether his mental health condition is adequately managed. (c) the above legal authorities indicate that long-term supervision of the child’s time with a parent is generally undesirable and has practical difficulties. the authorities refer to supervised time usually being intended to assist in the re-establishment of a relationship between the child and a parent. (the court nevertheless acknowledges that those authorities indicate that provided the trial judge provides cogent reasons, an order for long-term supervision is at least theoretically open to be made). in this case, having regard to the current unacceptable risk of harm posed to the children, as discussed above, in spending unsupervised time with the father, and in circumstances where the father lacks insight into his past related behaviour, if an open‑ended order for supervision was made, it is difficult to see when such an order could be lifted and the children then able to spend unsupervised time with the father. (d) the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.   the above legal authorities indicate that long-term supervision of the child’s time with a parent is generally undesirable and has practical difficulties. the authorities refer to supervised time usually being intended to assist in the re-establishment of a relationship between the child and a parent. (the court nevertheless acknowledges that those authorities indicate that provided the trial judge provides cogent reasons, an order for long-term supervision is at least theoretically open to be made). in this case, having regard to the current unacceptable risk of harm posed to the children, as discussed above, in spending unsupervised time with the father, and in circumstances where the father lacks insight into his past related behaviour, if an open‑ended order for supervision was made, it is difficult to see when such an order could be lifted and the children then able to spend unsupervised time with the father. (d) the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.
in this case, having regard to the current unacceptable risk of harm posed to the children, as discussed above, in spending unsupervised time with the father, and in circumstances where the father lacks insight into his past related behaviour, if an open‑ended order for supervision was made, it is difficult to see when such an order could be lifted and the children then able to spend unsupervised time with the father. (d) the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.   the family report writer referred to long-term supervision, presumably in a contact centre, as ultimately becoming boring for a child, and such a child becoming frustrated with the environment that is so presented to them during such supervision. even assuming that such supervised time could occur outside of a contact centre, for example in a park, as proposed by the father, there is probably still a reasonable possibility that as the younger children mature they would not wish to spend supervised time with the father at outside venues.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents s honour] and if you assume for the moment that the mother’s allegations of family violence made against the father are correct – that is, assume what she said to you about family violence experienced during the relationship is correct. is it more understandable or not that a parent such as the mother in those circumstances might consciously or unconsciously reveal her concerns in that regard to the children? [witness] yes. the wellbeing of a mother directly or – is intricately linked to the wellbeing of a child. they’re not mutually exclusive. so it’s important to understand that the behaviour of the mother could be impacted by her experiences. so while it’s not the best thing to talk to the children about that or make them aware of that, sometimes that can be difficult just because your coping strategies are not fully – fully there either.  j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.  m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
summary
deputy associate: dated: 19 february 2024
dated: 19 february 2024