last updated: 26 march 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
visser & drost (no 3) [2024] fedcfamc2f 118
orders
the court orders that:  all items of furniture, furnishings, chattels and jewellery in their possession, custody and control. (b) all monies held in cash or in bank accounts solely in their respective names. (c) all motor vehicles held in their respective names. (d) all contributions to or benefits or entitlements arising from membership of any fund of insurance or superannuation whether such interest be present, contingent, or expectant, held in their possession, title or name, which are not otherwise dealt with in these orders.   all monies held in cash or in bank accounts solely in their respective names. (c) all motor vehicles held in their respective names. (d) all contributions to or benefits or entitlements arising from membership of any fund of insurance or superannuation whether such interest be present, contingent, or expectant, held in their possession, title or name, which are not otherwise dealt with in these orders.   all motor vehicles held in their respective names. (d) all contributions to or benefits or entitlements arising from membership of any fund of insurance or superannuation whether such interest be present, contingent, or expectant, held in their possession, title or name, which are not otherwise dealt with in these orders.   all contributions to or benefits or entitlements arising from membership of any fund of insurance or superannuation whether such interest be present, contingent, or expectant, held in their possession, title or name, which are not otherwise dealt with in these orders.
reserve reasons for judgment
judge street
introduction
chronology
date
event
1973
applicant husband is born.
1976
respondent wife is born.
1998
applicant marries ms e.
2000
applicant and ms e purchase property at f street, suburb g. suburb g property is purchased in applicant’s sole name for $190,000.
2004
respondent’s daughter from the previous relationship, ms h, is born in country d.
2011
applicant and ms e separate. a divorce order is made.
2012
parties communicate online
2013
parties meet for the first time in person when husband travels to country d.
mid 2015
consent property orders made by federal circuit court at parramatta in relation to the division of assets between the applicant and ms e.
applicant receives by way of property settlement a sum of $169,839 being a cash payment from ms e in relation for the applicant’s interest in the suburb g property.
2015
applicant applies his property settlement funds received from ms e towards renovating the suburb c property. applicant estimates he spent $90,000 towards the renovations.
2016
parties are married in australia. respondent stays in australia for approximately one month after the party’s wedding. the respondent and her daughter then travel back to country d.
respondent stays in australia for approximately one month after the party’s wedding. the respondent and her daughter then travel back to country d.
applicant’s mother is admitted into hospital, where she remained for a few weeks. arrangements are made by hospital staff for the nsw trustee and guardian to be appointed as the applicant’s mother financial manager. in 2016 after being released from hospital the applicant’s mother was placed into j nursing home. the applicant removed his mother from the nursing home due to costs and she returned to occupy the suburb c property with him.
in 2016 after being released from hospital the applicant’s mother was placed into j nursing home. the applicant removed his mother from the nursing home due to costs and she returned to occupy the suburb c property with him.
late 2016/ early 2017
the applicant and respondent placed an advertisement in a newspaper to secure a carer for the applicant’s mother. two carers are then arranged and cared for the applicant’s mother from late 2016 or early 2017 until mid-2017.
mid 2017
applicant’s mother is cared for at k nursing home where she remained until 2021 being the date of her death.
2016-2017
respondent and her daughter remain in country d and return to australia in or about 2017. whilst the respondent and her daughter were in australia in 2017, they occupied the suburb c property with the applicant. the respondent’s daughter, ms h was enrolled to attend school. the applicant tries to assist the respondent by gaining employment at a country d nursing home in suburb c. the respondent is hired and given a start date and later identified as not suitable for the role due to her limited english.
the applicant tries to assist the respondent by gaining employment at a country d nursing home in suburb c. the respondent is hired and given a start date and later identified as not suitable for the role due to her limited english.
2017
respondent travels to australia from country d then returns to country d in 2018.
early 2018
husband purchases airline tickets for the respondent and her daughter to travel to country d.
mid to late 2018
party’s relationship begins to deteriorate.
2018-2019
applicant attends to payment of costs associate with visa being issued for respondent and her daughter.
mid 2019 to late 2019
applicant paid $840 a fortnight to nsw trustee and guardian
early 2019
party’s cease sharing a bed and being intimate.
mid 2019
visas are granted and issued to the respondent and her daughter.
late 2019
parties separate under same roof- provisional advo made against the applicant for alleged protection of the respondent- communication respondent wants divorce.
late 2019 to mid 2021
applicant paid $1,100 per fortnight to nsw trustee and guardian
advo against applicant for protections of respondent is finalised at suburb c local court with applicant accepting the avo on a without admissions basis.
march 2020
applicant notices a letter to the respondent from services australia in the mailbox which contained a healthcare card.
mid 2020
parties and respondent’s daughter ms h travel to another region for a day out. the respondent slapped the applicant on the face, back of head and upper body.
provisional advo taken out against the respondent for the protection of the applicant.
the respondent provides statement to police relating to events of the day out.
due to condition in advo obtained by the respondent -the applicant vacated suburb c property and respondent remains in occupation of the suburb c property with her daughter.
2020-2023
the respondent continues to send emails and texts to the applicant.
late 2020
applicant provides statement to the police relating to events of the day out in mid 2020.
advo taken out for the protection of the applicant against the respondent listed at suburb c local court and dismissed.
2021
death of applicant’s mother.
nsw trustee and guardian serves eviction notice on the respondent.
2022
order for divorce is made
18 december 2021 to 30 march 2022
applicant pays respondent $650. applicant then paid to the respondent $340 per week pending the parties attendance at mediation.
march 2022
parties scheduled to attend mediation however it is postponed due to respondent instructing new solicitor. applicant continues to make weekly payments to respondent of $340 until april 2022 being the postponed mediation date.
mid 2022
applicant secures rental accommodation at suburb g. applicant pays $390 rent per week and continues to pay council rates and expenses associated with the respondent’s occupation of the suburb c property.
applicant pays $390 rent per week and continues to pay council rates and expenses associated with the respondent’s occupation of the suburb c property.
3 august 2022
applicant commences these proceedings by filing an initiating application and support documents.
11 august 2022
notice of address for service filed by the respondent’s newly appointed solicitors, m lawyers.
october 2022
title search for suburb c property still identifies the property as registered in the joint names of the applicant’s mother and father.
26 october 2022
suburb c property is jointly valued by l valuers, value identified as $775,000
1 november 2022
parties attend conciliation conference with sjr. agreement in principle is reached during the conference.
4 november 2022
wife withdraws her consent to the agreement in principle reached at the conciliation conference.
18 november 2022
title search identifies suburb c property is registered in the sole name of the husband.
28 november 2022
proceeds are listed before a jr and directions are made for the preparation of the matter for compliance and readiness hearing. respondent is legally represented.
15 december 2022
respondent’s solicitors file a notice of ceasing to act (m lawyers).
19 december 2022
further request is received from respondent for a one-time payment of $300-$400
21 december 2022
applicant agrees to advance $4000 to the respondent as part of overall settlement amount
1 february 2023
matter is listed before judge dunkley for compliance and readiness hearing and is allocated final hearing dates. respondent appears in person.
respondent appears in person.
17 april 2023
notice of address for service filed by the respondent’s newly appointed solicitors, r lawyers
1 may 2023
notice to produce is filed and served on behalf of the husband addressed to the wife.
11 & 12 may 2023
matter is listed for final hearing before judge street. the final hearing is adjourned due to respondent’s adjournment application on conditions and relisted for 31 july and 1 august 2023.
the final hearing is adjourned due to respondent’s adjournment application on conditions and relisted for 31 july and 1 august 2023.
31 july 2023
final hearing is vacated on conditions due to respondent’s adjournment application. respondent is ordered to vacate the suburb c property on or before 18 september 2023. the applicant is ordered to pay the respondent $10,000 to assist with moving costs. final hearing is relisted for 16 & 17 november 2023.
respondent is ordered to vacate the suburb c property on or before 18 september 2023. the applicant is ordered to pay the respondent $10,000 to assist with moving costs. final hearing is relisted for 16 & 17 november 2023.
the applicant is ordered to pay the respondent $10,000 to assist with moving costs. final hearing is relisted for 16 & 17 november 2023.
final hearing is relisted for 16 & 17 november 2023.
18 september 2023
respondent moves out of the suburb c property and begins to sublet
16 november 2023
final hearing before judge street
evidence outline  affidavit of applicant husband dated 2 may 2023, (2) affidavit of applicant husband dated 11 august 2023, (3) affidavit of applicant husband dated 14 november 2023, (4) affidavit of applicant husband with valuation report dated 15 november 2023,   affidavit of applicant husband dated 11 august 2023, (3) affidavit of applicant husband dated 14 november 2023, (4) affidavit of applicant husband with valuation report dated 15 november 2023,   affidavit of applicant husband dated 14 november 2023, (4) affidavit of applicant husband with valuation report dated 15 november 2023,   affidavit of applicant husband with valuation report dated 15 november 2023,   affidavit of respondent wife dated 26 october 2023, (2) affidavit of respondent wife dated 8 november 2023, (3) affidavit of respondent wife dated 15 november 2023, and (4) affidavit of mr n dated 15 november 2023. (5) affidavit of ms h 26 october 2023.   affidavit of respondent wife dated 8 november 2023, (3) affidavit of respondent wife dated 15 november 2023, and (4) affidavit of mr n dated 15 november 2023. (5) affidavit of ms h 26 october 2023.   affidavit of respondent wife dated 15 november 2023, and (4) affidavit of mr n dated 15 november 2023. (5) affidavit of ms h 26 october 2023.   affidavit of mr n dated 15 november 2023. (5) affidavit of ms h 26 october 2023.   affidavit of ms h 26 october 2023.
current assets and liabilities
applicant’s evidence
the respondent sold her [country d] property in or around 2017, approximately two months before the parties married, for approximately $53,000.00 aud. the applicant demanded that the funds be transferred to his bank account, to demonstrate to nsw trustee and guardian that he had access to fund so that he would not access his mother’s funds. the respondent refused and she exhausted these funds to support herself and her daughter. the respondent was required to pay for her own basic necessities, with the minimal funds she received from centrelink.
respondent’s evidence
alteration of property law   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
...
including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order requiring:  either or both of the parties to the marriage, or ... to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.  the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   identify and determine the value of the asset pool of the parties as at the date of the hearing (this necessarily involves identifying both the assets and liabilities), (b) identify and assess each of the parties’ financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (c) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   identify and assess each of the parties’ financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (c) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the s 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.
within the family law context, those comments [in respect to the adequacy of reasons] should be seen as reinforced by the fact that the nature of the s 79 inquiry is, in essence, a broad discretionary assessment, which is neither an accounting nor mathematical exercise and which, effectively as a corollary, requires a "broad-brush approach".(citations omitted)
contributions
submissions
findings and conclusions
associate: dated: 20 february 2024
dated: 20 february 2024