last updated: 26 march 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
filipovic & filipovic (no 3) [2024] fedcfamc2f 249
orders
the court orders that:  disclosed by the husband or any of the brother and the companies, or (ii) provided to the court on subpoena and released to the parties for inspection and copying, or (iii) an item or aspect of the required documents and/or information does not exist, then on or before 30 march 2024 (30 days) (‘the new disclosure date’),  ) provided to the court on subpoena and released to the parties for inspection and copying, or (iii) an item or aspect of the required documents and/or information does not exist, then on or before 30 march 2024 (30 days) (‘the new disclosure date’),  i) an item or aspect of the required documents and/or information does not exist, then on or before 30 march 2024 (30 days) (‘the new disclosure date’),
the brother and the companies provide the following by way of financial disclosure:  documentary evidence showing the account into which the net proceeds of sale of $1,218,348 received by bb lawyers on the settlement of e street, suburb f was deposited, and documentary evidence showing how these funds were subsequently applied. (b) bank account statements in relation to any mortgage/s secured against the property at k street, town l, including mortgage number ... registered in 2009 for the period 1 january 2010 to date. (c) copies of all existing leases or recently lapsed leases associated with commercial properties to be valued as particularised at paragraph 4 of the orders made by a judicial registrar on 16 august 2023. (d) copy statements for anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd for the period 3 october 2017 to 21 january 2021. (e) copy statements for account number ...93 and account number ...88 for the period 1 january 2018 to date, as identified in the anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (f) copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   bank account statements in relation to any mortgage/s secured against the property at k street, town l, including mortgage number ... registered in 2009 for the period 1 january 2010 to date. (c) copies of all existing leases or recently lapsed leases associated with commercial properties to be valued as particularised at paragraph 4 of the orders made by a judicial registrar on 16 august 2023. (d) copy statements for anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd for the period 3 october 2017 to 21 january 2021. (e) copy statements for account number ...93 and account number ...88 for the period 1 january 2018 to date, as identified in the anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (f) copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copies of all existing leases or recently lapsed leases associated with commercial properties to be valued as particularised at paragraph 4 of the orders made by a judicial registrar on 16 august 2023. (d) copy statements for anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd for the period 3 october 2017 to 21 january 2021. (e) copy statements for account number ...93 and account number ...88 for the period 1 january 2018 to date, as identified in the anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (f) copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy statements for anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd for the period 3 october 2017 to 21 january 2021. (e) copy statements for account number ...93 and account number ...88 for the period 1 january 2018 to date, as identified in the anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (f) copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy statements for account number ...93 and account number ...88 for the period 1 january 2018 to date, as identified in the anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (f) copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy documents associated with the loan facility number ...92 including bank statements associated with that facility for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in anz account ending #...13 in the name of g pty ltd. (g) documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   documents and evidence of deposits into anz account ending ...77 in the name of j pty ltd on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 confirming the source from which those deposits were made. (h) copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy statements for all share trading accounts in the name of the second respondent or held by him on behalf of another for the period 1 january 2018 to date including but not limited to any cc investments accounts in his name. (i) copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy documents providing a breakdown of beneficiary loans payable to “filipovic family” as identified in financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years 30 june 2016 to 30 june 2022 inclusive. (j) copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy tax returns and financial accounts for the b filipovic investment trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2013 to 30 june 2015 inclusive. (k) copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy tax returns from financial accounts for c trust for the financial years ended 30 june 2015 to 30 june 2018 inclusive. (l) financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   financial accounts and tax returns for g trust for the financial year ended 30 june 2018. (m) copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy bank account statements for accounts ending ...50 and ...42 for the period 1 january 2021 to date as identified in westpac account ending ...47 in the name of h pty ltd. (n) copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   copy credit card statements for account ending ...84 in the name of mr b filipovic for the period 1 january 2017 to date.   when and how the required document or information as disclosed, and/or (b) where in the documents released on subpoena the required document or information is, and/or (c) which document or what aspect of the required documents and information does not exist and the circumstances of why that is.   where in the documents released on subpoena the required document or information is, and/or (c) which document or what aspect of the required documents and information does not exist and the circumstances of why that is.   which document or what aspect of the required documents and information does not exist and the circumstances of why that is.   inform the applicant as to all developments including in respect to any proposed offers for sale before he accepts any offer to sell the property and provide the applicant with an authority to liaise with the selling agent to enable her to be kept informed as to the proposed sale, (b) that after payment of the outstanding line of credit debt secured by mortgage on that property, the net sale proceeds of o street be applied as follows: (i) the sum of $65,000 be paid to the husband as part property settlement, and (ii) the sum of $268,000 be paid to the wife as part property settlement, and (iii) the balance be paid to an interest bearing account in the names of the husband and wife and held on trust for them by a solicitor agreed between the husband and wife, and failing agreement the husband’s solicitors, pending agreement in writing between the husband and wife or further order of the court.   that after payment of the outstanding line of credit debt secured by mortgage on that property, the net sale proceeds of o street be applied as follows: (i) the sum of $65,000 be paid to the husband as part property settlement, and (ii) the sum of $268,000 be paid to the wife as part property settlement, and (iii) the balance be paid to an interest bearing account in the names of the husband and wife and held on trust for them by a solicitor agreed between the husband and wife, and failing agreement the husband’s solicitors, pending agreement in writing between the husband and wife or further order of the court.   the sum of $65,000 be paid to the husband as part property settlement, and (ii) the sum of $268,000 be paid to the wife as part property settlement, and (iii) the balance be paid to an interest bearing account in the names of the husband and wife and held on trust for them by a solicitor agreed between the husband and wife, and failing agreement the husband’s solicitors, pending agreement in writing between the husband and wife or further order of the court.  ) the sum of $268,000 be paid to the wife as part property settlement, and (iii) the balance be paid to an interest bearing account in the names of the husband and wife and held on trust for them by a solicitor agreed between the husband and wife, and failing agreement the husband’s solicitors, pending agreement in writing between the husband and wife or further order of the court.  i) the balance be paid to an interest bearing account in the names of the husband and wife and held on trust for them by a solicitor agreed between the husband and wife, and failing agreement the husband’s solicitors, pending agreement in writing between the husband and wife or further order of the court.   disclosed by the husband or any of the brother and the companies, or (ii) provided to the court on subpoena and released to the parties for inspection and copying, or (iii) an item or aspect of the required documents and/or information does not exist, then on or before 30 march 2024 (30 days) (‘the new disclosure date’),  ) provided to the court on subpoena and released to the parties for inspection and copying, or (iii) an item or aspect of the required documents and/or information does not exist, then on or before 30 march 2024 (30 days) (‘the new disclosure date’),
the husband provide the following by way of financial disclosure:   details and documentary evidence of the total sales of $127,204 referred to in the business activity statement for aa pty ltd for the period 1 january 2023 to 31 march 2023. (b) details and documentary evidence of the source from which $96,800 was deposited into the bank account ending #...93 on 3 february 2023 and the purpose for which the deposit was made. (c) in respect to any trust of which the first respondent is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income in accordance with rule 6.06 (3) (f) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, copies of: (i) copy of the trust deed or any amending deed thereof, (ii) a copy of taxation returns since 1 july 2018 to date, (iii) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.   details and documentary evidence of the source from which $96,800 was deposited into the bank account ending #...93 on 3 february 2023 and the purpose for which the deposit was made. (c) in respect to any trust of which the first respondent is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income in accordance with rule 6.06 (3) (f) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, copies of: (i) copy of the trust deed or any amending deed thereof, (ii) a copy of taxation returns since 1 july 2018 to date, (iii) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.   in respect to any trust of which the first respondent is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income in accordance with rule 6.06 (3) (f) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021, copies of: (i) copy of the trust deed or any amending deed thereof, (ii) a copy of taxation returns since 1 july 2018 to date, (iii) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.   copy of the trust deed or any amending deed thereof, (ii) a copy of taxation returns since 1 july 2018 to date, (iii) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.  ) a copy of taxation returns since 1 july 2018 to date, (iii) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.  i) a copy of financial statements since 1 july 2018 to date, (iv) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.  ) a copy of bank account statements associated with any such trust for the period 1 july 2018 to date. (d) income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.   income tax returns and notices of assessment for the financial years ending 30 june 2010 to 30 june 2017 inclusive.   the wife to file and serve no later than 7 days after these orders, and (b) the husband, the brother and the companies file and serve no later than 14 days after these orders.   the husband, the brother and the companies file and serve no later than 14 days after these orders.
reasons for judgment
introduction
interim hearing on 19 february 2024
ruling on late filed material with reasons reserved
limitation on interim hearing: proceedings issued two years ago
the july 2023 orders
the court orders that: upon the undertaking of the applicant wife, [ms filipovic] as to damages, by her senior counsel to submit to such order (if any) as the court may consider to be just for the payment of compensation (to be assessed by the court or as the court may direct) to any person (whether or not that person is a party) affected by the operation of order 2 herein or any continuation (with or without variation) of order 2 and to pay that compensation to the person/s affected by order 2 herein: 1. the following be and are parties to these proceedings:   [mr b filipovic] as the second respondent, and (b) [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) as trustee for [c trust] as the third respondent, and (c) [d pty ltd] (acn [...]) as trustee for the [b filipovic investment trust] as the fourth respondent. save in the ordinary course of business, the second respondent, [mr b filipovic] and the third respondent, [c pty ltd] and the fourth respondent [d pty ltd], be and are restrained by themselves, their servants or agents from: (a) dealing with, transferring, encumbering or dissipating the assets of [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), (b) altering the directorship and/or shareholding of [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), and (c) liquidating or deregistering [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), without first obtaining the applicant wife’s written consent or obtaining an order of the court. within 21 days of these orders, the second and third respondents provide to the applicant the following documents: (documents listed) ... within 21 days of these orders, the second and fourth respondents provide to the applicant the following documents: (a) for [d pty ltd] (acn [...]): (documents listed) (b) for [g pty ltd]: (documents listed) ... (c) for [h pty ltd]: (documents listed) (d) for [j pty ltd]: (documents listed) (e) all documents in respect to the acquisition of the property at [k street] (documents listed) ... within 28 days of these orders, the parties jointly appoint a property valuer to undertake a single expert valuation in accordance with the rules (and in default of agreement within 14 days of these orders, the applicant wife nominate three and the first respondent together with the other respondents choose one) of the properties located at: (eight real properties listed) ...   [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) as trustee for [c trust] as the third respondent, and (c) [d pty ltd] (acn [...]) as trustee for the [b filipovic investment trust] as the fourth respondent.   [d pty ltd] (acn [...]) as trustee for the [b filipovic investment trust] as the fourth respondent.   dealing with, transferring, encumbering or dissipating the assets of [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), (b) altering the directorship and/or shareholding of [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), and (c) liquidating or deregistering [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]),   altering the directorship and/or shareholding of [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]), and (c) liquidating or deregistering [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]),   liquidating or deregistering [c pty ltd] (acn [...]) and/or [d pty ltd] (acn [...]),   all documents in respect to the acquisition of the property at [k street]
6. any application for costs be in accordance with the rules. the wife’s application in a proceeding filed 28 july 2022 and the responses to that application filed 25 august 2022 and 8 september 2022 are otherwise dismissed. these proceedings be listed for directions hearing before [a] registrar [...] on 16 august 2023 at 2:00pm. ...
the 16 august 2023 orders
the court orders by consent until further order that: that the parties participate in a private mediation on 6 october 2023. ... that each party shall provide to each other party a list of documents (or class of documents) it requires to be produced within 14 days and those documents shall be produced within a further 14 days subject to any objection to their production. that the parties shall appoint [dd real estate] to prepare a desktop appraisal of the properties listed below:  ght real properties listed)
with the costs of [dd real estate]... the court orders that: next court event (further case management) all outstanding applications are adjourned to the judicial registrar’s list (by microsoft teams) on 11 october 2023 at 2.00 pm for a procedural hearing. private mediation not later than 7 days prior to the mediation, each party must send to each other party (if not already exchanged) and to the mediator: (a) a copy of any initiating application, response, affidavit and financial statement upon which that party relies,   a copy of any initiating application, response, affidavit and financial statement upon which that party relies,  ual documents listed) ...
7. the parties shall:   comply with all reasonable requests made by the mediator., and (b) attend the mediation in person or as otherwise requested by the mediator and make a genuine attempt to resolve maters in dispute. ...   attend the mediation in person or as otherwise requested by the mediator and make a genuine attempt to resolve maters in dispute.
and the court notes that: the parties will consider whether this matter ought be transferred to division 1 at or prior to the next return date. in the event that the mediation ordered at paragraph 1 herein is vacated, the parties are to jointly notify chambers (by email to ...@...) forthwith confirming the reason for the delay and the updated mediation date. the court is informed that all issues as to valuation have been attended to in these orders. the parties assured the court that any outstanding disclosure will be attended prior to the mediation and the parties have been advised that costs orders may be made in the event the matter is not able to proceed on the date allocated for the mediation in these orders. to ensure the mediation proceeds as planned, any party may seek a mention hearing on short notice in relation to the issue of discovery/disclosure in the event any issue arises in respect to those matters. in the event the mediation does not resolve the property dispute between the parties the parties shall appoint a valuer to prepare valuations of the properties identified at order 4 above in accordance with the manner set out at order 5 of the orders dated 7 july 2023. consistent with paragraph 125 of the reasons for judgment of his honour judge o'shannessy dated 7 july 2023, any valuation, and the costs expended on the same, are all subject to the ultimate orders of the judge at final hearing. the costs expended on the mediation shall also be subject to the ultimate orders of the judge at final hearing. in the event that any party fails to comply with these orders, the court may order that they pay the legal costs of the other party resulting from their non‑compliance or the matter may be listed for an undefended hearing. ...
the respondent’s disclosure
directions hearing 16 august 2023 on 16 august 2023 [the] jr [...] made orders that further disclosure requests be made by 30 august 2023, and documents be produced within 14 days thereafter. a private mediation was to occur on 6 october 2023 with a further directions hearing on 11 october 2023. the court noted the court has been informed that all issues as to valuations have been attended to in these orders parties assured the court any outstanding disclosure will be attended to prior to mediation on 18 august 2023 i requested [mr b filipovic] provide by 1 september 2023, further documents, including in relation to the acquisition of [town l]. and answers to questions. not having received any response, my lawyer sent a follow up letter on 5 september 2023 [mr b filipovic] eventually replied on 7 september 2023 belatedly seeking documents regarding the [town l] property, contrary to the orders made on 16 august 2023. contrary to the orders made 16 august 2023, [mr b filipovic] thereafter took the position that: he would “not respond to any requests for documents in relation to [town l] until your client has responded to the above request". if he did not receive my documents [regarding [town l]] there would be no mediation 37 my lawyer attempted to negotiate a mutual exchange of documents. [mr b filipovic] agreed for a mutual exchange on 25 september, which was then postponed to 26 september, then he resiled from the exchange altogether. 39 i agreed to provide my financial disclosure first. [mr b filipovic's] lawyer sent a link to documents, but stated i would only get the password to access the link after i had provided the documents sought by [mr b filipovic]. i complied with this demand, but after my lawyer sent my documents, the password provided to access the documents failed to open the link. a file was ultimately provided without encryption on 26 september 2023 the documents provided suggested there were other accounts associated with various entities in which [mr b filipovic] had an interest which had not been disclosed i requested copy statements for other accounts in the name of [j pty ltd] ("[j pty ltd]") given the narrations in bank statements provided for account [...77] in the name of [j pty ltd] refer to deposits being received into that account (#...77) from [j pty ltd]" this included deposits on 1 july 2022 and 15 july 2022 into account [#...77] totalling over $245,000 where the narration makes reference to those payments being received from "[j pty ltd]" no response or documents have been received following a request for this by my lawyers to [mr b filipovic's] lawyers i requested an explanation for how over $1,200,000 of net proceeds from the sale of a property at [e street] had been applied i requested copies of [mr b filipovic’s] share trading accounts given he had spent over $120.000 to purchase [cc shares] on 22 and 29 april 2022, funded from the $760,000 deposited into his personal account on 19 october 2021 from an account in the name of [d pty ltd], one week after our separation. the origin of these funds is the sale of a property at [s street]
d i am able to produce this correspondence at the hearing [mr b filipovic] replied on 4 october 2023 stating “... we do not consider our client is necessarily obliged to comply with the numerous requests you have provided ... until your client makes their case against our client clear". he sought i prepare "pleadings" and reiterated ·”to be clear, we do not propose to seek instructions in relation to your letter sent today until we have a response to our letter"
the october 2023 orders
... documents to be filed 4. not later than 4.00 pm on 8 november 2023, the applicant file and serve: (a) application in a proceeding setting out with precision the interlocutory orders sought, and (b) an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management). not later than 4.00 pm on 6 december 2023, the first, second, third and fourth respondents file and serve: (a) a response to an application in a proceeding setting out with precision the interlocutory orders sought, and (b) an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management). ... and the court notes that: in the event of non-compliance with these filing directions, the court will at its discretion either vacate the interim defended hearing, conduct the matter as a procedural hearing, proceed on an undefended basis, list other matters with priority and/or make a costs order against the defaulting party. (emphasis added)   application in a proceeding setting out with precision the interlocutory orders sought, and (b) an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management).   an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management).   a response to an application in a proceeding setting out with precision the interlocutory orders sought, and (b) an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management).   an affidavit in support of the interlocutory orders sought which is no longer than 10 pages in length and has no more than 5 annexures (noting the provisions of rules 5.04 and 5.08 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) and the central practice direction – family law case management).
wife files 2 working days late but the listing is months away in feb 2024
wife’s subpoena returnable on 13 november 2023
the respondents don’t file or explain
the first reminder to the respondents
the second reminder to the respondents
dear colleagues [filipovic & filipovic] & ors – mlc13771/2021 we refer to our letter dated 13 december 2023 and note that your clients have still to file and serve any response or affidavit in support in answer to our client's application in a proceeding. even accepting the extension provided to your clients, your clients remain in breach of the orders made on 11 october 2023 in circumstances in which they are over a week late in filing their material. please ensure that any responses that your clients seek to rely upon are filed and served with this office by this friday, 22 december 2023. we put you on notice that in the event that your clients fails to comply with the orders by the close of business on 8 january 2024 at the latest, our client will object to your clients' reliance on any material filed after that date and will seek for our client's application to proceed on an undefended basis. yours sincerely, ...
the festive season and no reply
dear colleagues, [filipovic & filipovic] & ors – mlc1371/2021 we refer to our letter dated 13 december 2023 and note that your clients have still to file and serve any response or affidavit in support in answer to our client's application in a proceeding. even accepting the extension provided to your clients, your clients remain in breach of the orders made on 11 october 2023 in circumstances in which they are over a week late in filing their material. please ensure that any responses that your clients seek to rely upon are filed and served with this office by this friday, 22 december 2023. we put you on notice that in the event that your clients fails to comply with the orders by the close of business on 8 january 2024 at the latest, our client will object to your clients' reliance on any material filed after that date and will seek for our client's application to proceed on an undefended basis. yours sincerely, ...
an outline of case required
the material of the respondent’s
three preliminary applications
senior counsel: your honour, could i start by indicating that my client’s position is that none of the material that the first or other respondents seek to rely upon today should be received today, that neither of my friends should be heard today, and my client’s application ought proceed as if undefended today... many years ago, in the supreme court of queensland...when two (particular) practitioners appeared...(the justice) said, “...we don’t be needing these,” and picked up the rules of court and threw them into the well of the court. and your honour might well, in this case, think that the first to fourth respondents have come before you today expecting that we won’t be needing the rules of court, nor will we be needing or adhering to any prior order or direction of the court. we will just do as we please.
2.41. when service is effected
a document served electronically or by post is taken to have been served: (a) if the document was sent electronically, on the next business day after the document was sent, (b) if the document was posted to an address in australia, 40 on the day on which the document would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.   if the document was sent electronically, on the next business day after the document was sent, (b) if the document was posted to an address in australia, 40 on the day on which the document would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.   if the document was posted to an address in australia, 40 on the day on which the document would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
no reason provided in filed material
legislation and rules
189 formal defects not to invalidate   proceedings in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) are not invalidated by a formal defect or an irregularity, unless the court is of the opinion that: (a) substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity, and   substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity, and  the injustice cannot be remedied by an order of the court.  the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may, on such conditions (if any) as the court or judge thinks fit, make an order declaring that the proceeding is not invalid: (a) by reason of a defect that it or the judge considers to be formal, or   by reason of a defect that it or the judge considers to be formal, or  by reason of an irregularity.
190 overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions   the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes:  according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.  without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives: (a) the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,   the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,   the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court,  the efficient disposal of the court's overall caseload, (d) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.  the civil practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them (including the power to make rules of court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching purpose (notes omitted)
... 191 parties to act consistently with the overarching purpose   the parties to a civil proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose.
... power of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) to give directions about practice and procedure in a civil proceeding   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge may give directions about the practice and procedure to be followed in relation to a civil proceeding, or any part of such a proceeding, before the court. (2) without limiting subsection (1), a direction may:  require things to be done, or (b) set time limits for the doing of anything, or the completion of any part of the proceeding, or (c) limit the number of witnesses who may be called to give evidence, or the number of documents that may be tendered in evidence, or (d) provide for submissions to be made in writing, or (e) limit the length of submissions (whether written or oral), or (f) waive or vary any provision of the rules of court in their application to the proceeding, or (g) revoke or vary an earlier direction.  set time limits for the doing of anything, or the completion of any part of the proceeding, or (c) limit the number of witnesses who may be called to give evidence, or the number of documents that may be tendered in evidence, or   limit the number of witnesses who may be called to give evidence, or the number of documents that may be tendered in evidence, or   waive or vary any provision of the rules of court in their application to the proceeding, or   if a party fails to comply with a direction given by the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge under subsection (1), the court or judge may make such order or direction as the court or judge thinks appropriate. (4) in particular, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or judge may do any of the following:  dismiss the proceeding in whole or in part, (b) strike out, amend or limit any part of a party's claim or defence, (c) disallow or reject any evidence, (d) award costs against a party, (e) order that costs awarded against a party are to be assessed on an indemnity basis or otherwise.   strike out, amend or limit any part of a party's claim or defence,   order that costs awarded against a party are to be assessed on an indemnity basis or otherwise.
federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 1.04 overarching purpose   the overarching purpose of these rules, as provided by section 67 of the federal circuit and family court act, is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible. (2) parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. (3) a party's lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party's behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and   take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and  assist the party to comply with the duty.[4]
... 1.31 court may make orders or dispense with these rules   the court may, in the interests of justice, dispense with compliance, or full compliance, with any of these rules at any time. (2) if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.
... 1.33 failure to comply with a legislative provision or order   if a step is taken after the time specified for taking the step by these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the step is of no effect. (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:  dismiss all or part of the proceeding, (b) set aside a step taken or an order made, (c) determine the proceeding as if it were undefended, (d) order costs, (e) prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).
1.34 relief from orders   a party may apply for relief from:  the effect of subrule 1.33(1), or (b) an order under subrule 1.33(2).  in determining an application under subrule (1), the court may consider the following:  whether there is a good reason for the non-compliance, (b) the extent to which the party has complied with orders, legislative provisions and pre-action procedures, (c) whether the non-compliance was caused by the party or the party's lawyer, (d) the impact of the non-compliance on the management of the proceeding, (e) the effect of the non-compliance on each other party, (f) costs, (g) whether the party should be stayed from taking any further steps in the proceeding until the costs are paid, (h) if the application is for relief from the effect of subrule 1.33(1)--whether all parties consent to the step being taken after the specified time.   the extent to which the party has complied with orders, legislative provisions and pre-action procedures, (c) whether the non-compliance was caused by the party or the party's lawyer, (d) the impact of the non-compliance on the management of the proceeding,   whether the non-compliance was caused by the party or the party's lawyer, (d) the impact of the non-compliance on the management of the proceeding,   the impact of the non-compliance on the management of the proceeding,   whether the party should be stayed from taking any further steps in the proceeding until the costs are paid,   if the application is for relief from the effect of subrule 1.33(1)--whether all parties consent to the step being taken after the specified time.
... 10.27 orders on default   if an applicant is in default, the court may order that: (a) the proceeding be stayed or dismissed as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant, or (b) a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (c) if the applicant does not take a step in the time referred to in paragraph (b)--the proceeding be stayed or dismissed, as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant. (2) if a respondent is in default, the court may: (a) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (b) give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   the proceeding be stayed or dismissed as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant, or (b) a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (c) if the applicant does not take a step in the time referred to in paragraph (b)--the proceeding be stayed or dismissed, as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant.   a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (c) if the applicant does not take a step in the time referred to in paragraph (b)--the proceeding be stayed or dismissed, as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant.   if the applicant does not take a step in the time referred to in paragraph (b)--the proceeding be stayed or dismissed, as to the whole or any part of the relief claimed by the applicant.   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (b) give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.  tes omitted)
leave to rely on late filed material
senior counsel: and, your honour, it caused prejudice to my client. it continues to cause prejudice to my client. my client has not had the opportunity to properly instruct my 35 instructor. frankly, haven’t had an opportunity to properly consider the contents of the documents. and should my instructor and i put my client to the expense of perusing, considering and preparing arguments against documents filed at the last minute, in circumstances where one struggles to find a reason for the late filing, other than that it was deliberate and intended to cause mischief and disruption to the 40 applicant and contemptuous of this court’s processes. in those circumstances – and i’m reminded there’s still no case outline from ..... ... senior counsel: in the absence of any evidence or explanation, [the late filing was deliberate and intended to cause mischief] it’s an inference that’s open, because someone who had a credible or innocent explanation for such delay in utter disregard of the direction of the court would hasten to go into evidence about it, so -
no good reason provided
not deliberate or intended to cause mischief
application that the respondents not be heard on the substantive applications
application for undefended hearing
“...... the court may order that a hearing or trial may proceed, because of the respondent’s failure to comply with the rule or order, as if a response had not been filed the court may make orders set out in the application on being satisfied by evidence that the orders should be made.”   in an undefended case the response becomes a nullity (rules of court) (b) where an application has been struck out due to the default of a party to make a full frank and prompt disclosure of his/her financial affairs that party ought have no further right to be heard without order of the court (tate and tate) (c) in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   where an application has been struck out due to the default of a party to make a full frank and prompt disclosure of his/her financial affairs that party ought have no further right to be heard without order of the court (tate and tate) (c) in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.
... ... i am of the opinion that the husband has forfeited his right to have me read his affidavit evidence. in any event where his evidence was not corroborated i would be unable to accept it as there is no ability on the wife’s part to cross-examine him or his witnesses as they are not present. i will have regard to the court record in order to consider any agreements recorded for the purpose of the final hearing. i have also referred to some of the husbands’ evidence in the course of my reasons... ... i have read all of those affidavits and my findings are based on the evidence set out therein, on the documents tendered in the hearing, reference to some of the husbands affidavit evidence or the matters of court record referred to together with the wife’s oral evidence, unless i state otherwise.  0] first it would be wrong in this case to lose sight of the fact that there are two parties to this dispute. the wife is entitled to have her application filed 1 september 2000 heard.
... [the appellant] has not complied with orders of this court and is in default pursuant to r 10.26 of [the rules], so much so that these proceedings have been heard on an undefended basis. but the primary judge did not do as portended. her honour did not order the appellant to take some other “step in the proceeding” (r 10.27(2)(a)). nor did her honour “give judgment” against the appellant (r 10.27(2)(b)). the response filed by the appellant in february 2020, seeking certain property settlement orders, was not summarily dismissed. in fact, during final submissions, the primary judge elicited from him the precise nature of his proposal, as her honour was properly intent on determining what just and equitable orders were needed to finalise the cause between the parties under pt viiiab of the act. the appellant was allowed to make final submissions, but not permitted to cross-examine the respondent, though no “other order” of that sort was actually made or explained (r 10.27(2)(b)). the hearing did not proceed on an “undefended basis”, as the primary judge said it did (at [185]), since the appellant participated in the trial and resisted the respondent’s application, though he was deprived of an opportunity to cross-examine her.
... it is well-established that procedural fairness requires a party to be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case and it matters not whether that opportunity is taken up (kioa v west [1985] hca 81, (1985) 159 clr 550). the respondent submitted that the appellant was afforded the opportunity but did not take it up because she did not file a case outline or an affidavit in chief. that however, was the failure to take up the opportunity to prepare for the hearing, and that failure was the basis for the application of r 1.33(2) of the rule. it was not the opportunity to be heard as to what the consequences of that failure should be.
the substantive hearing: disclosure
continuing obligation of full and frank of all relevant documents and information
the substantive hearing: part or interim property application
... my father objected to a subpoena to his accountant for the production of trust deeds and financial accounts relating to three trusts of which my father is an appointer. he was ordered to pay [mr b filipovic’s] costs 103 i have received no distributions whatsoever for over 14 years. i have voluntarily disclosed all my individual tax returns for the financial years since 2009.
if the order is to be made under s.80(1)(h), it would seem that regard should be had to the requirement in s.79 that the orders be just and equitable and this would require the court to undertake at least some brief consideration of the matters in s.79(4) including those referred to in s.75(2). if on a brief consideration of those matters, it seems likely to the court that the party who is the applicant for the interim order for an advance of funds from the other party will be likely to receive by way of property settlement a sum sufficient to cover the advance, that would seem to be sufficient to enable the order sought to be made (cf wilson and poletti). in paris king investments brereton j at [33], referring to an interim property order under s 79 and s 80(1)(h) of the act and also zschokke, said that “while the requirements of s 79(2) and (4) must be observed in the same manner as for any interim property order, if it appeared that the applicant would likely receive by way of property settlement a sum sufficient to cover the advance, then an interim order may be made”  tations omitted) .... we agree with the submissions of senior counsel for the wife in relation to the approach to be taken to the hearing of an application for an interim property settlement order. there are two stages to the hearing of such an application where the power is to be exercised pursuant to s 80(1)(h) of the act. this is recognised by the fact that although the power under s 79 should ordinarily be exercised on a once only basis, “circumstances may arise before there can be a final hearing” where the power is exercised. thus the first step is to resolve whether to exercise the power before a final hearing and if it is resolved to do so then the second step involves the exercise of that power.132. the husband maintains that s is supported by him financially on a voluntary basis and that therefore the application by the wife should be dismissed. ... senior counsel for the wife in his oral submissions submitted that in harris the full court was saying that “the touchstone is the need for finality a once–and–for-all hearing and so there must be something that requires a departure from the usual case”. he further submitted however that the expression “compelling” was not used by the full court in the sense “of any rote formula” that was intended to “circumscribe the unfettered discretion”. he said that it was used by the full court as a description having regard to the “other formulae” of “an appropriate case”, “a proper case” or “as the justice of the case requires”. he further submitted that what the full court said about compelling circumstances cannot be considered in isolation from what was previously said. he submitted that to “say that one needs to erect a case of so-called compelling factors and then only exercise in a case where it’s considered to be compelling” would “confine the discretion inappropriately”. ... in relation to the first stage, in our view, when considering whether to exercise the power under s 79 and s 80(1)(h) of the act to make an interim property order the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice. it is not necessary to establish compelling circumstances. all that is required is that in the circumstances it is appropriate to exercise the power. in exercising the wide and unfettered discretion conferred by the power to make such an order, regard should be had to the fact that the usual order pursuant to s 79 is a once and for all order made after a final hearing. we also emphasise that in order to establish an appropriate case for an interim property settlement order more is required than the mere fact that upon a final hearing the applicant would receive the property being sought (or an amount in excess of the funds being sought) from the other party. ... as to the various matters discussed by brereton j in paris king investments which we have discussed above, we do not propose to deal with all of what his honour said, however we make the following observations about some of the matters. obviously the applicant should have “at least an arguable case for substantive relief which deserves to be heard”. further, in determining at the procedural stage whether to exercise the jurisdiction there may need to be evidence of the applicant’s “likely costs of the litigation” given that the need for funds to defray litigation costs and expenses is the circumstance propounded as to why it is appropriate that an order be made. we also accept that “it is not an essential precondition” that the applicant’s legal representatives will not continue to act unless the costs are paid or secured on an ongoing basis.  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79.?that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4)?(d), (e), (f) & (g) ("the other factors") including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2)?so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. (citations omitted and emphasis added)
costs
associate: dated: 27 february 2024
dated: 27 february 2024
schedule of parties
fourth respondent:
d pty ltd
[1] anonymised as filipovic & filipovic (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 825[2] for reasons unclear the portal index shows the application filed on 13 november 2023 but the application document records it filed on 13 december 2023. there was no issue raised about this. [3] federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021.[4] section 67 applies to division 1, and the identical section 190 applies to division 2.[5] this submission was objected to as evidence from the bar table and i heard it on the basis that it was an assertion not on affidavit in reply to an affidavit filed 13 november 2023 for a hearing on 19 february 2024.[6] senior counsel for the wife referred to sharpe v grobbel [2017] nswsc 1065 at [21], in the matter of medical training and development pty ltd [2021] nswsc 981 at [11] – [15], asiak v australia secured and managed mortgages pty ltd [2008] fca 753 at [52], zunino & zunino [2019] famca 845 at [55]- [56], oswal v burrup holdings [2011] fca 609 at [22] & [31] and re motasea pty ltd [2014] nswsc 69 at [49] – [51].