last updated: 10 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marcos & serina (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 373
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
... the wife seeks a property division of 40/60 in the husband’s favour. she seeks a cash payment equivalent to what would be 40% of the total asset pool including superannuation (on her case in the realm of $1,000,000) to be transferred to her. the husband seeks that there be no property alterations and for the wife’s application to be dismissed. background the wife was born in 1958 and at the time of the final hearing was aged 63 years. she owns a business where she works and maintains good health, save for a medical condition. the husband was born in 1955 and at the time of the final hearing was aged 66 years. he retired from operating a business in 2017 and relies on funds from a self-managed superannuation fund and rental income. he enjoys good health. ... those articulate submissions point to the wife’s claim of indirect contribution by her ideas and advice to the husband about renovating his suburb f property, her homemaking including her cooking, her provision of a home for the couple to live in (the suburb e property) for the last three years of the relationship, essentially section 90sm(4) contributions and the significant asset disparity between the parties at the end of the relationship and the wife’s commitments to support herself. ... i must not make an order adjusting the parties’ property unless i am satisfied it is just and equitable to do so. in all the circumstances i am not satisfied that there is a principled reason to alter the parties’ interests in their property. i am not satisfied, in all the circumstances, that it is just and equitable to make property alteration orders. accordingly i will dismiss the wife’s application.
proceedings this day
decision
reasons for decision
section 117 costs   subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and
section 117(2a)(a) financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings.
$
wife’s existing assets & liabilities
the suburb e property (agreed)
1,300,000
suburb e property mortgage  8,836[1])
suburb e property equity
811,164
bank accounts
nominal
household contents
modest
motor vehicle 1
46,000
credit card debts (not disputed)  ,719)
wife’s superannuation
38,629
total wife’s assets & liabilities
878,074
husband’s existing assets & liabilities
the suburb f property
1,600,000
the suburb d property (owned by a trust/trustee controlled by husband & treated by the parties as if his property))
2,180,000
motor vehicle 3
50,000
motor vehicle 4
45,000
husband’s home contents
husband’s bank accounts
credit card (not disputed)  ,608)
overdraft facility (not disputed)  ,482)
husband’s self-managed superannuation
385,968
total husband’s assets & liabilities
4,277,119
total assets & liabilities:
5,155,193   [q street, suburb e] - equity of $687,862 (expected selling price january 2024 – mid range of $1,150,000).   [motor vehicle 1]- value of $46,000. (c) credit card liabilities - $9,000 (d) [mr g] liabilities - $158,500. (e) superannuation- balance of $38,629. (f) selling costs of my home - $31,000. (g) legal fee liabilities - $15,000. total= $558,991.
section 117(2a)(b) whether any party is in receipt of legal aid
section 117(2a)(c) the conduct of the parties in the proceedings
... i am satisfied that the parties did not regard their relationship as temporary after late 2012, when the wife moved into the husband’s home, and after early 2017, when the parties moved into the wife’s largely renovated suburb e property. but i am satisfied, taking into account all of the common ground circumstances and the demeanour of the parties in cross-examination, that the residence arrangements of both living in the commercial property from late 2012 until early 2017, and then both living at the suburb e property until early 2020, was intended by each of them to be temporary in the sense of until it is convenient (to move into your/my own property) but also in the sense of indefinite until it is convenient (to move into your/my own property) and in the context of a permanent relationship that was a de facto relationship within the provisions of section 4aa of the act, recited earlier.
section 4aa de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship   a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:  the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   those circumstances may include any or all of the following:  the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.  the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case. (5) for the purposes of this act: (a) a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship. (6) for the purposes of subsection (1), 2 persons are related by family if:   a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.  one is the child (including an adopted child) of the other, or (b) one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).
section 117(2a)(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure to comply with any order
section 117(2a)(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings
section 117(2a)(f) whether either party of the proceedings has made an offer in writing
21 april 2021
our client puts the following offer of settlement to finalise this matter: 1. our client pay your client the sum of $50,000 (the payment), contemporaneously with the payment your client sign all documents and do all acts and things required to withdraw all caveats registered by her against our client's properties, at her expense, and the parties sign a financial agreement in relation to the payment and spousal maintenance, with the payment to be made within 14 days of such agreement being signed by both parties, 4. your client's initiating application filed 19 october 2020 be dismissed, and 5. the parties otherwise bear their own costs in relation to this matter.
27 april 2021
dear mr... ... we are instructed without prejudice to settle property matters on a final basis. our client proposes the following: your client makes a payment to our client in the sum of $375,000. if your client is agreeable to our client’s proposal in relation to property matters, we are instructed to draft a minute of consent orders. the above offer is open for acceptable until 4 pm on 10 may 2021, at which time it will be expressly withdrawn. ... we await your response.
on 7 may 2021
as we noted in our letter of 21 april 2021, our client’s offer contained in that letter will not be repeated.
mr dunlop: ... ultimately, my submission was going to be based on one reading of both rules, and a reading of division 2 rules are very much event or court-based event orientated in terms of it being court-based events and little regard to the work backstage, if i can put it that way... in terms of the professional costs incurred by a party via lawyers or disbursements in terms of counsel and whatnot (as complied to the applicable scale for division 1)   on an indemnity basis and in sum of $167,028.53, or (b) in the alternative, his legal costs on scale in accordance with schedule 3 of federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules in the sum of $97,643.05.   in the alternative, his legal costs on scale in accordance with schedule 3 of federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules in the sum of $97,643.05.
section 117(2a)(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant
“...a party cannot reject or ignore a reasonable offer seriously made except at his or her peril as to costs. if one considers the issue as a matter of policy, that is, on the basis of what the parliament’s objective and purpose was in enacting the legislation, it is clear that the parliament wished to encourage settlement thereby reducing the cost of litigation to the parties and to the community. that must mean that a party cannot reject or ignore a reasonable offer seriously made except at his or her peril as to costs. at the same time a party cannot sit tight and postpone a decision as to acceptance”
“...i accept counsel for the husband’s submission that paragraph (f) does not have any particular priority, but its importance must surely be weighed in the light of all the circumstances of the case. ... similarly, when one looks at paragraph (f) it is quite clear that the purpose of that provision is to ensure that offers to settle, if made seriously, are considered seriously, to ensure that the cost of litigation is avoided, the workload of this court is lightened, and one other consideration is certainly that a party with greater wealth is not placed in a position whereby he or she can wear out the other by simple attrition...” we think that whilst s 117(2a) does not provide any direct guidance to where weight should be given in any one particular case, it is very important for the court to give proper consideration to written offers of settlement that have been made. the insertion of s 117c into the legislation is a clear indication of the desire of parliament to enable parties to avoid unnecessary litigation by indicating to the other party an appropriate basis upon which litigation can be settled. the failure to heed a reasonable offer in circumstances where there is adequate knowledge of the parties at the time the offer is made to give it a proper consideration, is something to which very significant weight indeed ought normally be given. it is clearly a circumstance that would justify the making of an order for costs in favour of the husband.
associate: dated: 26 march 2024
dated: 26 march 2024