last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
houghton & dunne [2024] fedcfamc2f 259
orders
by way of final order, the court orders that:
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge vasta
introduction
family violence
2015
late 2016
subsequent events
the first proceedings
early 2017
early 2017 incident
aftermath
the dr f report
affidavit of the pgm
final orders - february 2018
post final orders
incidents in early 2019
text messages
u know what when [x] say 2 u why did dad kill him self just say he a piece of shit o n wait a minute he a warm peace of shit,cunt, paranoid,skitafranuc, low life s scum bag. that what i am by
so did u fuck him as well is that why u stayed there even after i made my self very fucking clear how i felt about u stay there whilst that cunt is there. that why u had me on speaker i tell uwhat i find out he has touch u all my son in any way n i mean any way he will be a dead man walking
fuck u u an your dad game over this is how u wanna play cunt i hope u drop ded just letting you know i have let child services know all about u your dad drug dealing so fuck u i’m his farther so i will be having my son on the day the court order say if not u will be arrested so just try answer n the police want be involved i mean it i really don’t care if i and getting locked up like i said i will die b4 that happen so answer the fucking phone know or are you fat legs 2 busy being spread like a slut u r is that why u can’t answer u have your mouth hands full do u i really hope die a slow painful death i really do hope your [illness] spread all through u. u deserve it
february 2020 incident
5.54pm you’re about to become famous [ms houghton], we both are. hope ya fuckin’ happy ya slut 6.02pm answer the fucking phone. so much for answering it aye yeah. you’re all full of shit. the whole fucking lot of ya’s mate. right. answer your fucking phone like i said before something bad fucking happens and you do become fucking famous 6.07pm oh what? you’re too busy, you got your mouth full of fucking his cock do ya? huh? yeah. fuckin’ no, fuckin’ no wonder where you got your fuckin’ your fuckin’ sex diseases from you fuckin’ ya fuckin’ slut. wasn’t definitely wasn’t fuckin’ me. i know that’s for fuckin’ sure. fuckin’ i should go fuckin’ go and fuckin’ get myself fuckin’ checked.
september 2020 conversations e father) has caused me extreme anxiety to the point where i have to lock my entire house up, packed my bags up and i ready to run if i have to do. i have also started initiating a safety plan regarding his behaviour. this has become an ongoing issue where i have had to do this. i am afraid (the father) will turn up to my address. i did not give (the father) any lawful permission to contact me unannounced.
september 2020 incident
statement of the pgm
what x said that day
what x said in september 2020
observation narrative approximately 8:45am, [x] was sat down at the [table], playing with the animals. [x] then began conversing with [ms k] about events that occurred in september, 2020. [x]: ‘you make me feel safe, and aunty [ms m] and aunty [ms n] and grandma but mostly my mummy.: [ms k] “im glade you feel safe with me [x], you can always tell me tings if you want to because it is safe here. would you like to talk a little bit about your weekend?” [x] “lots of things happened that were scary” [ms k] “how about we just start at the beginning? so where were you over the weekend? [x] “i was at nannies house” [ms k]: was that for 1 sleep over or 2 sleep overs? [x]: i had 2 sleep over. but the really bad day was on the number 2 sleep over. [ms k]: ok so what happened? [x]: i was with nanny and playing video on my game and daddy came and tried to take me from nanny. he decided to turn bad and was yelling so loud and saying lots of bad words. daddy then got me and was yelling at me and nanny the he wanted to kill us dead. [ms k]: oh buddy that sounds very scary [x]: daddy was being angry and scare and he got a big [weapon]. nanny then got me and nanny got me away so i can’t get killed. i didn’t have a good day. [ms k]: no it doesn’t sound like you had a good day at all. [x]: daddy wanted the police to come. daddy wanted the police to kill us. (begins to cry) i was very, very, very, very scared. daddy came and got me from nanny and he said me and you are getting killed dead. [ms k]: what happened then? [x]: i was crying, i cried and i cried and i cried i cried and i cried i cried and i cried i cried and i cried and i cried and i cried [x] then got up from his chair and cuddled [ms k]. [x]: i was so scared i was going to ged dead. nanny just got me and took me away in her car, and then got [ms o]. and [ms o] drove me and nanny and grandy and brought me all the way to mummy and then i was safe. [x] cuddled [ms k] more firm. it was the worstest day ever. [ms k]: buddy that sounds like the worst day ever. how do you feel now? [x]: im safe here with you and my mummy and aunty [ms n], and aunty [ms m] and my grandma and (dog) and (cat). at 9:19am [ms k] contacted [q service] to request a mentor come out to visit explaining the conversation with [x]. at approximately 13:30 –[ms p] from [q service] began a conversation with [x] about the different set ups, who was in care and some art work. [x]: it wasn’t a good weekend. [ms p]: oh no, its a bit disappointing isn’t it. [x]: and can i say about my weekend with dad? [ms k]: yes you can tell her its safe here. [x]: daddy changed his mid to being bad and then he got a [weapon] and then nanny got me away from there. [ms k]: what did he say? what words? [x]: that we were going to get dead and jail but nanny got me away to my mummy. i was a lot scared and i cried and i cried and i cried. [ms p]: maybe it was good that your nanny got you away at that time. [x]: yah.
september 2020
what x said to police in september 2020
court orders
the evidence of the mother
evidence of the father
admission in late 2010
admission in early 2011
admission in mid-2016
admission in early 2017
contact with mhu in mid-2017
admission in early 2019
admission in early 2020
admission late 2020
what inferences can be drawn from these records?
other aspects of the father’s evidence
first family report   told me that his dad’s name is [mr dunne] and that he has a beard. [x] stated, “my dad is not nice, he tried to [harm] me” however, could not recall or did not want to elaborate further on what this meant. [x] stated he did not want to see (the father) because, “he is mean and my mum is good”. [x] stated that (the mother) does not want him to see (the father). [x] said that (the mother) told him that (the father) “tried to take me when i was a baby”. he further stated, “it makes me sad when my dad is mean to me”. [x] was unable to articulate what mean things (the father) did to him that made him sad. [x] could not recall the last time he spent time with (the father).
evidence of mr t
updated family report
whilst (the father) is very motivated to resume a relationship with [x], significant time has passed since they spent any time together (over two years). further, [x] has also formed a view that his father is dangerous and has attempted to [harm] him. in my opinion, and from evidence i have been provided, i am not of the view that (the father) attempted to harm [x] or that he threatened to [harm] him.
permanently ceasing the parents time with the child for the duration of their childhood is an extreme recommendation to make. in this instance, given [x]’s young age and (the father)’s willingness to undertake appropriate actions, i am not of the view that the relationship between [x] and his father should be permanently severed. there are however several actions that i feel would be appropriate to occur in the circumstances.
further report from mr t
what can be made of these expert reports?
submissions made by counsel for the father upon instructions.  dunne] has kept referring to me as “a fucking cunt” and a “fucking slut” and started saying “tell me that you are fucking him, tell me he is fucking you hard”, referring to my new partner. i have had enough after this and have begun walking away. i have lost my temper during this and have just begun to agree with everything [mr dunne] is saying.
the third submission
you know what, you just signed both our death warrants, you cunt. you calling coppers, they are going to have to shoot us dead, right, i fucking promise you that. fucking dog, you’re a fucking dog, that’s all that you fucking are. i mean it, call the fucking coppers about this right now. call [suburb r] police station. they are going to have to shoot us both fucking dead, you silly cunt. that’s what you fucking are: a stupid fucking silly cunt.
application of the act
application of law to the circumstances of the case
primary considerations – section 60b  the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   it is important to x that he has a meaningful relationship with both his mother and father, and (b) there is a great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse.   there is a great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse.   the mother has demonstrated that she has a committed involvement as a parent in the x’s life. the father has always wanted to be in the life of his son and the evidence of mr t is that x enjoys the company of his father. (b) there is overwhelming evidence of the father exposing x directly and indirectly to family violence.   there is overwhelming evidence of the father exposing x directly and indirectly to family violence.
additional considerations – section 60cc(3)  in my view, x is too young to be able to form any firm and considered view about this subject. (b) i have already spoken at great length about the relationship x has with the mother and father therefore there is no reason in my view to consider this part further. i will speak further about the relationship x has with the pgm later in these reasons. (c) i have detailed the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to make decisions spend time with x and to communicate with x. i have taken these matters into account. (ca) whilst the mother has mentioned the lack of child support, this is not an issue that looms large in these proceedings. (d) in this matter, the child has not been seen the father except for the occasions in which there has been joint therapy. i have looked at all the possibilities of the orders that i could make and have considered the effect on x in each of those scenarios. (e) there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have already spoken at great length about the relationship x has with the mother and father therefore there is no reason in my view to consider this part further. i will speak further about the relationship x has with the pgm later in these reasons. (c) i have detailed the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to make decisions spend time with x and to communicate with x. i have taken these matters into account. (ca) whilst the mother has mentioned the lack of child support, this is not an issue that looms large in these proceedings. (d) in this matter, the child has not been seen the father except for the occasions in which there has been joint therapy. i have looked at all the possibilities of the orders that i could make and have considered the effect on x in each of those scenarios. (e) there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have detailed the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to make decisions spend time with x and to communicate with x. i have taken these matters into account. (ca) whilst the mother has mentioned the lack of child support, this is not an issue that looms large in these proceedings. (d) in this matter, the child has not been seen the father except for the occasions in which there has been joint therapy. i have looked at all the possibilities of the orders that i could make and have considered the effect on x in each of those scenarios. (e) there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.  ) whilst the mother has mentioned the lack of child support, this is not an issue that looms large in these proceedings. (d) in this matter, the child has not been seen the father except for the occasions in which there has been joint therapy. i have looked at all the possibilities of the orders that i could make and have considered the effect on x in each of those scenarios. (e) there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   in this matter, the child has not been seen the father except for the occasions in which there has been joint therapy. i have looked at all the possibilities of the orders that i could make and have considered the effect on x in each of those scenarios. (e) there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   there are no practical difficulties with any of the possible range of parenting orders i may make. (f) this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance has been the focus of my deliberations. i have looked very carefully at the capacity of the mother, the father and the pgm as to whether they can truly provide for the needs of x, especially his emotional and intellectual needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have taken into account these considerations though they are not matters that looms large. (h) this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance does not apply. (i) in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   in many ways, the circumstances a corollary of circumstance (c). i have taken those matters well and truly into account. (j) this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance has had significance in my deliberations. (k) this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance has also had great significance in my deliberations, (l) in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   in making these orders, i am mindful of the fact that x has been the subject of litigation for most of his young life. i am very mindful of the fact that what has been proposed, by the father and the icl, are very similar proposals to what has been tried before. as was said during submissions, insanity is doing the same thing again, yet expecting a different result. it seems to me that the proposals of the icl and of the father will certainly lead to further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.
parental responsibility
conclusions as to parenting
should there be time with the paternal grandmother?
the affidavit of the pgm in the earlier proceedings
the actions of the pgm in september 2020
the trial
conclusion
orders
dated: 29 february 2024