last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
battista & battista (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 268
orders
the court orders that:  at all times as agreed by the parents in writing, and (b) until 12 june 2024 in a two week alternating cycle: (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 9am to 5pm on thursday and from 8am on saturday to 3pm on sunday. (c) from 13 june 2024 and until 9 april 2025 in a two week alternating cycle: (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on friday until 3pm on sunday. (d) from 10 april 2025 and until x commences school (kindergarten): (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday. (e) once x commences school and during his first year of schooling (kindergarten): (i) commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday. (f) from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   until 12 june 2024 in a two week alternating cycle: (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 9am to 5pm on thursday and from 8am on saturday to 3pm on sunday. (c) from 13 june 2024 and until 9 april 2025 in a two week alternating cycle: (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on friday until 3pm on sunday. (d) from 10 april 2025 and until x commences school (kindergarten): (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday. (e) once x commences school and during his first year of schooling (kindergarten): (i) commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday. (f) from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 9am to 5pm on thursday and from 8am on saturday to 3pm on sunday.  ) week 2: from 9am to 5pm on thursday and from 8am on saturday to 3pm on sunday.   from 13 june 2024 and until 9 april 2025 in a two week alternating cycle: (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on friday until 3pm on sunday. (d) from 10 april 2025 and until x commences school (kindergarten): (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday. (e) once x commences school and during his first year of schooling (kindergarten): (i) commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday. (f) from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on friday until 3pm on sunday.  ) week 2: from 5pm on friday until 3pm on sunday.   from 10 april 2025 and until x commences school (kindergarten): (i) week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday. (e) once x commences school and during his first year of schooling (kindergarten): (i) commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday. (f) from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   week 1: from 9am to 5pm on thursday, (ii) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday.  ) week 2: from 5pm on thursday until 3pm on sunday.   once x commences school and during his first year of schooling (kindergarten): (i) commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday. (f) from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   commencing on the second thursday of term 1 and each alternate week thereafter, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday.   from the commencement of x’s second year of schooling (year 1) and thereafter: (i) during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year. (g) notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   during school term: commencing on the second thursday of each school term, from 3pm or after school on thursday to 5pm on sunday, (ii) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year.  ) during school holidays at the end of term 1, 2 and 3: as agreed by the parties, but failing agreement for 5 consecutive nights from 9am on the first monday of the school holidays until 9am on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (iii) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year.  i) during school holidays at the end of term 4: as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement for 7 consecutive nights from 9am on 2 january to 9am on 9 january each year.   notwithstanding any other order, during easter (on days as celebrated in the roman catholic faith): (i) commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   commencing in 2025 and each odd numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday, and (ii) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.  ) commencing in 2026 and each even numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday.   commencing in 2025 and in each odd numbered year thereafter from 8am on easter saturday until 9am on easter monday, and (b) commencing in 2026 and in each even numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday.   commencing in 2026 and in each even numbered year thereafter from 3pm on the thursday immediately before good friday and until 8am on easter saturday.   with the father when he is not spending time with him on that day, each thursday between 6pm and 6.30pm, and (b) with the mother when he is not spending time with her on that day, each saturday between 6pm and 6.30pm.   with the mother when he is not spending time with her on that day, each saturday between 6pm and 6.30pm.
the court orders by consent that:  each year (being the mother’s name day) if he is not otherwise in her care from immediately after school until 5.00 p.m. on a school day and from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. if the day does not fall on a school day. (b) each year (being x’s name day) if he is not otherwise in the mother’s care from immediately after school until 5.00 p.m. on a school day and from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. if the day does not fall on a school day.   each year (being x’s name day) if he is not otherwise in the mother’s care from immediately after school until 5.00 p.m. on a school day and from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. if the day does not fall on a school day.   the travelling party provides not less than 60 days prior written notice of the intention to travel including the intended destination, dates of proposed travel, itinerary that identifies the return date and the particulars of where the travelling party and x will be residing during their travel including the address and contact details, (b) the destination is a signatory to the hague convention, and (c) the travelling party will facilitate x communicating with the other party via facetime or other visual electronic means not less frequently than every second day while x is travelling.   the destination is a signatory to the hague convention, and (c) the travelling party will facilitate x communicating with the other party via facetime or other visual electronic means not less frequently than every second day while x is travelling.   the travelling party will facilitate x communicating with the other party via facetime or other visual electronic means not less frequently than every second day while x is travelling.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:  from 28 september 2023, a two-week rotation, from 8am until 12pm thursdays in week one, and 8am to 3pm thursdays and 3pm fridays until 3pm sundays in week two, (b) from 20 march 2024, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm thursday in week one, and 3pm friday to 3pm monday in week two, (c) from 25 september 2024, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm friday to 3pm monday in week two, (d) from 26 march 2025, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm thursday to 3pm monday in week two, (e) from 24 september 2025 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm wednesday to 3pm monday in week two, and (f) part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   from 20 march 2024, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm thursday in week one, and 3pm friday to 3pm monday in week two, (c) from 25 september 2024, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm friday to 3pm monday in week two, (d) from 26 march 2025, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm thursday to 3pm monday in week two, (e) from 24 september 2025 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm wednesday to 3pm monday in week two, and (f) part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   from 25 september 2024, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm friday to 3pm monday in week two, (d) from 26 march 2025, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm thursday to 3pm monday in week two, (e) from 24 september 2025 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm wednesday to 3pm monday in week two, and (f) part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   from 26 march 2025, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm thursday to 3pm monday in week two, (e) from 24 september 2025 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm wednesday to 3pm monday in week two, and (f) part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   from 24 september 2025 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm wednesday to 3pm friday in week one, and 3pm wednesday to 3pm monday in week two, and (f) part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   part of school and christmas holidays and special occasions.   from 23 march 2023, a two-week rotation, from 9am until 5pm thursday in week one, and 9am until 5pm thursday and from 8am saturday until 3pm sunday in week 2, (b) from 21 march 2024, a two-week rotation, from 9am until 5pm thursday in week one, and from 9am until 5pm thursday and 8am saturday until 5pm sunday in week two, (c) from 4 february 2026 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm until 7pm wednesday in week one, and 3pm until 7pm wednesday and from after school on friday until 5pm sunday, and (d) part of special occasions.   from 21 march 2024, a two-week rotation, from 9am until 5pm thursday in week one, and from 9am until 5pm thursday and 8am saturday until 5pm sunday in week two, (c) from 4 february 2026 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm until 7pm wednesday in week one, and 3pm until 7pm wednesday and from after school on friday until 5pm sunday, and (d) part of special occasions.   from 4 february 2026 onwards, a two-week rotation, from 3pm until 7pm wednesday in week one, and 3pm until 7pm wednesday and from after school on friday until 5pm sunday, and (d) part of special occasions.   part of special occasions.
procedural history
background
family reports
family report dated 29 march 2022  starting with an additional half day at two and a half years of age, possibly tuesdays, (b) moving to spending two consecutive days with the father before commencing one overnight each week when x turned three years of age, (c) considering the possibility of an additional night per fortnight after x turns four years old, (d) considering another additional night per fortnight when x turns five years old, (e) after x starts school, moving the tuesday time to after school on thursdays when x turns six years old, and (f) considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.   moving to spending two consecutive days with the father before commencing one overnight each week when x turned three years of age, (c) considering the possibility of an additional night per fortnight after x turns four years old, (d) considering another additional night per fortnight when x turns five years old, (e) after x starts school, moving the tuesday time to after school on thursdays when x turns six years old, and (f) considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.   considering the possibility of an additional night per fortnight after x turns four years old, (d) considering another additional night per fortnight when x turns five years old, (e) after x starts school, moving the tuesday time to after school on thursdays when x turns six years old, and (f) considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.   considering another additional night per fortnight when x turns five years old, (e) after x starts school, moving the tuesday time to after school on thursdays when x turns six years old, and (f) considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.   after x starts school, moving the tuesday time to after school on thursdays when x turns six years old, and (f) considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.   considering an additional overnight per fortnight when x turns seven.
as stated, at the current time there are significant contraindicators for [x] living in an equal time arrangement. the parents do not have the requisite quality of relationship – flexibility, clear, open, and honest communication and an ability to problem solve together – for such an arrangement to be successful for [x]. however, if the co‑parenting relationship has benefited from professional therapeutic assistance, the possibility of [x] spending additional time in [mr battista]’s care and possibly living equally between the parents could be considered and the parents might consider attending mediation to ascertain the likelihood of such an arrangement working for and benefitting [x].   the parties have shared parental responsibility, (b) the x live with the mother and spend increasing time with the father until he is spending five nights per fortnight with the father by the time he is seven years old, in line with the pathway outlined at [38] above, (c) that the parties engage with a senior mental health professional to assist with communication, co-operation and problem solving, (d) that the father attend a mental health professional for individual therapy to improve his understanding of how his behaviour may impact others, and (e) that both parties undertake the “circle of security’ course.   the x live with the mother and spend increasing time with the father until he is spending five nights per fortnight with the father by the time he is seven years old, in line with the pathway outlined at [38] above, (c) that the parties engage with a senior mental health professional to assist with communication, co-operation and problem solving, (d) that the father attend a mental health professional for individual therapy to improve his understanding of how his behaviour may impact others, and (e) that both parties undertake the “circle of security’ course.   that the parties engage with a senior mental health professional to assist with communication, co-operation and problem solving, (d) that the father attend a mental health professional for individual therapy to improve his understanding of how his behaviour may impact others, and (e) that both parties undertake the “circle of security’ course.   that the father attend a mental health professional for individual therapy to improve his understanding of how his behaviour may impact others, and (e) that both parties undertake the “circle of security’ course.   that both parties undertake the “circle of security’ course.
updated family report dated 12 january 2024  that the parties identified changeovers as a flashpoint of conflict and that she tried to get the parents to improve their communication, but was unsuccessful in getting the parents to implement suggested strategies, (b) that there are differences between the parents in what they considered the frequency, content and how communication between them ought to occur. ms u told mr j that she perceived the mother to be willing to provide the father with information about x, that the father wants to keep himself informed about x, but daily emails are a little excessive as the mother may lack the time to respond, (c) that the mother indicated x can be clingy and unsettled when he comes back into her care. ms u said this could be “normal” because he missed the mother or was anxious. ms u had suggested that x could have a facetime call when in the father’s care overnight, but the father had advised ms u there are orders in place in relation to such calls and he did not see the need for such a call. ms u said that such a call ought to be a non-negotiable if x spends more than one consecutive night with the father, (d) that the parents’ behaviour in front of x was important modelling behaviour for him and that she had told the parents she wanted them to adopt more flexible thinking. she provided mr j an example of when the mother was 10 minutes late to changeover and the father telling the mother that he would bring x back 10 minute later. ms u said the father could have accepted that getting a small child to changeover on time can be difficult and not expect time to be made up, and the mother could have accepted her lateness and agreed to x returning to her care 10 minutes later, (e) that x might not be able to communicate freely between the parents about his time in their care and that this may lead x to think he needs to keep secrets from his parents. ms u perceived that neither parent wanted to share anything about their lives with the other parent and that this was concerning and does not provide x with a “good model of communication”, (f) that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that there are differences between the parents in what they considered the frequency, content and how communication between them ought to occur. ms u told mr j that she perceived the mother to be willing to provide the father with information about x, that the father wants to keep himself informed about x, but daily emails are a little excessive as the mother may lack the time to respond, (c) that the mother indicated x can be clingy and unsettled when he comes back into her care. ms u said this could be “normal” because he missed the mother or was anxious. ms u had suggested that x could have a facetime call when in the father’s care overnight, but the father had advised ms u there are orders in place in relation to such calls and he did not see the need for such a call. ms u said that such a call ought to be a non-negotiable if x spends more than one consecutive night with the father, (d) that the parents’ behaviour in front of x was important modelling behaviour for him and that she had told the parents she wanted them to adopt more flexible thinking. she provided mr j an example of when the mother was 10 minutes late to changeover and the father telling the mother that he would bring x back 10 minute later. ms u said the father could have accepted that getting a small child to changeover on time can be difficult and not expect time to be made up, and the mother could have accepted her lateness and agreed to x returning to her care 10 minutes later, (e) that x might not be able to communicate freely between the parents about his time in their care and that this may lead x to think he needs to keep secrets from his parents. ms u perceived that neither parent wanted to share anything about their lives with the other parent and that this was concerning and does not provide x with a “good model of communication”, (f) that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that the mother indicated x can be clingy and unsettled when he comes back into her care. ms u said this could be “normal” because he missed the mother or was anxious. ms u had suggested that x could have a facetime call when in the father’s care overnight, but the father had advised ms u there are orders in place in relation to such calls and he did not see the need for such a call. ms u said that such a call ought to be a non-negotiable if x spends more than one consecutive night with the father, (d) that the parents’ behaviour in front of x was important modelling behaviour for him and that she had told the parents she wanted them to adopt more flexible thinking. she provided mr j an example of when the mother was 10 minutes late to changeover and the father telling the mother that he would bring x back 10 minute later. ms u said the father could have accepted that getting a small child to changeover on time can be difficult and not expect time to be made up, and the mother could have accepted her lateness and agreed to x returning to her care 10 minutes later, (e) that x might not be able to communicate freely between the parents about his time in their care and that this may lead x to think he needs to keep secrets from his parents. ms u perceived that neither parent wanted to share anything about their lives with the other parent and that this was concerning and does not provide x with a “good model of communication”, (f) that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that the parents’ behaviour in front of x was important modelling behaviour for him and that she had told the parents she wanted them to adopt more flexible thinking. she provided mr j an example of when the mother was 10 minutes late to changeover and the father telling the mother that he would bring x back 10 minute later. ms u said the father could have accepted that getting a small child to changeover on time can be difficult and not expect time to be made up, and the mother could have accepted her lateness and agreed to x returning to her care 10 minutes later, (e) that x might not be able to communicate freely between the parents about his time in their care and that this may lead x to think he needs to keep secrets from his parents. ms u perceived that neither parent wanted to share anything about their lives with the other parent and that this was concerning and does not provide x with a “good model of communication”, (f) that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that x might not be able to communicate freely between the parents about his time in their care and that this may lead x to think he needs to keep secrets from his parents. ms u perceived that neither parent wanted to share anything about their lives with the other parent and that this was concerning and does not provide x with a “good model of communication”, (f) that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that consistency between the parents’ homes will be very important for x, but ms u noted that the parents have varying parenting styles. she gave mr j the example about the mother encouraging x to eat even if he is resistant, while the father not wanting to force x to eat if he does not want to. while ms u did not have any significant safety concerns for x while in his father’s care, she told mr j that the parents’ communication needed to improve, and (g) that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.   that the parents have very little respect for each other. ms u told mr j that she perceived the parents to be “fed up’ with each other and walking on eggshells, and that the parents were aware of their communication difficulties and would like to change but that they currently relate to each other with “concrete rigidness, stubbornness and spite”.
therefore, the co-parenting relationship remains, with even more certainty, contraindicative for [x] to be able to live in an equal time parenting arrangement without suffering any negative emotional and psychological impact and no information obtained for this assessment dissuades the writer from that opinion. rather, this position has been strengthened, given there has been no appreciable improvement in the co-parenting relationship, and feasibly a deterioration, since the initial assessment.
it is recommended that [x]’s time in [the father’s] care increase one night (friday) per fortnight until mid-2024. it is recommended that this arrangement remain in place until the first quarter of 2025 and then another night be introduced so that, by the time [x] commences school in 2026, he is spending from after school thursday until 4.00pm on sunday each alternate week in [the father’s] care. it will be important for [x] to start the school week from [the mother’s] home on the sunday afternoon as this will set him up for the week ahead.   the x live with the mother, (b) that x spend three nights per fortnight with the father in line with the recommendation outlined above at [53], (c) that there be no change in x’s parenting arrangements during the school holidays for his first year of school, (d) that the parties engage in a parenting coordinator to assist in decision-making and mediate conflict, (e) that the parties attend a senior mental health clinician with family law experience for two years after final orders for joint sessions to improve communication and the co‑parenting relationship, and (f) that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.   that x spend three nights per fortnight with the father in line with the recommendation outlined above at [53], (c) that there be no change in x’s parenting arrangements during the school holidays for his first year of school, (d) that the parties engage in a parenting coordinator to assist in decision-making and mediate conflict, (e) that the parties attend a senior mental health clinician with family law experience for two years after final orders for joint sessions to improve communication and the co‑parenting relationship, and (f) that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.   that there be no change in x’s parenting arrangements during the school holidays for his first year of school, (d) that the parties engage in a parenting coordinator to assist in decision-making and mediate conflict, (e) that the parties attend a senior mental health clinician with family law experience for two years after final orders for joint sessions to improve communication and the co‑parenting relationship, and (f) that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.   that the parties engage in a parenting coordinator to assist in decision-making and mediate conflict, (e) that the parties attend a senior mental health clinician with family law experience for two years after final orders for joint sessions to improve communication and the co‑parenting relationship, and (f) that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.   that the parties attend a senior mental health clinician with family law experience for two years after final orders for joint sessions to improve communication and the co‑parenting relationship, and (f) that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.   that the parties use a communication application such as our family wizard.
relevant legal principles
determination  by virtue of being final orders, and (b) including an order that “x live with the mother at all times other than when he is spending time with the father in accordance with the orders” (emphasis added),   including an order that “x live with the mother at all times other than when he is spending time with the father in accordance with the orders” (emphasis added),
infect the operation of any previously made interim orders with uncertainty.
counsel: so when [dr v] was giving you the date, when you’re at that appointment, you made yourself available to be with [x] on that day? on the day of the operation? mother: and the two weeks for his recovery period. counsel: ok. alright. and then, you then advised [mr battista] of that date? mother: no, [mr battista] was present when the appointment was made. mr dura: ok, so you’re both there? mother: yes. counsel: so you both made yourselves available to be there [for the operation]? mother: we basically scheduled the first available appointment, which was [mid-2023], we were put on the waitlist for any potential cancelations. counsel: so you both knew that the operation needed to happen as soon as it could? mother: yes. counsel: correct? cause you booked the first available and you had yourself on standby if there was an earlier cancelation? mother: yes. counsel: you both knew that it was something that [x] had been struggling with and that’s why you were there with [dr v]. mother: yes. counsel: so [in early 2023] keep reading from paragraph 130, you say you received a call from [dr v]’s office and said to you, consistent with you being on standby, we’ve got an opening [earlier]? mother: yes. counsel: right. you’ve said to them “i’ll speak with [mr battista] and i’ll get back to you”? mother: correct. counsel: right? and you say you then reviewed your week your work calendar and realised you couldn’t take the two weeks off? mother: yes. counsel: and then, without consulting with [mr battista], you immediately rang back to the [dr v’s] offices and told them “well let’s just keep the date”? moter: yes, there was other... counsel: that’s what you did, didn’t you? mother: sorry, yes, yes. counsel: and then what you did is you rang [mr battista] said to him “they called me, we could do [the earlier date], i’m not available, so i told them to keep it [mid-2023]”? mother: um, yes, but sorry... counsel: that’s what happened wasn’t it? mother: yes, however, there’s some other mitigating circumstances with regards to [x]’s surgery that... counsel: no, i’m just reading your affidavit. mother: oh, ok, yes. counsel: if there are other mitigating circumstances are they not referred to in your affidavit? mother: there is further down yes. counsel: ok. so, [mr battista] told you, when you had the conversation with him [in early 2023], that he could be available for [x] to take him to the appointment and be available for him on [the later] operation didn’t he? mother: ah, yes. counsel: but you didn’t bother to enquire with [mr battista] before making the decision to delay the operation for a month did you? mother: we weren’t delaying it, it was scheduled in. counsel: [ms battista], you had the opportunity to bring it forward a month? mother: somewhat, yes. counsel: not ‘somewhat’, yes. mother: almost a month, yes. counsel: right. and that was for [x]’s benefit, hence the reason why you were on standby, and didn’t have to wait till [mid-2023]? mother: correct. counsel: right, something the two of you agreed to do when you were with [dr v] [in early 2023]? mother: correct. counsel: right. you didn’t enquire of [mr battista] if he was available to take your son to have the operation a month earlier before dismissing it as an option did you? mother: i, sorry, before dismissing it as an option we were advised by [dr v] that [x] needed to isolate from daycare the week preceding his surgery. counsel: ma’am stop. you did not engage with [mr battista] to say “surgery’s just rang, we can get him in [on the earlier date], can you do it”? mother: no. counsel: right. all you did, is you looked at your work calendar. mother: correct. counsel: realised, you couldn’t be there for [x], so decided it wasn’t an option for [x] to have that surgery [at the earlier date]? mother: as well as the other... counsel: no, i’m reading your affidavit. what you’re telling me now is nowhere in your affidavit is it? mother: the appointment with the dietitian as well. counsel: what you’re telling me now, is not something you put in your affidavit about [x] having to isolate for two weeks, or a week, before [the earlier] operation. you didn’t say that in the paragraphs do you? mother: ah, no it doesn’t look like it, no. counsel: right. i’m sure, if that’s what they did tell you, you would have said to them “well he won’t be able to isolate for a week before [the earlier date], so we can’t do that”. you didn’t say that to them did you? mother: to the... counsel: to the surgery. mother: yes, sorry, no i didn’t say that to them but then... counsel: because you immediately ruled it out because you couldn’t be there, irrespective of whether or not his father could? mother: i had a conference so no i couldn’t be there. counsel: right. but even if for [x]’s benefit it was brought forward 28 days, and his father was there to support him and you weren’t, you weren’t prepared to do that for [x]’s benefit were you? mother: i, i don’t think it would have been a good idea. counsel: you weren’t prepared to do it for [x]’s benefit were you? mother: for [x]’s benefit? counsel: to have the operation 28 days earlier? mother: yes, there was also the matter of the two week recovery period after the fact as well that needed to be taken into consideration. counsel: you had to be there didn’t you? mother: i think it’s important that i was, yes. counsel: right. more important than his dad being there? mother: no, [mr battista] was also at his surgery as well. i think it’s important that both of us would be there. so if either of us... counsel: even if it was to [x]’s detriment mother: i don’t think it was to [x]’s detriment. counsel: well, let’s read on in your affidavit. mother: yep. counsel: in paragraph 131, where you talk about this phone call, you say that “[mr battista] continued to accuse me of making decision unilaterally”. see that there? mother: mmm counsel: and on that occasion, that is exactly what you did, wasn’t it? you decided, without consultation with [mr battista], that [x] would not have the operation 28 days earlier? mother: i don’t think that would have been a good idea no. counsel: no, you, did you understand.... mother: sorry, yes. counsel: right, thank you. and he told you didn’t he, that being [mr battista], said to you that he would be available for [x]’s surgery and that if you couldn’t be there, you didn’t have to be there? he said that to you didn’t he? mother: he said that yes. counsel: now, we then read on in your affidavit in the following paragraphs, and we have, if i understand that chronology correctly, we have the weekend of mother’s day. mother: yes. counsel: where we heard some questions about that, and we read over the page. when he comes into your care [in mid-2023], paragraph 137, so he’s back in your care, you tell [mr battista] that [x] needed to see his gp because he was unwell? mother: yes. counsel: and he’d been unwell for a few days thereafter so he doesn’t go to childcare, paragraph 139? moher: yes. counsel: and he doesn’t go because he has [an illness]? mother: correct. counsel: all of which could have been prevented if he had his operation [earlier]? mother: potentially. her honour: well you can’t have [surgery] if you don’t have [...] can you? mother: yes, but he could have had [illness] the week leading up to the surgery. when was it, the reschedule one, [the earlier date]. counsel: sorry, are we clutching at straws [ms battista] sorry, i said that wrong and i apologise. but are we clutching at straws? mother: i don’t think so, i think it was important for both [mr battista] and i to be present for [x]’s surgery. counsel: your son would not have been ill with [an illness for 2 days] if he had his operation [earlier]? mother: he would have been convalescing, he would have been recovery period yes. counsel: he would have been recovering, he wouldn’t have been suffering from [an illness]? mother: no. counsel: right. but, because it didn’t meet your convenience, your little boy had to go through that? mother: i think that’s a bit unfair sir. counsel: well how else do you put it? mother: i was not available to be present for [x]’s surgery at that point in time. counsel: how long was your conference. mother: three days. counsel: right. so he could have had his operation, and where was the conference? mother: in sydney. counsel: right, were you overnight at the conference? mother: no. counsel: right. so he would have had an operation... mother: or two days maybe i’m sorry. counsel: ok, lets call it three days, in sydney, not overnight? mother: yep. counsel: he goes in has his operation, you’d be there in the evening when he comes out of his operation. he wakes, mum’s there dad’s there. right, when he had his operation, how long did he stay in hospital for? mother: overnight. counsel: one night? mother: overnight, yes. counsel: ok, so let’s assume he did it [on the earlier date], when did your conference start? mother: i can’t remember sir. it was that week. i think it was a tuesday and a wednesday, i’m not certain. counsel: right, so he stays overnight, you could have stayed there overnight, you both could have stayed there overnight because that wasn’t the conference time correct? mother: overnight? counsel: yes. mother: yes. counsel: next morning... mother: sorry, i wouldn’t have felt comfortable staying overnight with [mr battista] just... counsel: well one of you could have stayed there. let’s assume you could have stayed there right? the next day [mr battista] rocks up, you go off to your conference and he spends the day with his dad, convalescing in hospital until he is released? mother: ok. counsel: right. by that stage you’ve had two days of your conference. he may have had a third day home recovering with his dad until your conference is over. or he could have been home and been cared for by your mum. correct? mother: correct. counsel: right. by that stage your conference is done, he’s had his operation, he’s got another eleven days of convalescing at home? mother: yes, sorry i keep nodding, yes. counsel: but you elected not to make that call? mother: i elected not to make that call, yes, no i did not. counsel: in your affidavit at paragraph 138. mother: 138? counsel: yep. you describe what the gp told you was going on with [x]’s [illness]. mother: yes. counsel: they were [infected]? mother: yes. counsel: must have been painful for the little boy, wasn’t it? mother: absolutely. counsel: all of which could have been avoided? mother: i understand what you’re saying ..., but i thought it was... counsel: but you don’t agree with me? mother: i don’t agree that i shouldn’t have been at [x]’s surgery and vice-versa [mr battista] shouldn’t have been at [x]’s surgery.   will likely benefit from having one primary residence with [the mother]... this will allow [x] to have the majority of the time with one consistent carer without having to adapt to changes... [x] needs to have one primary synchronised relationship...
associate: dated: 1 march 2024
dated: 1 march 2024
[1]battista & battista [2022] fedcfamc2f 778.[2] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [140].[3] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [141]-[142]. [4] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [144].[5] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [146].[6] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [178].[7] updated single expert report prepared by mr j, dated 12 january 2024 at [78]-[109].[8] updated family report prepared by mr j, dated 12 january 2024 at [144]. [9] updated family report prepared by mr j, dated 12 january 2024 at [156].[10] see slater & light [2011] famcafc 1 at [45].[11] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520 at [26] cited with approval by the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] (“mccall”).[12] mccall at [122].[13] mrr v gr [2010] hca 4 at [13].[14] banks & banks [2015] famcafc 36 at [52].[15] exhibit 4, pages 11-14 of 14.[16] family report prepared by mr j, dated 29 march 2022 at [141] where the expert said that the mother is “undoubtedly” so. [17] exhibit 2.[18] affidavit of mr battistamr battista, filed 31 august 2023 at [33].[19] having regard to the “qwerty” keyboard, the typographical errors are understandable and do not of themselves imply any malicious intent. [20] not from an official transcript, but transcribed by court staff from the audio of the hearing. [21] updated single expert report prepared by mr j, dated 12 january 2024 at [155].