last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mulliner & riggs [2024] fedcfamc2f 366
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
trial material   an outline of case document (final hearing), and (b) an updated trial affidavit. in the event that the applicant father does not comply with order 2, the court will consider the respondent’s application made today to proceed with the final hearing on an undefended basis.
fathers email address
issue of compliance
circumstances of the hearing
issue of undefended hearing
application for undefended hearing
“...... the court may order that a hearing or trial may proceed, because of the respondent’s failure to comply with the rule or order, as if a response had not been filed the court may make orders set out in the application on being satisfied by evidence that the orders should be made.”   in an undefended case the response becomes a nullity (rules of court) (b) where an application has been struck out due to the default of a party to make a full frank and prompt disclosure of his/her financial affairs that party ought have no further right to be heard without order of the court (tate and tate) (c) in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   where an application has been struck out due to the default of a party to make a full frank and prompt disclosure of his/her financial affairs that party ought have no further right to be heard without order of the court (tate and tate) (c) in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the applicant has a duty to the court to make full disclosure and deal with the court in good faith (krebs) (d) in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the applicant must establish the case with admissible evidence (tate) (e) in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   in an undefended hearing the trial judge has the discretion to have regard only to the evidence of the party before the court and not the affidavit evidence of the excluded party (tate) [the converse of this being there must be a discretion to have regard to part or all of the affidavit evidence filed by the excluded party] (f) the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   the trial judge in an undefended hearing may exercise a discretion to have regard to agreements reached between the parties prior to the hearing as to such matters as value of property where such agreements have been noted on the court record or where there is admissible evidence establishing such agreement (tate) (g) where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   where a court does proceed to conduct a hearing as an undefended matter it is still bound by the same general requirements as to proof as in a defended matter. this does not mean that a court necessarily has to insist on detailed evidence, make elaborate findings and give reasoned decisions in undefended matters... nevertheless it must be satisfied that the evidence supports its findings and orders. (h) subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   subject to matters of procedural fairness the trial judge may allow the remaining party in an undefended hearing to rely on affidavit material filed and served on the excluded party together with oral evidence and the tendering of documents to establish a case. (i) there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.   there is a wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge as to the extent of the involvement of the defaulting party in the undefended hearing. this discretion must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties. each case will demand an individual assessment by the trial judge as to the appropriate procedure to be adopted. in many cases the reasons giving rise to the determination that the case should proceed undefended will no doubt impact upon the decision of the trial judge as to the method of hearing to be adopted. in many cases the trial judge will have regard to the evidence of the remaining party only.
... ... i am of the opinion that the husband has forfeited his right to have me read his affidavit evidence. in any event where his evidence was not corroborated i would be unable to accept it as there is no ability on the wife’s part to cross-examine him or his witnesses as they are not present. i will have regard to the court record in order to consider any agreements recorded for the purpose of the final hearing. i have also referred to some of the husbands’ evidence in the course of my reasons... ... i have read all of those affidavits and my findings are based on the evidence set out therein, on the documents tendered in the hearing, reference to some of the husbands affidavit evidence or the matters of court record referred to together with the wife’s oral evidence, unless i state otherwise.  0] first it would be wrong in this case to lose sight of the fact that there are two parties to this dispute. the wife is entitled to have her application filed 1 september 2000 heard.
rule 10.27(2) orders on default
... (2) if a respondent is in default, the court may: (a) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (b) give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or (b) give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.
... [the appellant] has not complied with orders of this court and is in default pursuant to r 10.26 of [the rules], so much so that these proceedings have been heard on an undefended basis. but the primary judge did not do as portended. her honour did not order the appellant to take some other “step in the proceeding” (r 10.27(2)(a)). nor did her honour “give judgment” against the appellant (r 10.27(2)(b)). the response filed by the appellant in february 2020, seeking certain property settlement orders, was not summarily dismissed. in fact, during final submissions, the primary judge elicited from him the precise nature of his proposal, as her honour was properly intent on determining what just and equitable orders were needed to finalise the cause between the parties under pt viiiab of the act. the appellant was allowed to make final submissions, but not permitted to cross-examine the respondent, though no “other order” of that sort was actually made or explained (r 10.27(2)(b)). the hearing did not proceed on an “undefended basis”, as the primary judge said it did (at [185]), since the appellant participated in the trial and resisted the respondent’s application, though he was deprived of an opportunity to cross-examine her.
rule 1.33 failure to comply with a legislative provision of order   if a step is taken after the time specified for taking the step by these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the step is of no effect. (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:  dismiss all or part of the proceeding, (b) set aside a step taken or an order made, (c) determine the proceeding as if it were undefended, (d) order costs, (e) prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).
... it is well-established that procedural fairness requires a party to be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case and it matters not whether that opportunity is taken up (kioa v west [1985] hca 81, (1985) 159 clr 550). the respondent submitted that the appellant was afforded the opportunity but did not take it up because she did not file a case outline or an affidavit in chief. that however, was the failure to take up the opportunity to prepare for the hearing, and that failure was the basis for the application of r 1.33(2) of the rule. it was not the opportunity to be heard as to what the consequences of that failure should be.
fathers participation in proceedings previously
... whilst there were concerns raised [ms riggs] in regard to [mr mulliner]’s historic drug use, she had no information to suggest that he was currently using drugs... [mr mulliner] raised [mr e]’s consumption of alcohol as a concern, which differed from the reports of both [ms riggs] and [mr e]. there was no collateral information available to assess associated risk, but it’s noted that [mr e] is not the primary carer for [x]. should his consumption of alcohol be in excess, this will increase volatility of [x]’s home environment.
parties’ proposals
mother’s change in circumstances
matter to proceed as a defended hearing
associate: dated: 22 march 2024
dated: 22 march 2024