last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hira & dipak [2024] fedcfamc2f 285
orders
the court orders that:  the father will send the cards to the children at an address which shall be nominated by the mother (via her solicitor) to the father (via his solicitor) within 14 days from the dates of these orders, (b) the mother be permitted to open and view the cards prior to providing them to the children and the mother must pass them on to the children unless they are inappropriate in accordance with order 8(c), and (c) the provision of cards by the father to the children is permitted on the conditions that the father does not, through any card: (i) denigrate, in any way, the mother, the children, or any person related to the children, including using abusive or belittling language, (ii) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (iii) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   the mother be permitted to open and view the cards prior to providing them to the children and the mother must pass them on to the children unless they are inappropriate in accordance with order 8(c), and (c) the provision of cards by the father to the children is permitted on the conditions that the father does not, through any card: (i) denigrate, in any way, the mother, the children, or any person related to the children, including using abusive or belittling language, (ii) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (iii) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   the provision of cards by the father to the children is permitted on the conditions that the father does not, through any card: (i) denigrate, in any way, the mother, the children, or any person related to the children, including using abusive or belittling language, (ii) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (iii) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   denigrate, in any way, the mother, the children, or any person related to the children, including using abusive or belittling language, (ii) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (iii) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.  ) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (iii) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.  i) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (iv) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.  ) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (v) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.
and the court notes that:  victoria police, (b) the department of families fairness and housing, and (c) the registrar of the court at city b.   the department of families fairness and housing, and (c) the registrar of the court at city b.   the registrar of the court at city b.
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
the parties’ positions  the mother have sole parental responsibility, (b) the children live with the mother, (c) after a period of not seeing the children for three months, the father commence supervised time with the children once per month, (d) time be unsupervised after six months, conditional upon him completing a parenting after separation and men’s behavioural change course, (e) the father be able to have video calls with the children, and (f) the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.   the children live with the mother, (c) after a period of not seeing the children for three months, the father commence supervised time with the children once per month, (d) time be unsupervised after six months, conditional upon him completing a parenting after separation and men’s behavioural change course, (e) the father be able to have video calls with the children, and (f) the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.   after a period of not seeing the children for three months, the father commence supervised time with the children once per month, (d) time be unsupervised after six months, conditional upon him completing a parenting after separation and men’s behavioural change course, (e) the father be able to have video calls with the children, and (f) the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.   time be unsupervised after six months, conditional upon him completing a parenting after separation and men’s behavioural change course, (e) the father be able to have video calls with the children, and (f) the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.   the father be able to have video calls with the children, and (f) the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.   the father be able to send gifts, cards, and letters to the children.
evidence relied on  further amended application filed 5 december 2023, (b) trial affidavit of mr hira filed 27 december 2023, (c) affidavit of mr e filed 23 december 2023. at the commencement of the final hearing, counsel for the father indicated that the witness would not be required for cross-examination the affidavit was described as a character witness and is of no assistance in determining the issues before me, and (d) outline of case filed 17 january 2024.   trial affidavit of mr hira filed 27 december 2023, (c) affidavit of mr e filed 23 december 2023. at the commencement of the final hearing, counsel for the father indicated that the witness would not be required for cross-examination the affidavit was described as a character witness and is of no assistance in determining the issues before me, and (d) outline of case filed 17 january 2024.   affidavit of mr e filed 23 december 2023. at the commencement of the final hearing, counsel for the father indicated that the witness would not be required for cross-examination the affidavit was described as a character witness and is of no assistance in determining the issues before me, and (d) outline of case filed 17 january 2024.   outline of case filed 17 january 2024.   amended response filed 1 august 2023, (b) trial affidavit of ms dipak filed 28 december 2023, and (c) outline of case filed 11 january 2024.   trial affidavit of ms dipak filed 28 december 2023, and (c) outline of case filed 11 january 2024.   outline of case filed 11 january 2024.
issues in dispute   the nature and extent of family violence experienced by the family, (b) whether or not the father is an unacceptable risk to the children due to family violence and his lack of insight and acknowledgment of the alleged family violence, (c) whether or not that risk can be ameliorated, (d) whether or not the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility with an obligation to consult with the father, (e) whether or not orders should be made for the father to spend time and communicate with the children, (f) whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not the father is an unacceptable risk to the children due to family violence and his lack of insight and acknowledgment of the alleged family violence, (c) whether or not that risk can be ameliorated, (d) whether or not the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility with an obligation to consult with the father, (e) whether or not orders should be made for the father to spend time and communicate with the children, (f) whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not that risk can be ameliorated, (d) whether or not the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility with an obligation to consult with the father, (e) whether or not orders should be made for the father to spend time and communicate with the children, (f) whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility with an obligation to consult with the father, (e) whether or not orders should be made for the father to spend time and communicate with the children, (f) whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not orders should be made for the father to spend time and communicate with the children, (f) whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not the father should be permitted to send cards, letters and gifts and under what conditions, (g) whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not an order should be made for family therapy, and (h) whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.   whether or not an airport watch list order and an order for passports should be made.
legal principles
impressions of the parties
periods of separation
family violence during the relationship
x’s burnt hand
alleged violence towards the mother
further incidents of family violence
disciplining and hitting the children
ipad incident - 2017
the plate incident – late 2022
the road incident – late 2022
1 am very regretful that i responded as i did, which caused this final family violence intervention order to be made and estrangement from my family. i intend to gain insights into why and ‘rehabilitative tools” from the men's behavioural change program and the parenting order program i am about to enrol in.
...i heard [x] say to [mr hira], “dad if you don t let go of mum right now 1 have the emergency number dialled in one hand! and [a weapon] in the other! i am going to stab you with [this weapon] if you don t let go right now!” at that moment, [mr hira] let go of me, pushed the children back into the car as they had at that point stepped out of the car...
late 2022
intervention order and assault charge
5. contact or communicate with a protected person by any means, in respect of [ms dipak] only. 9. the respondent may,   do anything that is permitted by a family law act order, a child protection order or a written agreement about child arrangements, or # (b) negotiate child arrangements by letter, email or text message, or (c) communicate with a protected person through a lawyer or mediator, or (d) arrange and/or participate in counselling or mediation, or (e) go to the home of a protected person, in the company of a police officer or a person chosen by the applicant, to collect personal property.
but only if the respondent does not commit family violence while doing so.
assault charge
parenting capacity and insight
child impact report
a. the key issue for determination at final hearing is the spend time arrangements between the children and the father in circumstances where:   the child impact report recommends no time between the children and the father, and (ii) the mother and independent children’s lawyer seek orders in accordance with the recommendations of the report.
b. the father’s position is that parental alienation has occurred and the mother has alienated the children from him. c. the father concedes the mother should have sole parental responsibility for the children, however is seeking orders be made requiring the mother to consult with him prior to any decision being made. d. the court is of the view that a family report is not necessary as a child impact report prepared by court child expert, [ms f] was released to the parties on 15 august 2023.
cross-examination of the court child expert
although [mr hira] denies his use of violence, the children recall it in detail. they regard him as an unsafe person for their mother and themselves. family violence is a form of harm to children and is considered a parenting choice. the impacts for children and their relationship with perpetrators can be complex and longstanding. these impacts are not always immediately detectable. given their reported past experiences, [x] and [y] are at increased risk of adverse mental health mental health outcomes as adults. despite [ms dipak]’s best efforts to shield the children from the cycle of violence and control, this pattern is confusing for children, who require both parents to be safe and protective. as [x] progresses towards adolescence, she is at an important developmental stage, where she is developing her own self-esteem, confidence and understanding of relationship dynamics. she requires supportive adults around her to guide her, and provide her with positive social role modelling. [y], from a young age, experienced lengthy periods of absence from her father. her lived experience of her father, when reintegrating in to the family unit, will likely have been frightening and confusing, as she tried to make sense of a parent who presented as unsafe, when she was wholly reliant on him to be a protective factor. separation has likely somewhat mitigated risk of further violence, particularly while [ms dipak] and the children are living in an undisclosed location. healing from past lived experiences of family violence for the children, may be improved by [mr hira] taking responsibility and accountability for his actions. [mr hira] is less likely to be able to respond to his children’s emotional needs adequately if he does not acknowledge the harm his past family violence has caused them. further, the children require that [mr hira] demonstrates he is placing their needs and wishes first, by listening to and respecting their feelings with regard to spend time, or a relationship with him, rather than attempting to enforce same against their will. additionally it seems [x] has felt compelled to take on the role of her mother and sister’s protector, exacerbating risk to her wellbeing now and in the longer term. the children’s narrative appears wholly aligned with their mother’s in relation to family violence. if the children have, as per [mr hira]’s reported concerns, been unduly influenced by their mother’s narrative, there might be conflicted loyalties with regard to spending time with their father. this could have future adverse impacts not only on the relationship with their father, due to a ruptured relationship, but potentially later on with their mother as well, if they come to view this influence and loyalty differently as they mature.
parental responsibility
supervised time or no time with the father?
video calls and cards
family therapy
airport watchlist and passports
conclusion
australian family law is unashamedly pro-contact. consequently, this court will bend over backwards to establish or preserve a worthwhile relationship with the poorest of parents provided adequate protective measures can be put in place to prevent any relevant risks. this approach is based on the assumption that a father is much more than the worst thing he has ever done.
associate: dated: 5 march 2024
dated: 5 march 2024