last updated: 29 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mulliner & riggs (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 367
orders
the court orders that:
and the court orders by consent that:
and the court orders that:
during school term
during school holidays  for half of the school term holidays as agreed between the parents and failing agreement with the father to have the first half in even numbered years and second half in odd numbered years with changeover to occur at 10:00am on the middle day of the holidays and the mother to have the second half in even numbered years and first half in odd numbered years, (b) for half of the long summer holidays as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis, commencing with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years, with changeover to occur at 10:00am on a monday.   for half of the long summer holidays as agreed and failing agreement on a week about basis, commencing with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years, with changeover to occur at 10:00am on a monday.   with the father on father’s day weekend from 12:00pm on the saturday before father’s day until commencement of school the next day following father’s day, (b) with the mother on mother’s day weekend from 12:00pm on the saturday before mother’s day until commencement of school the next day following mother’s day, (c) for easter in 2023 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (d) for easter in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (e) for christmas in 2025 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, (f) for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   with the mother on mother’s day weekend from 12:00pm on the saturday before mother’s day until commencement of school the next day following mother’s day, (c) for easter in 2023 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (d) for easter in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (e) for christmas in 2025 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, (f) for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   for easter in 2023 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (d) for easter in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (e) for christmas in 2025 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, (f) for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   with the mother from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday.  ) with the father from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday.   for easter in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday. (e) for christmas in 2025 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, (f) for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   with the father from 5.00pm on the thursday before good friday until 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday.  ) with the mother from 5.00pm on the saturday after good friday until 5.00pm on easter monday.   for christmas in 2025 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (i) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, (f) for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day,  ) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day,   for christmas in 2024 and all even numbered years thereafter: (i) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. (g) on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (ii) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day.  ) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day.   on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. (h) on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm.  ) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (i) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (ii) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.  ) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, (iii) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.  i) any other special occasion as agreed between the parents.   each parent keep the other advised and fully informed as to any medical health issues, including details of any appointments concerning x and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with x’s treating practitioners and any pharmacist dispensing medication about same, (b) each of the parents be permitted to, and do all acts and things to authorise the other to, receive copies of all medical, pharmaceutical (chemist) and allied health documents relevant to the child, and (c) each parent immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care, and (d) the mother be and is responsible for arranging medication and therapy (if any) for x and keeping the father informed of same in a timely manner and if necessary the father accept the mother’s decision about such matters. (e) the father be responsible for and pay to the mother all of her out of pocket expenses for x’s medication incurred in 2024, from this day, and each alternate year thereafter and the mother otherwise pay for such medication out of pocket expenses and neither party claim any credit or adjustment or alteration by reason of such payment in regard to any assessment of child support.   each of the parents be permitted to, and do all acts and things to authorise the other to, receive copies of all medical, pharmaceutical (chemist) and allied health documents relevant to the child, and (c) each parent immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care, and (d) the mother be and is responsible for arranging medication and therapy (if any) for x and keeping the father informed of same in a timely manner and if necessary the father accept the mother’s decision about such matters. (e) the father be responsible for and pay to the mother all of her out of pocket expenses for x’s medication incurred in 2024, from this day, and each alternate year thereafter and the mother otherwise pay for such medication out of pocket expenses and neither party claim any credit or adjustment or alteration by reason of such payment in regard to any assessment of child support.   each parent immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care, and (d) the mother be and is responsible for arranging medication and therapy (if any) for x and keeping the father informed of same in a timely manner and if necessary the father accept the mother’s decision about such matters. (e) the father be responsible for and pay to the mother all of her out of pocket expenses for x’s medication incurred in 2024, from this day, and each alternate year thereafter and the mother otherwise pay for such medication out of pocket expenses and neither party claim any credit or adjustment or alteration by reason of such payment in regard to any assessment of child support.   the mother be and is responsible for arranging medication and therapy (if any) for x and keeping the father informed of same in a timely manner and if necessary the father accept the mother’s decision about such matters. (e) the father be responsible for and pay to the mother all of her out of pocket expenses for x’s medication incurred in 2024, from this day, and each alternate year thereafter and the mother otherwise pay for such medication out of pocket expenses and neither party claim any credit or adjustment or alteration by reason of such payment in regard to any assessment of child support.   the father be responsible for and pay to the mother all of her out of pocket expenses for x’s medication incurred in 2024, from this day, and each alternate year thereafter and the mother otherwise pay for such medication out of pocket expenses and neither party claim any credit or adjustment or alteration by reason of such payment in regard to any assessment of child support.   each parent be entitled, and do all acts and things to authorise the other, to receive copies of all documents normally provided by schools to parents, including but not limited to school reports, newsletters, photographs and any other similar documents provided to parents, (b) each parent, and do all acts and things to authorise the other to, be permitted to attend any function or event at the school to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports days, parent teacher interviews and the like.   each parent, and do all acts and things to authorise the other to, be permitted to attend any function or event at the school to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports days, parent teacher interviews and the like.   using any illicit substances and/or consuming alcohol in excess of a bac of .05 no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of their time with the child and during their time with the child. (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating or speaking negatively about the child or the other party or any member of their family to or in the presence or hearing of the child, and from permitting any other person from doing so, (c) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the child and from permitting any other person from doing so, and (d) exposing the child to any form of violence, threats or intimidation and from permitting any other person from doing so.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating or speaking negatively about the child or the other party or any member of their family to or in the presence or hearing of the child, and from permitting any other person from doing so, (c) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the child and from permitting any other person from doing so, and (d) exposing the child to any form of violence, threats or intimidation and from permitting any other person from doing so.   discussing these proceedings with or in the presence or hearing of the child and from permitting any other person from doing so, and (d) exposing the child to any form of violence, threats or intimidation and from permitting any other person from doing so.   exposing the child to any form of violence, threats or intimidation and from permitting any other person from doing so.
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background of litigation
mothers residence
both parents be restrained from moving [x]'s residence more than 30 minutes from their current registered address.
child living arrangement dispute
... the court orders, until further order, that: parenting the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, [x], born [in] 2012, (“the child”). 9. the child live with the mother. 10. the child spend time and communicate with the father as follows: (a) in week 1 each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school wednesday until the commencement of school monday, (b) in week 2 from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday. for half of the school term holidays as agreed between the parties and failing agreement with the father to have the first half in even numbered years and second half in odd numbered years with changeover to occur at 10:00am on the middle day of the holidays and the mother to have the second half in even numbered years and first half in odd numbered years, for half of the long summer holidays as agreed and failing agreement for the father to have the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years with changeover to occur at 10:00am on the middle day of the holidays and the mother to have the first half in odd numbered years and second half in even numbered years. in the event that the child is not spending time with the father on father’s day weekend then he spend time with the father from 10:00am on father’s day until commencement of school on monday, in the event that the child is not spending time with the mother on mother’s day weekend then he spend time with the mother from 10:00am on mother’s day until commencement of school on monday. 15. for christmas in 2023 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (a) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (b) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day, 16. for christmas in 2024 and all odd numbered years thereafter: (a) with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (b) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day. on the child’s birthday the parent who does not have the care of the child on that day spends time as agreed and failing agreement:   in week 1 each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school wednesday until the commencement of school monday, (b) in week 2 from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday.   in week 2 from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (b) with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day,   with the father from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day,   with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve until 3.00pm christmas day and, (b) with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day.   with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day.   on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (b) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm. on the parent’s birthday if the child is not already spending time with that parent then time as agreed and failing agreement: (a) on a school day from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm, (b) on a weekend from 10:00am until 2:00pm, the child remained enrolled in [town b] primary school unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties or order of the court. both parties be restrained from moving [x]’s residence more than 30 minutes from their current residence.
21. the parties be restrained by injunction from: (a) speaking negatively about the other party or any member of their family within the hearing or presence of the child. (b) using any illicit substances and/or consuming alcohol in excess of a bac of .05 no less than 24 hours prior to the commencement of their time with [x] and during their time with [x]. the parties communicate using “my family wizard” or other parenting app as agreed between the parties. both parties ensure that [x] takes any prescribed medication whilst he is in their care with the mother to ensure that the father is provided with such medication for [x]’s time with him. 24. in relation to medical and allied health issues concerning the child: (a) each party keep the other advised as to any medical health issues, including details of any appointments concerning the child and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the child’s treating practitioner’s about same, (b) each of the parties be permitted to receive copies of all medical and allied health documents relevant to the child, and (c) each party immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care. 25. in relation to educational matters concerning the child: (a) each party be entitled to receive copies of all documents normally provided by schools to parents, including but not limited to school reports, newsletters, photographs and any other similar documents provided to parents, (b) each party be permitted to attend any function or event at the school to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports days, parent teacher interviews and the like. each party be permitted to attend all extracurricular events and functions relevant to the child and each party keep the other advised as to such events and provide no less than 72 hours’ notice thereof. ...   speaking negatively about the other party or any member of their family within the hearing or presence of the child. (b) using any illicit substances and/or consuming alcohol in excess of a bac of .05 no less than 24 hours prior to the commencement of their time with [x] and during their time with [x].   using any illicit substances and/or consuming alcohol in excess of a bac of .05 no less than 24 hours prior to the commencement of their time with [x] and during their time with [x].   each party keep the other advised as to any medical health issues, including details of any appointments concerning the child and authorise the other to liaise with and speak with the child’s treating practitioner’s about same, (b) each of the parties be permitted to receive copies of all medical and allied health documents relevant to the child, and (c) each party immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care.   each of the parties be permitted to receive copies of all medical and allied health documents relevant to the child, and (c) each party immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care.   each party immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or medical injury whilst in their respective care.   each party be entitled to receive copies of all documents normally provided by schools to parents, including but not limited to school reports, newsletters, photographs and any other similar documents provided to parents, (b) each party be permitted to attend any function or event at the school to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports days, parent teacher interviews and the like.   each party be permitted to attend any function or event at the school to which parents are normally invited including but not limited to concerts, sports days, parent teacher interviews and the like.
4. the child live with the parties as follows: on a week about basis being with the applicant in the first week, from the conclusion of school on friday (or 3pm if friday is a nonschool day) until the commencement of school the following friday (3pm if a nonschool day), then each alternative week thereafter, and week about with the respondent each other alternative week from the conclusion of school on friday (3pm if friday is a nonschool day) until the commencement of school the following friday (3pm if friday is a nonschool day) and then each other alternative week thereafter.
decision of child’s spend time arrangements
1. equal shared responsibility for [x] child spend time with father each alternative fortnight from conclusion of school thursday until commencement of school wednesday the week after. 3. half of school holidays week on/week off. 4. evenly shared easter, birthdays, christmas 5. both parents to have full knowledge of medication and appointments.
reasoning for child spend time arrangement
background of the father
background of the mother
childs needs
60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances equal time   subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.
substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant.
reasonable practicality   in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
consent orders (6) if: (a) the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,
the court may, but is not required to, consider the matters referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or (if applicable) the matters referred to in paragraphs (2)(c) to (e).   to avoid doubt, subsection (6) does not affect the application of section 60ca in relation to a parenting order.
credit of the parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... (citations omitted)  ] in carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson”) at [165] to [169] kent j made the following observations concerning the making of adverse credit findings against a parent in a parenting case:  5] as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw. ... [169] moreover, the resolution of parenting proceedings in this court usually requires consideration of not only the credibility of the parties as witnesses or litigants but appreciation of the characters and personalities of them as people whose future relationship, or the context of that relationship with their child, the court has the responsibility to decide.  ] we agree with those observations. it follows from them that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to.
his honour and i am going to start with in the lead up to this court case, do you agree that you and [mr mulliner] had a good relationship?--- [ms riggs]: yes, i do. his honour: thank you. and that you caught up for lunches and dinners?--- [ms riggs]: on a very regular basis. yes. his honour: on a regular basis? ... [ms riggs]: very regular. like, i would say every second day. it was either dinner at my house, or dinner at his house. ... his honour: has it stopped?--- [ms riggs]: absolutely. his honour: yes. but when?---’ [ms riggs]: when? his honour: yes. when he started this court case, or before?--- [ms riggs]: no. before. his honour: okay. how old was [x], when it stopped?--- [ms riggs]: he would have been 10. his honour: 10?--- [ms riggs]: or near enough to 10. yes. his honour: okay. and when you caught up, including the lunches and dinners, you were civil to each other?--- [ms riggs]: more than civil.
confusion as to previous orders
mistrust of the parties
breakdown of relationship between parties
previous relationship of the parties
the family report
79. [mr mulliner] and [ms riggs] have equal shared parental responsibility of [x]. 80. [x] live with [ms riggs]. [mr mulliner] be afforded spend-time with [x] from wednesday after school to monday after school every other week, with thursday overnight contact to cease. when [x] transitions to high school, and should he consistently engage with therapeutic supports until this time to improve resilience and emotional regulation, spend-time with [mr mulliner] could be gradually and incrementally increased over time, until a week-about arrangement has been reached. 83. [ms riggs] and [x] remain in the [town b] area. [mr mulliner] and [ms riggs] attend a parenting program to assist them with gaining skills in therapeutic parenting to be able to provide a consistent approach to [x]’s care. 85. an online parenting app be utilised to aid communication between the parents. if the parents have not completed a parenting orders program (pop), this would be of benefit to assist them to co-parent more successfully, and especially to assist them to positively navigate disagreements or conflict. [x] continue to engage with a therapist on an approximately fortnightly basis.
fathers wedding with new partner
conclusion
associate: dated: 22 march 2024
dated: 22 march 2024
[1] in the oral reasons provisions and passages from authorities were not read out