last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
channing & channing [2024] fedcfamc2f 293
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:
background  w, born in 2004, (b) x, born in 2005, (c) y, born in 2009, and (d) z, born in 2012.   x, born in 2005, (c) y, born in 2009, and (d) z, born in 2012.   y, born in 2009, and (d) z, born in 2012.   z, born in 2012.
recusal application
relevant law  identification of what it is said might lead a judge to decide a case other than on its legal and factual merits, and (2) identify the logical connection between the matter and the feared deviation from the course of deciding the case on its merits.   identify the logical connection between the matter and the feared deviation from the course of deciding the case on its merits.   the decision-maker has an opinion on a relevant aspect of the matter in issue in the particular case, (2) the decision-maker will apply that opinion to that matter in issue, (3) the decision-maker will do so without giving the matter fresh consideration in the light of whatever may be the facts and arguments relevant to the particular case, and (4) the question which is said to have been prejudged is one which should be considered afresh in the particular case.   the decision-maker will apply that opinion to that matter in issue, (3) the decision-maker will do so without giving the matter fresh consideration in the light of whatever may be the facts and arguments relevant to the particular case, and (4) the question which is said to have been prejudged is one which should be considered afresh in the particular case.   the decision-maker will do so without giving the matter fresh consideration in the light of whatever may be the facts and arguments relevant to the particular case, and (4) the question which is said to have been prejudged is one which should be considered afresh in the particular case.   the question which is said to have been prejudged is one which should be considered afresh in the particular case.
the court’s questions of the father  page 241.23 – 241.33:
sure. but you’re a grown man, aren’t you?---yes, 100 per cent. yes. right. and [y] has been living with you even though there are orders in place for him to live with mum, and you haven’t done anything about ensuring that you comply with those court orders, correct?---that’s correct. okay. so how is that an action of a mature man? is it?---no. and how can i have any confidence that you will comply with any future court order?---i give my word to your honour.   page 244.20:
but you want to separate the two boys from their sisters, don’t you?---their sisters are at an age now where - - - you want to separate them, have them live in separate households, don’t you?---the – yes, your honour.   page 244.35 – 244.37:
do you see my conundrum?---yes, your honour. right. and if [y] runs away again like he did, do you think that it would help him stay with mum or not run away if there was an order in place that you be arrested if he comes to your house?---yes.   page 243.30 – 243.45:
mr gardiner: your honour, what your honour has done this morning is put to my client that – absence of any application or any proposal by the mother or the icl – that in your honour’s mind, it might be a useful thing to have a self-executing order placing him under arrest if something didn’t happen ultimately as a result of the orders that your honour finds, which is wholly unfair, in my submission. her honour: mr gardiner, can i tell you this. mr gardiner: and then - - - her honour: can i tell you this. the reason why i have done what i have done is because i am looking for ways to ensure that these children have a relationship with both of their parents...   page 254.8 – 254.17:
her honour: and what the father is proposing to do is in some respects going to be as difficult for the children because of what it will practically mean. so what i am exploring, and what i was trying to explore with [mr channing] – because he’s the one that’s very close to [y] – he’s the one that has the relationship with [y] that [y] doesn’t want to leave for, it seems to me, a number of reasons, and not just dad has been brainwashing him or dad is putting pressure on him. it’s clearly much more complex than that. i want to see if i can come up with a solution that sees these children – because these parents aren’t going to live forever – that sees these children having a relationship with each other...   page 255.1 – 255.18:
her honour: i was left trying to work out what the video actually showed. you didn’t ask mum any questions about what the video showed. you simply - - - mr gardiner: didn’t have to. her honour: no, you didn’t. mr gardiner: the police of new south wales - - - her honour: what the police - - - mr gardiner: - - - were satisfied that what was in this was entirely contrary to what the mother, [w] and [x] - - - her honour: the police aren’t here to give evidence, they’re not being cross-examined, and i don’t have to have any regard to an opinion of a police officer who looks like he wasn’t very much older than [w] when he interviewed her.
the father’s submissions  i inferentially understood that i had “crossed the line” because i had stated that i would recuse myself if an application were made, (b) i had formed a view adverse to the father’s position and set about to cross examine him regarding an allegation of family violence and potential orders of “the most draconian nature” so as to have some evidentiary foundation to reject the father’s case, and (c) i “entered the fray” in the proceedings rather than merely make enquiries and i put unreasonable propositions to the father in the context of having already criticised him.   i had formed a view adverse to the father’s position and set about to cross examine him regarding an allegation of family violence and potential orders of “the most draconian nature” so as to have some evidentiary foundation to reject the father’s case, and (c) i “entered the fray” in the proceedings rather than merely make enquiries and i put unreasonable propositions to the father in the context of having already criticised him.   i “entered the fray” in the proceedings rather than merely make enquiries and i put unreasonable propositions to the father in the context of having already criticised him.   i had already “cross examined” the father with a “‘clear intent” to neutralise the father’s criticisms of the mother in respect to the allegation of family violence the subject of the video which the father and the nsw police say was an allegation made without foundation, (b) i had already formed the view that the conduct did occur prior to submissions and without cross examination of the single expert witness, and (c) i canvassed potential ways in which the mother’s proposed orders could be affected including a three-month hiatus in which y spends no time with the father and a self-executing order that the father be arrested if y returns to live with him.   i had already formed the view that the conduct did occur prior to submissions and without cross examination of the single expert witness, and (c) i canvassed potential ways in which the mother’s proposed orders could be affected including a three-month hiatus in which y spends no time with the father and a self-executing order that the father be arrested if y returns to live with him.   i canvassed potential ways in which the mother’s proposed orders could be affected including a three-month hiatus in which y spends no time with the father and a self-executing order that the father be arrested if y returns to live with him.
the mother’s submissions
delay
no apprehended bias nterventionist comments or conduct by a judge will not unilaterally create an apprehension of bias in the mind of the reasonable lay observer, who is taken to understand that such interventions are often motivated by the judge’s desire to understand the evidence and to advance the trial process.
the icl’s submissions
determination
the context of the questions  where the two boys might go to school depending on where they were to live, (b) the daughters’ (lack of) attempts at seeing y, (c) the mother’s attempts at contacting y since he ran away in early 2022, (d) what the mother has done about ensuring the boys spend time together, and (e) a social media post of the mother.   the daughters’ (lack of) attempts at seeing y, (c) the mother’s attempts at contacting y since he ran away in early 2022, (d) what the mother has done about ensuring the boys spend time together, and (e) a social media post of the mother.   the mother’s attempts at contacting y since he ran away in early 2022, (d) what the mother has done about ensuring the boys spend time together, and (e) a social media post of the mother.   what the mother has done about ensuring the boys spend time together, and (e) a social media post of the mother.   a social media post of the mother.   the time that y had spent with the extended families, (b) the children’s bonds to each other and the father’s opinion about the importance of such bonds, (c) whether it was detrimental for y and z to not spend time with the mother or him respectively, (d) the father’s communication with the mother, (e) the circumstances surrounding the 18 february 2022 orders that y live with the mother and the steps the father had taken to comply with those orders, (f) whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   the children’s bonds to each other and the father’s opinion about the importance of such bonds, (c) whether it was detrimental for y and z to not spend time with the mother or him respectively, (d) the father’s communication with the mother, (e) the circumstances surrounding the 18 february 2022 orders that y live with the mother and the steps the father had taken to comply with those orders, (f) whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   whether it was detrimental for y and z to not spend time with the mother or him respectively, (d) the father’s communication with the mother, (e) the circumstances surrounding the 18 february 2022 orders that y live with the mother and the steps the father had taken to comply with those orders, (f) whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   the father’s communication with the mother, (e) the circumstances surrounding the 18 february 2022 orders that y live with the mother and the steps the father had taken to comply with those orders, (f) whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   the circumstances surrounding the 18 february 2022 orders that y live with the mother and the steps the father had taken to comply with those orders, (f) whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   whether the father had considered that y may feel sorry for the father and that this was the reason he wanted to remain living with the father, (g) whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   whether it would assist y to remain with the mother, if he is ordered on a final basis to live there, if there was an order that the father be arrested if y returns to him, and (h) whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.   whether the father thought that z might run away if he was to live with the father.
right. and if [y] runs away again like he did, do you think that it would help him stay with mum or not run away if there was an order in place that you be arrested if he comes to your house?---yes. mr gardiner: i’m sorry, your honour. i’m having a little difficulty with - - - her honour: that there is an automatic order in place that the police arrest the father if [y] returns to the house. mr gardiner: well, i’ve got a whole lot of difficulty with that, but that was never - - - her honour: you may have a lot of difficulty. i’m just asking the father about that proposition. i can certainly make that order. mr gardiner: well, i’m not suggesting that your honour doesn’t have the power to make the order. it’s the first - - - her honour: i just want to know how it is that i can ensure that whatever order i make, that these parties comply with it. mr gardiner: well, i know you’re - - - her honour: so i’m asking the father what he thinks the impact might be on [y] – whether that might stop him from running away? mr gardiner: well, you’re – with respect, you’re cross-examining my client about the fact of a self-executing order that places him in jail. her honour: i am asking him whether he thinks that that might - - - mr gardiner: in pretty unfair circumstances, with respect. with great respect, really? her honour: sure. mr gardiner - - - mr gardiner: anyway, i’ve said what i’ve said. her honour: you have.
so what do you say? would that maybe stop [y] from running away?---i don’t think it would stop him from running away, but it would stop him from coming to me, to protect me. so in those circumstances where you are quite concerned that [y] might run away, what do you think you could do to ensure that he didn’t if i was to make an order that he live with mum?---to be honest, your honour - - - you just don’t know?---yes. okay. if [z] comes to live with you – we all watched the video, and you say that’s not how he normally behaved, that was out of the usual. he hasn’t wanted to see you or hasn’t come to see you for some time, has he?---that’s correct. okay. and i think you’ve acknowledged that there might be some difficulties if he did come to live with you, right?---yes, your honour. what if he runs away?---i don’t believe [z] would have the inclination to run away. you don’t think that he would?---no. ...   exhibit 1 video 1 – cctv footage (being a video taken by a police officer of a screen which was displaying cctv facing the mother’s residence taken from another residence across the road) (“the video”), (b) exhibit 1 video 2 – cctv footage form a different angle (being a video taken by a police officer of a screen which was displaying cctv facing the mother’s residence taken from another residence across the road), (c) exhibit 1 video 3 – police interview with w, and (d) exhibit 1 video 4 – police interview with x.   exhibit 1 video 2 – cctv footage form a different angle (being a video taken by a police officer of a screen which was displaying cctv facing the mother’s residence taken from another residence across the road), (c) exhibit 1 video 3 – police interview with w, and (d) exhibit 1 video 4 – police interview with x.   exhibit 1 video 3 – police interview with w, and (d) exhibit 1 video 4 – police interview with x.   exhibit 1 video 4 – police interview with x.  r honour]: all right. mr gardiner, i’ve watched the video of the incident where the mother fell on the floor, and i will use those terms, when [z] was refusing to leave. i’ve watched it twice, once this morning and once yesterday afternoon. i’ve taken note of some times, and i wondered whether i play the video now and ask the father to concede certain things at particular times or whether he agrees or not about certain things being visible on the video, because nobody actually asked the mother any questions about it. so i’ve watched it. doing the best that i can, i think i know who’s there, but i’m not sure. or alternatively, you and mr batey and dr mcconaghy can have a discussion with reference to those times, and there could be an agreement about - - - mr gardiner: i’m content for your honour to watch – to have the video played again and to ask my client some questions about that. her honour: i – all right. thank you. so i will just play the whole video, and then i will go back, and i will just ask you about certain things that i observed, and i just want to have your view about it?---sure.
conclusion about apprehended bias
although it is important that justice must be seen to be done, it is equally important that judicial officers discharge their duty to sit and do not, by acceding too readily to suggestions of appearance of bias, encourage parties to believe that by seeking the disqualification of a judge, they will have their case tried by someone thought to be more likely to decide the case in their favour.
and:[17]
...if the mere making of an insubstantial objection were sufficient to lead a judge to decline to hear or decide a case, the system would soon reach a stage where, for practical purposes, individual parties could influence the composition of the bench. that would be intolerable.
... two things need to be remembered: the observer is taken to be reasonable, and the person being observed is “a professional judge whose training, tradition and oath or affirmation require [the judge] to discard the irrelevant, the immaterial and the prejudicial”
judges are not expected to wait until the end of a case before they start thinking about the issues, or to sit mute while evidence is advanced and arguments are presented. on the contrary, they will often form tentative opinions on matters in issue, and counsel are usually assisted by hearing those opinions, and being given an opportunity to deal with them.
where a complaint is made of excessive questioning or inappropriate comment, the appellate court must consider whether such interventions indicate that a fair trial has been denied to a litigant because the judge has closed his or her mind to further persuasion, moved into counsel’s shoes and “into the perils of self-persuasion”.
...what i am attempting to do is to work out what the facts of this case are. and just because a document has been tendered, that being the video, doesn’t mean that i have to accept the opinion of a police officer who’s not on oath, and i don’t know what he considered, what he viewed, whether he had any discussions with anybody. certainly, the father has just indicated that he has only seen the video now for the third time. and he seems to have accepted – according to [dr b’s] report, she’s critical of him for accepting that. in one sense, i want to give him the opportunity of saying, “well, hold on. maybe i was a little bit harsh,” or “no, i’m absolutely right. [w] was coerced.” i want to know what he is thinking and why he’s thinking the way that he is so that i can then work out what i consider to be in these children’s best interests based on fact.
knowledge of his or her own integrity can sometimes lead a judge to fail to appreciate that particular comments made in the course of a trial may wrongly convey to one or other of the parties to the litigation or to a lay observer an impression of bias.
appointment of single expert forensic psychiatrist
the father’s application  the parties jointly engage a forensic psychiatrist to provide a single expert report which would include an assessment of the mental health of the mother, including any diagnosis, her ability to care for the children and any recommendation as to treatment and an assessment of the mental health of z and any related treatment, or (b) an expert be appointed jointly to enquire and report upon matters relating to the welfare of y and z.   an expert be appointed jointly to enquire and report upon matters relating to the welfare of y and z.   nature of the relationship between the siblings, (b) likely effect of any change in circumstances, (c) capacity of the parents to meet the children’s needs, (d) whether the children are at risk of being, or have been, exposed to physical or psychological harm in either parents care, (e) family violence, (f) attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   likely effect of any change in circumstances, (c) capacity of the parents to meet the children’s needs, (d) whether the children are at risk of being, or have been, exposed to physical or psychological harm in either parents care, (e) family violence, (f) attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   capacity of the parents to meet the children’s needs, (d) whether the children are at risk of being, or have been, exposed to physical or psychological harm in either parents care, (e) family violence, (f) attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   whether the children are at risk of being, or have been, exposed to physical or psychological harm in either parents care, (e) family violence, (f) attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   family violence, (f) attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   attitudes of the parents, (g) effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   effect of the children spending substantial and significant time with each parent, and (h) views of the children.   views of the children.   the current expert, dr b, is a clinical psychologist, (b) dr b’s report is approximately 20 months old, and (c) this matter is particularly complex and the court would be best assisted by having an experienced forensic psychiatrist to give evidence.   dr b’s report is approximately 20 months old, and (c) this matter is particularly complex and the court would be best assisted by having an experienced forensic psychiatrist to give evidence.   this matter is particularly complex and the court would be best assisted by having an experienced forensic psychiatrist to give evidence.   the matter went part-heard, (b) time is not healing any wounds in the matter, (c) the parties have become more entrenched in their positions, and (d) the single expert, dr b, was not able to speak with one of the children.   time is not healing any wounds in the matter, (c) the parties have become more entrenched in their positions, and (d) the single expert, dr b, was not able to speak with one of the children.   the parties have become more entrenched in their positions, and (d) the single expert, dr b, was not able to speak with one of the children.   the single expert, dr b, was not able to speak with one of the children.   neither parent of the children have a current mental health diagnosis and there is not sufficient evidence to support the need for a psychiatric assessment of the mother, (b) it was not put to the mother under cross examination that she had a mental health condition, (c) dr b states that any therapy for the children will be up to each of them to decide when and if they are ready to undertake it, (d) the mother’s evidence is that z already attends upon a psychologist with such notes able to be subpoenaed, (e) further information regarding z’s current mental health could be elicited by way of further subpoena to his general practitioner, and (f) the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.   it was not put to the mother under cross examination that she had a mental health condition, (c) dr b states that any therapy for the children will be up to each of them to decide when and if they are ready to undertake it, (d) the mother’s evidence is that z already attends upon a psychologist with such notes able to be subpoenaed, (e) further information regarding z’s current mental health could be elicited by way of further subpoena to his general practitioner, and (f) the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.   dr b states that any therapy for the children will be up to each of them to decide when and if they are ready to undertake it, (d) the mother’s evidence is that z already attends upon a psychologist with such notes able to be subpoenaed, (e) further information regarding z’s current mental health could be elicited by way of further subpoena to his general practitioner, and (f) the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.   the mother’s evidence is that z already attends upon a psychologist with such notes able to be subpoenaed, (e) further information regarding z’s current mental health could be elicited by way of further subpoena to his general practitioner, and (f) the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.   further information regarding z’s current mental health could be elicited by way of further subpoena to his general practitioner, and (f) the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.   the father has not provided names, costs or availabilities of experts to the parties at the time of filing his application.
associate: dated: 7 march 2024
dated: 7 march 2024
[1] those orders incorrectly refer to the application being filed on 19 february 2024, this is when it was lodged for filing, but it was sealed on 20 february 2024. [2] johnson & johnson [2000] hca 48; (2000) 201 clr 488 at [11] (“johnson & johnson”); ebner v official trustee in bankruptcy [2000] hca 63 at [6] (“ebner”). [3] feldman v nationwide news pty ltd [2020] nswca 260; [2020] 103 nswlr 307 at [41] citing ebner.[4] ebner at [7].[5] ebner at [8].[6] ebner at [8].[7] minister for immigration & multicultural affairs v jia legeng [2001] hca 17.[8] vakuata & kelly [1989] hca 44; [1989] 167 clr 568 (“vakuata & kelly”).[9] ebner at [8].[10] [2021] nswca 23 at [46(xii)].[11] edinger & duy [2023] fedcfamc1a 194 at [21] citing galea v galea (1990) 19 nswlr 263 at 281-282 (“galea”).[12] t:58-63.[13] t:55.5-11.[14] t237-247.[15] t:244.35 – 245.27.[16] re jrl; ex parte cjl [1986] hca 39; (1986) 161 clr 342 at 352 (per mason j) (“re jrl; ex parte cjl”).[17] ebner at [20].[18] ebner at [20].[19] saklani & valder [2023] fedcfamc1a 163 (“saklani & valder”) at [31] citing johnson & johnson at [12].[20] johnson &johnson at [13].[21] johnson &johnson at [13].[22] nuan & lei [2023] fedcfamc1a 211 at [15] citing galea at 281.[23] r v watson; ex parte armstrong [1976] hca 39; (1976) 136 clr 248 at 263, as cited in johnson & johnson at [12].[24] johnson & johnson at [14].[25] t:254.5-15.[26] t:258.46-47.[27] vakuata v kelly at [4] (per brennan, deane and gaudron jj).[28] saklani & valnder at [32] citing ebner at [7].[29] saklani & valnder at [32] citing re jrl; ex parte cjl at 352.