last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
payne & east (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 377
orders
the court orders that
time with the father
restraints  endeavouring to ascertain the residential address of the mother and children and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf. (b) attending the children’s school/s or any extracurricular activities attended by the children and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf. (c) approaching the mother and children’s residence and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf.   attending the children’s school/s or any extracurricular activities attended by the children and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf. (c) approaching the mother and children’s residence and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf.   approaching the mother and children’s residence and permitting, causing, or authorising an agent to do so on his behalf.
passports and travel
other
final property orders  first to discharge mortgage no. ... to bank f (“the mortgage”). (b) second to pay any costs, commissions, and advertising expenses of the sale. (c) the remaining balance to be applied as follows: (i) a sum equal to 40% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the father. (ii) a sum equal to 60% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the mother.   second to pay any costs, commissions, and advertising expenses of the sale. (c) the remaining balance to be applied as follows: (i) a sum equal to 40% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the father. (ii) a sum equal to 60% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the mother.   the remaining balance to be applied as follows: (i) a sum equal to 40% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the father. (ii) a sum equal to 60% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the mother.   a sum equal to 40% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the father. (ii) a sum equal to 60% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the mother.  ) a sum equal to 60% of the remaining proceeds of sale to the mother.   the father have sole use and occupation of the property, (b) the father pay all mortgage repayments to the effect that the balance outstanding does not increase beyond the sum of $285,000, rates and outgoings for the property as and when they fall due, (c) the father be restrained from further encumbering the property and/or drawing on the existing mortgage facility without the consent in writing of the mother. (d) the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the father pay all mortgage repayments to the effect that the balance outstanding does not increase beyond the sum of $285,000, rates and outgoings for the property as and when they fall due, (c) the father be restrained from further encumbering the property and/or drawing on the existing mortgage facility without the consent in writing of the mother. (d) the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the father be restrained from further encumbering the property and/or drawing on the existing mortgage facility without the consent in writing of the mother. (d) the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the parties hold their respective interests in the property upon trust pursuant to these orders.   the motor vehicle 2 in her possession, and (b) funds standing to her credit in any bank accounts in her name. (c) the chattels and furniture in her possession.   funds standing to her credit in any bank accounts in her name. (c) the chattels and furniture in her possession.   the chattels and furniture in her possession.   m bank credit card account ending #...91 - ($8,000) (b) m bank visa account ending #...05 – ($8,000) (c) n bank mastercard account ending #...47 – ($2,500)   m bank visa account ending #...05 – ($8,000) (c) n bank mastercard account ending #...47 – ($2,500)   n bank mastercard account ending #...47 – ($2,500)   the business trading as h pty ltd, (b) motor vehicle 3 in his possession, and (c) funds standing to his credit in any bank accounts in his name. (d) chattels and furniture in his possession.   motor vehicle 3 in his possession, and (c) funds standing to his credit in any bank accounts in his name. (d) chattels and furniture in his possession.   funds standing to his credit in any bank accounts in his name. (d) chattels and furniture in his possession.   chattels and furniture in his possession.
superannuation splitting orders  mr east is the member spouse – member number ... (“the member spouse”), (b) ms payne is the non-member spouse (“the non-member spouse”), (c) super fund 1 is the superannuation fund (“the superannuation fund”), (d) super fund 2 is the trustee company (“trustee”)   ms payne is the non-member spouse (“the non-member spouse”), (c) super fund 1 is the superannuation fund (“the superannuation fund”), (d) super fund 2 is the trustee company (“trustee”)   super fund 1 is the superannuation fund (“the superannuation fund”), (d) super fund 2 is the trustee company (“trustee”)   super fund 2 is the trustee company (“trustee”)   the establishment of a separate account in the name of the non-member spouse in the superannuation fund, or (b) the transfer or “rolling over” into another superannuation fund of the payment split which was created by this order hereof, (c) there is a satisfaction of a condition of release and payment of a payment split which was created by this order hereof, (d) an execution of a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90mza of the family law act in relation to the payment split created by this order hereof,   the transfer or “rolling over” into another superannuation fund of the payment split which was created by this order hereof, (c) there is a satisfaction of a condition of release and payment of a payment split which was created by this order hereof, (d) an execution of a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90mza of the family law act in relation to the payment split created by this order hereof,   there is a satisfaction of a condition of release and payment of a payment split which was created by this order hereof, (d) an execution of a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90mza of the family law act in relation to the payment split created by this order hereof,   an execution of a waiver of rights within the meaning of section 90mza of the family law act in relation to the payment split created by this order hereof,
the member spouse be and is hereby restrained by himself, his servants or agents from executing a death benefit nomination in favour of any person or doing any other act or thing which would render any part of his interest in the superannuation fund a “non-splittable” payment within the meaning of regulation 12 or 13 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001 and the member spouse revoke any death benefit nominations currently executed in favour of any person other than the non-member spouse and execute forthwith a death benefit nomination in favour of the non-member spouse.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses in action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders. (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank accounts be divided equally and the accounts then closed. (c) save as provided herein each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank accounts be divided equally and the accounts then closed. (c) save as provided herein each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   save as provided herein each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgmentres tempore
introduction
respondent not seeing the children
decision of no time
background
the first proceedings
respondent imprisoned and released after serving sentence
orders each party seeks
orders sought by the icl. the mother have sole parental responsibility in respect of the children [x] born [in] 2015 and [y] born [in] 2017.
2. the children live with the mother. the father spend time with the children as determined by the court, after considering any risk factors presented by the father. 4. the father attend and complete a men’s behaviour change program. the father continue to attend upon his psychologist and accept all their reasonable directions. that in the event that the father’s time is supervised, the court consider a review of this matter in 3 to 6 months. 7. the father attend upon a psychiatrist for review of his medication
mr hale: ...the icl particularly says that we don’t want to start supervised [time]if there’s absolutely no prospect of going to unsupervised, but, at this stage, particularly bearing in mind the wishes of the children, and not just the wishes of the children, but the right of the children to know their father and his extended family, at this stage it’s a process worth trying. even if it doesn’t proceed, [ms p] has adverted to the identification aspect and indicated that if, at the very least, there ought be some identification visits on six occasions a year from memory. so, in the icls respectful submission, yes, it’s – there’s no guarantee that it would proceed to supervised, but, at this stage, it’s worth trying and it’s not that there’s simply no prospect that it could ever become unsupervised. and one can speculate that, if [the respondent] were to engage with a psychiatrist and gain greater insights into his mental health issues, and the like, then there’s a real prospect of there being fulfilling time between him and the children.
his honour: ...ms paterson, mr hale’s “let’s have some supervision and see how that goes,” is there any view that, contrary to if i did do supervision, what that’s going to show is [x] and [y] would be likely to interact well with their father? ms paterson: they’re likely to, yes. his honour: yes. and, hence, at the end of whether it’s four or six or ten visits, we would know what we know now?... ms paterson: yes. they’re likely to have a good time. his honour: yes. ms paterson: and there might be some difficulties with the administration of it, but that will be contained to his - - - his honour: yes. but the issue is, is it safe for the children? is it safe for [ms payne]? is it safe for the children’s relationship with [the applicant]? ms paterson: yes, if it’s – yes. his honour: all right. and your case is there’s an unacceptable risk, or rather in blunt terms it’s not safe? ms paterson: yes. that’s right. and no amount of carefully choreographed supervision even at a contact centre is sufficient to mitigate that risk. his honour: and mr hale’s case says, “look, give [the respondent] a chance to get his case in order,” to do the psychologist, to do the psychiatrist, etcetera. you say you press for final orders and that i make final orders on the state of the evidence as it is. ms paterson: correct. his honour: and that if [the respondent]... does all the things that mr hale and the icl says he should do, that it would be a different case? ms paterson: of course it would, and that it would have to be assessed on its merits at the time.
orders sought by the applicant
orders sought by the respondent.
the current proceedings
interim proceedings and current orders
interim parenting orders[4] 1. that the parenting orders made on 2 september 2021 be discharged. that until further order, the mother, [the applicant] [ms payne] (‘the mother’), have sole parental responsibility for the children [x] ... and [y] (‘the children’). 3. that the children live with the mother. that until further order, the father be restrained from spending time or communicating with the children. that the mother be excused from providing her and the children’s current and future address and contact details to the father with such details to remain confidential. that the parties have liberty to apply for the parents and the children to attend upon a court appointed child expert for the purpose of preparation of a full family report if they deem it necessary for the progression of this matter. that the independent children’s lawyer do all acts and things to cause and arrange for the father to be psychiatrically assessed by an expert psychiatrist (‘the psychiatrist’), and it is requested that such assessment be funded by victoria legal aid in the first instance. ... that the mother has leave to make an application to proceed on an undefended basis in the event that the father does not file documents in accordance with these orders. parenting - other ... that the independent children’s lawyer forthwith provide by email to the father and by email and ordinary post to the father care of his lawyers retained in criminal proceedings, the following documents within seven (7) days of these interim orders on condition that the father only uses these documents for the purposes of this proceeding and subject to the injunctions made in these orders: (the cir and documents provided by dffh and a copy of the orders) ... interim property orders 21. that regarding the property at [‘the frh’]: 60 days prior to the trial date, the parents to all things necessary obtain an updated valuation of the property from the firm known as [e company], the cost of such valuation to be paid initially by the mother and adjusted at a final settlement. in the event that the father fails to facilitate entry to [the frh] when requested to, the valuer be permitted to revalue the property based on the criteria listed in the valuation report dated [mid]-2021, ... (emphasis added)
the final hearing
application for undefended hearing refused
ms paterson: [on 6 july 2022 the court made] ...a discretionary order at that stage for the 102na provisions to apply. and your honour... at that stage listed the matter for trial on 20 april 2023, and you made trial directions which included an order for the parties to file material. the respondent was to file material within 28 days of the trial date, and you made an order that if he failed to do so, the applicant could seek leave to proceed undefended. the father did not comply with those orders and directions for filing documents... but, in any event, the court vacated... that trial date. the order to vacate the trial date was made on 20 march 2023, and the matter was re-listed for 25 september 2023 for four days. that’s the second trial date... and ... ms paterson: so... this is the third time the matter has come before the court for a trial. it was to have a special fixture before you in september, and the main reason for the trial date being vacated and adjourned to today was the fact that the psychiatric report still hadn’t been completed and released. the interviews had happened several months prior to that, but the father had not attended to payment of the report. he, in fact, has now done that, and the report was only released on 10 january. but for his failure to do that, in my submission, the matter could have proceeded to hearing on 25 september... ... ms paterson: and so...when the matter came before you on 11 september, which was when you vacated the 25 september trial date, you made orders for the father to file and serve any amended response trial affidavit, financial statement by no later than 4 pm on 4 december. he hasn’t done that. ... but in any event, the only material that he has filed is material that is woefully out of date... ... his honour: and is one of your points, if you proceed undefended, there’s a prospect of concluding at least this part of the case today. ms paterson: yes. ...
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:  the nature of the cause of action or defence, and the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and the gravity of the matters alleged.
reliability of the parents’ evidence ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
some significant events & controversies
respondent first diagnosed by dr.s back in 2013
start of de facto relationship in 2014
8. there are two (2) children of the relationship: (a) [x] born [in] 2015 (almost 6 years), and (b) [y] born [in] 2017 (aged 3 years) (“the children”). from [late] 2019 to [late] 2020 the children lived with [the applicant] and i on an equal shared care basis by way of an informal agreement. [the applicant] has refused to allow me to see the children since this time.   [x] born [in] 2015 (almost 6 years), and (b) [y] born [in] 2017 (aged 3 years) (“the children”).   [y] born [in] 2017 (aged 3 years) (“the children”).
late 2019 incident
mr hale: do you agree that there had certainly been a gastro sort of thing going on in the household, with him and the kids?--- the applicant: not at that time, no mr hale: you think it was a ruse simply to get you there?--- the applicant: he was definitely insistent that i come, because he’s also an adult and able to look after himself, and should be able to look after his children at the same time.
his honour” you get there. there’s discussion between you. you go to leave with the children?— the applicant: mmm. his honour: which is what he originally requested?--- the applicant: yes. his honour,: but at this point he has changed his mind - - -?--- the applicant: yes. his honour: and doesn’t want you to leave with the children?--- the applicant: wants me to stay. his honour: wants you to stay. takes [y] from you and [assaults you]?- the applicant: he locked me in the house. his honour: okay?--- the applicant: and, yes, essentially, we were having an argument, quite close quarters to each other, and i had [y] in my arms. his honour: yes?--- the applicant: and he ripped him out of my arms. yes. his honour: right. and so no [assault]?--- the applicant: yes. sorry. then, yes, the altercation moved to an open living space, where there was a scuffle, including [an assault]. his honour: yes, but you didn’t [assault him]?--- the applicant: god no. his honour: yes. he [assaulted you]?--- the applicant: yes.
mr hale: yes, and that’s the last occasion there was a physical incident – there was physical abuse of you by [the respondent]?--- the applicant: yes. there – it was not a common or consistent thing, and i’ve never claimed that he’s – has – he has done that more than once. mr hale: okay. so that was the one occasion there was physical abuse of you by [the respondent]?--- the applicant” i would say there was an altercation. yes. i wouldn’t really call it abuse. it was an incident. mr hale: okay?--- the applicant: to me, abuse is a consistent kind of thing. mr hale: well, i - - -?--- the applicant: i guess it’s subjective, though.
late 2020 text messages
i cannot have the kids until further notice. if you want to talk. you are welcome to call me.
you have no idea what you have done to me inside i'm dead! i'm checking out [the applicant]! hopefully the borders are open in the next week or 2 and i'm going to [...] and staying with dad for a while... i can't do shit and while there's a ivo it's all your responsibility. i'll have the kids when i can. i will not be committing to anything for the next 13 months. you do what ever you want!
late 2020/ early 2021 respondent’s allegations investigated
a further report was received [in early] 2021 which raised concerns for [x] and [y]'s safety when in the care of [the applicant] as it was alleged that she was abusing illicit substances. child protection note that these concerns were raised in the most recent intervention and were not substantiated. it was also alleged that the children's emotional wellbeing was being impacted given they had not had contact with their father, [the respondent]. the child protection assessment drew attention to the concerns for [the respondent] perpetrating family violence which had recently been investigated and substantiated by child protection between [late] 2020 and [early] 2021. child protection assessed there to be concern for the pattern of family violence perpetrated by [the respondent] towards [the applicant]. child protection substantiated these concerns and assessed [the respondent] as responsible for harm on [x] and [y]. child protection had recently assessed that [x] and [y] would be at risk of experiencing harm whilst having contact with [the respondent] and a recommendation was made that it would be in their best interests to have only supervised contact with [the respondent].  te] 2020 – [early] 2021, protective intervention, concerns substantiated [in late] 2020, child protection received a report in relation to the safety and wellbeing of [x] and [y] who currently reside in the primary care of [the applicant]. the reported information identified there is a current intervention order in place wits [the applicant] and the children listed as protected persons. the information indicated that [the respondent] had been having contact with the children however [the applicant] has since ceased this contact and is no longer permitting it. concerns were raised that [the applicant] may be misusing substances given her posts on social media. further concerns raised that [the applicant] may be having men come to the home and is suspected to have a boyfriend who is a drug dealer. [in late] 2020, child protection attended the family home and interviewed [the applicant] who vocalized her suspicions that the report had been made by [the respondent] regardless of child protection advising the identity of the reporter cannot be disclosed. [the applicant] disclosed [the respondent] had committed significant family violence against her. [the applicant] disclosed that [the respondent] had grabbed her by the throat and dragged her in front of [x] and [y]. [the applicant] disclosed that [the respondent] had been financially controlling, emotionally abusive, and physically abusive towards her and that he had breached the current intervention order 23 times in [late] 2020 alone. [the applicant] expressed she had not ceased contact between the children and [the respondent] as reported, rather [the respondent] had been unwilling to see the children due to his mental health. [the applicant] denied she was involved in substance misuse and denied allegations that her boyfriend was a drug dealer. child protection interviewed [x] who made disclosures that she had observed [the respondent] grab [the applicant]’s phone, observed him hurt [the applicant] and making her bleed. [x] disclosed no concerns about [the applicant]. [in late] 2020, child protection interviewed [the respondent], who disclosed his concerns that [the applicant] is using drugs along with her boyfriend however was unable to provide information as to these concerns. child protection spoke to [the respondent] in relation to the concerns for his use of family violence, and [the respondent] denied these stating that his relationship with [the applicant] was a “fairy tale relationship” where there was no violence involved. [the respondent] stated that they were a loving family together and that [the applicant] ended the relationship [the respondent] denied any previous or current family violence and alleged that [the applicant] had been violent towards him. [the respondent] denied any substance misuse however acknowledged having mental health issues including anxiety and post-traumatic stress. during the intervention, [the applicant] engaged with child protection and submitted evidence of ongoing breaches of the intervention order that [the respondent] was committing. child protection later spoke to [the respondent] [in early] 2021 and raised concerns for [the respondent] persistently breaching the intervention order and perpetrating family violence and harassment towards [the applicant]. [the respondent] acknowledged he had been sending harassing messages to [the applicant]. [the respondent] was assessed to lack very limited insight into his behaviour and was unable to acknowledge his use of violence. [the respondent] stated to child protection on one occasion that [ms payne] had “escalated it to this point”. when child protection read out some of the language used in [the respondent]’s breaches, he stated “she got me to this point”. child protection attempted to challenge [the respondent] and hold him accountable and recommended he engage in family violence supports to address his behaviour and to create a safe environment for the children. during the intervention, it was alleged that [the applicant] had been using illicit substances. child protection investigated this and did not substantiate these concerns. [the applicant] submitted drug screens during the intervention which were negative of any illicit substances. the period of protective intervention closed [in early] 2021 with [x] and [y] residing in the primary care of [the applicant].
final orders for regular time made by consent
5. the children spend time and communicate with the father as follows:   in each fortnight: in week 1 from the conclusion of school on friday until 5 pm on sunday, and in week 2 from the conclusion of school until 7 pm (with the father to return the children to the changeover location at [z store]) on any one weekday upon providing the mother with at least 24 hours’ notice in writing.
... (provisions for special occasions to be shared) ... (g) for half of all school term holidays... (h) in the long summer school holidays on a week about basis...   for half of all school term holidays... (h) in the long summer school holidays on a week about basis...   in the long summer school holidays on a week about basis...
offer of property settlement late 2021 emails
too late now. your greediness and selfish acts have now made its worse...
section 131 exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiations   evidence is not to be adduced of (a) a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute, or (b) a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute. (2) subsection (1) does not apply if:   a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute, or (b) a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.   a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.
... (e) the evidence tends to contradict or to qualify evidence that has already been admitted about the course of an attempt to settle the dispute, or ... (g) evidence that has been adduced in the proceedings, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence ...  the evidence tends to contradict or to qualify evidence that has already been admitted about the course of an attempt to settle the dispute, or   evidence that has been adduced in the proceedings, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence
why did we get a parenting agreement for?...
early 2021 ‘war’ email
so you have declared war have you?... ...
think very wisely! let me see my children! it's that simple. i will retreat instantly! and life will be good! if you continue this path. it's war! the end!!! all out war! do not take all i have left in this world. my god dam f-----g flesh and blood. very scary scenario when you take everything a man has left! there are 2 options here! you choose!! let that sink in for a minute!
...
applicant issues proceedings
dr s report
dear... i am writing to you with regard to the specific questions in your letter dated on [early] 2021 how long [the respondent]has been your patient [the respondent]has come to see me since 2013 [mr east]’s diagnosis (mental health condition only) [mr east]’s diagnosis is: [a mental illness] [mr east]’s current and recommended treatment ... medications: [mr east]’s compliance to the medication is good. he is asked to continue current treatment for the foreseeable future. in your professional opinion, whether [the respondent]is medically fit to care for the children? [mr east]’s mental health has been well managed with oral medications over the past year. in my opinion, he is medically fit to care for his children at this stage. ...
his honour: that’s your evidence, is it, that you have no psychiatric history?--- [the respondent]: ...i’ve taken antidepressant, but the psychiatric, bipolar, or whatever you want to call it, was diagnosed by a gp. he was actually underqualified to give that assumption and the prognosis was null and void. and the prognosis that i’ve been given from [dr r][14] isn’t [a mental illness] or any kind of personality disorders. and i must note, i’ve never been to a psychiatric treatment facility before either. taken antidepressant, that’s it, for a bit of depression. his honour: all right. so in your affidavit[15] - - -?--- the respondent: yes, i realise that i said i had [a mental illness]. his honour: yes, you said you had [a mental illness]?--- the respondent: yes, i did. exactly right. and at the time i believed i did. i mean, i was seeing – i was seeing [dr s]. i no longer – i do see him for other things, but i don’t see him for my mental stuff any more, except to get my regular pills. at the time i was led to believe and with [the applicant] telling me that i was mental and everyone telling me, you know, “there must be something wrong with you.” i was led to believe that i, you know, i think they call it gaslighting. you know, they make you think you’ve got the problem and you think that you’ve got the – the disorder. it turns out i was just... a little bit sad and i just needed a bit of help and needed to see a psychologist, and which i’ve been doing. i take some regular medication and i feel great. so that’s... that one.
the respondent: i had a mental health issue, if you want to call it that, called depression, based on the way i was being treated at home and my ex-partner, [the applicant], being [a drug addict] and being on drugs all the time and me trying to run a business and trying to, you know, defend myself from day to day and without being gaslighted all the time, and, you know, after a while, when your partner is not coming home at night and she’s sleeping with other people and taking drugs and stealing your money, it gets pretty depressing. and if you want to read my affidavit, it’s all in there.
another child protection investigation of the applicant
ms u (mr east]-4 report mid-2021
... firstly, [the respondent] was referred to [aa psychology] by [dr s] of [bb medical clinic] in [early] 2020. secondly, [dr s] referred him for assistance with symptoms of anxiety and depression, with a background diagnosis made six years ago of [a mental illness]. this condition had been stable for some years but the depressive component has been activated by his recent marital breakdown. thirdly, in relation to psychological treatment, [the respondent]has been having regular counselling sessions since [early] last year and has attended 17 appointments. sessions focused on assisting him with anxiety management strategies, worked on ongoing review with the aim of closure in relationship breakdown and also provided education and support with separated parenting management. in this process he showed a preparedness to look at his own behaviour [and] also a concern for his ex-partner’s wellbeing. i would recommend continuation of the two to three weekly counselling as he adjusts to regular access arrangements. finally, in response to the request of an assessment of [mr east]’s medical fitness to parent his children, i can only comment as psychologist. i have no knowledge of his medical fitness. as a psychologist and based on the work we have done, i think [the respondent]is fit to parent his children. his reporting of the periods of access he has had with his children over the last 12 months have always indicated good understanding of his children’s needs, preparedness to be flexible in his dealing with his ex-partner and definite enjoyment of warmth being with his kids. my understanding that his medication is well monitored and that he has progressed significantly in understanding and reducing his symptoms of anxiety and depression since his referral [early] last year. he also uses lifestyle and exercise strategies to assist in managing daily pressures. he is in a stable relationship and has his partner’s unqualified support and assistance in caring for the children. he has also agreed to participate in a men’s behaviour change group grogram which will provide him with additional techniques to manage calculation and difficult situations. as such, [the respondent]appears to take his parental responsibilities seriously and is very willing to work constructively with his ex-partner for the well bring(sic)[18] of his two children. ...
the respondent’s conduct with the maternal grandparents
early 2022 mr q texts the respondent
the concerns for [the respondent’s] perpetration of family violence have recently been investigated and substantiated by child protection (between [late] 2020 and [early] 2021). child protection have recently assessed that [x] and [y] would be at risk of experiencing harm whilst having contact with their father therefore child protection assessed that it would be in their best interests that the father’s contact be supervised.
ms v, or not: [early] 2022 text messages plicant], please don't call me a fool or tell me i'm being lied to or played...
respondent abuse to paternal grandfather early 2022
''truly don't give a f--- about anyone or anything anymore. i will keep going like a robot [mr w], you will need to f----- kill me, i swear i will destroy her career. i will shame her. i will make sure your family's name is dirt as well as destroy your business and take everything from you ... .just like everything has been taken from me." “don't even think for 1 min this is a f----- joke. i'm not a violent man [mr w]. but i'll get you were it hurts over the next 20 years. then i'll piss on your grave once you die of a heart attack because you worked your whole life for nothing” “i suggest you shut the f--- up. get your women into order. grow some f------ balls and call me. we need to chat. if you can't bring yourself to call me. write me a letter. meet me for coffee. do something don't just avoid and be a sly dog like you have been and do nothing. all you had to do you stupid old b------ was to talk to me. why the f--- didn't you just say something. your just hid and ignored and hoped it would all go away. it's not going away [mr w]. you can't hide from this one.” “i owe you and your family nothing. you have already cost me over $***k for nothing. nothing mate. but ill gladly piss the house up against the wall and make sure [the applicant] gets nothing anyway which will also make you get nothing. i don't give a f---. do vou? how much do vou give a f--- about your daughter?”
text message from respondent early 2022
please. just stop it now. it's over...
respondent has mr q’s registration
got [...’s][26] rego to. i’ll be making a visit soon and putting out the word. makjng making sure he knows well and truly never to raise his voice again in front of my children. that actually is f----- considering all thing. i hope he’s ready to meet me, ill have a influence he wont forget.
applicant does not allow respondent to see children (early 2022 emails)
excuse me. i haven't abused you at all...
i actually can't even believe that your going to pull this stunt again!...
you did didn't you [applicant]?...
and to think that even if you do think i have mental health issues...
respondent asserts he is seeing the children (early 2022 email)
good afternoon [payne] family. i'm giving you 24hrs notice as per our family parenting plan that is court ordered...
respondent meets with the children’s school (early 2022 email)
... good to see you have updated everyone with our parent agreement...
email to the applicant from ‘insider who dislikes women’
this has nothing to do with your relationship or the fact you don't like [respondent]. who cares [applicant].
“i’m coming to see you...”
? i'm coming to see you [applicant]. whether you like it or not...
applicant obtains ivo, and correspondence thereafter
that's all lies. i never did that...
it's not effective yet btw...
more threats & abuse
just thought i'd treat myself and get a couple of h---- to compliment my [hotel room]. actually the business might take one for the team. gotta "conference" to go to. you know how it is .. employee entertainment once every 6 months. gotta spend all that extra money i got now since your not getting a settlement and its the financial year in a few months [emoji] going to be fun. have a good weekend. i know i will
early 2022 online id recovery
x’s sports event ([early] 2022 email)
there ya go. coz i know you didn't get any ...
applicant makes children available to respondent (early 2022 email)
respondent withholds children early 2022
anyway moving on. the souls purpose of this email is to inform you that im taking responsibility of our children's needs until further notice. they are not safe with you [applicant]. i don't trust you.
respondent arrested while withholding the children
the respondent: well, when your kids come to you, telling you that there – there’s a violent man that has been coming to the house – and they could even name his name, [mr ad]. apparently, he was abusing mummy. as he was leaving the house, he – apparently, he even broke the – the camera at the front porch. when – when mummy tried to tell this person that there was a camera watching, you know, he’s – he – he apparently swore at her and broke the camera and drove off, and, you know – and i – i end up giving the kids back that time, but made some concerns and [the applicant] just wouldn’t have it. basically, it was none of my business and, you know, i should, you know, keep out of who – who she sees, and just didn’t want to talk about it. the following fortnight, the kids were still telling me things. basically, they were – you know, mummy just lives in her room all the time and – really [x]. like [the applicant] says, [x] is so verbal and so with it, she’s like a 12 year old, even though she’s eight. it’s incredible. she notices so much, and she was scared and she didn’t want to go home, and – and i said, “well, you don’t have to go home, sweetheart. you can stay here,” and – and that’s what i did.
respondent stating the maternal family have destroyed the childrens lives (early 2022 emails)
you have destroyed your known kids lives
that's all i wanted. be amicable. let me be involved let me be a dad. and you go to these lengths to ruin my family!...
respondent’s knowledge of the messaging group
your so in denial abiut all this. u think i'm just trying to defame her i not when there's like 20 people saying it! wouk's u like to see a few videos of [applicant] [using drugs]? iv got a fe there? which will be passed into dhs tomorrow! your loosing her kids [the applicant]. i'm going to make sure of itl you have complete screwed your selfl there is no option. if i can't have them i no one will understand me as the group says. you vile sloot (emphasis added)
fake social media page
his honour: so he made a duplicate [social media] page?--- the applicant: yes. his honour: yes?--- the applicant: using my name. his honour: yes?--- the applicant: and stating my place of employment, and then used the photographs, yes. his honour: and this is after separation?--- the applicant: mmm. ... his honour: okay. so he used photographs and – one photograph?--- the applicant: i think there were two or three. his honour: and these were photographs taken of you during your relationship or - - -?--- the applicant: i believe so. i don’t actually recall them ever being taken, and i had never seen them before. his honour: or were they fake photographs?--- the applicant: i’m pretty sure they were real. his honour: okay?--- the applicant: they were really of someone. i believe that they were of me. ... his honour: how long did that fake website then stay up?--- the applicant: i’m not sure, but it wasn’t long. it wouldn’t have been more than 48 hours. his honour: okay?--- the applicant: they’re quite vigilant on that sort of protection online. his honour: all right. and did anyone at [your workplace] discuss this with you? the applicant: some of my immediate work colleagues did, but nobody that his honour: not the hierarchy? the applicant: no. thank goodness. ... his honour: and how did you find out about the fake [social media] page?--- the applicant: i actually got a notification in my emails to – to tell me that someone had tried to connect with me in my network, because that’s what it does. his honour: and then you go into it, and then you saw it yourself? the applicant: yes
mid-2022 and lead up to court emails
thank you for that, however lam not interested in any part of proceeding...
i understand that however the federal family law agreement overides any victorian ivo. the ivo is not valid.
you honestly think i'm going to agree with anything to do with your client your got another thing coming.
i need a update please with the family law. are we both withdrawing or what? also ivo application. do i need to prepare or is it going ahead. ? i need confirmation by 4pm pls otherwise it might be too late.
... in person and post is what i will be electing to do if [ applicant] would like to continue.
all this is going to do is end up being 50/50 anyway!...
... i will not be sending correspondence via registered post, as this will unnecessarily increase my client's costs and delay proceedings...
i'm sorry. but registered post is my right and i wish to use that right. your clients costs are not my concern, nor my business.
11 may 2022 court hearing, orders and text/emails continue
i'm just letting you know i'm having some technical difficulties this morning. i apologise. lam representing myself due to financial issues. i cannot afford a lawyer.
the court orders that: the respondent file and serve a response to the amended initiating application filed by the applicant on 9 may 2022 by no later than 4.00pm on 25 may 2022. the respondent file and serve an affidavit in response to the affidavit filed by the applicant on 9 may 2022 by no later than 4.00pm on 25 may 2022. pursuant to section 68l of the family law act 1975 (cth) an independent children’s lawyer is appointed for the children:   [x] born [in] 2015, and (b) [y] born [in] 2017. ...
8. pursuant to section 62g of the family law act 1975 (cth), the parties and [x] ... and [y] ...are directed to attend with a court child expert ...for the purposes of the preparation of a child impact report... part 1 of the event will occur by video, using microsoft teams, on 16 june 2022 with:   the applicant to attend at 9.00am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am. ...
part 2 of the event will occur in person at the melbourne registry on the morning of 23 june 2022... pursuant to section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth) is it requested that the department of families, fairness and housing (the department) provide to the court by 4.00 pm on 1 june 2022... any notifications to the department of suspected abuse of or of suspected family violence affecting [the children] the matter be adjourned for an interim defended hearing in relation to parenting matters on 6 july 2022 at 10.00am. ...
ok. i'm prepared to give one last attempt to mediate and sort this out in-house...
of course i have a lawyer. i have the best lawyer in melbourne...
this whole issue is about [the applicant]. not our kids.
i really just don’t understand why all keep f----- with me
you withdraw i withdraw! its as simple as that! if you want me to waste more money and shame with you with my own affidavit, then cut you again i will.
well your lawyer is shit! still om a budget i see! did u see me on the big stage?...
regardless of any order! ill always tell [x] the truth!...
if you want to steal this house...
this the shit i'm talking about! inconsiderate and deliberately trying to not include me!...
for that attitude and abuse that i recorded on my phone don't expect the kids back on sunday!...
i have here documents. photos, text messages. emails. the works. i can destroy your dignity once and for all...
so.. am i filing this affidavit and destroying your dignity once and for all ?..
i refer to six very concerning emails that my client received from you since she filed her last affidavit, the latest sent to her at 6.22pm last night....
my kids are number one and truth is i don’t care for what any piece of paper saids...
fyi - you think im f------ around missy?? i'm dead set! i'm taking every f----- out! i dont give a f--- and i'm making noise! i'll be on the ducking news soon!!
respondent is incarcerated until late 2022
mid-2022 incident
ms paterson: yes. all right. so [mid-2022] you appear by telecourt and the matter is adjourned?--- the respondent: yes. ms paterson: and on that day the – when you were in the room that’s set up for the telecourt, when the prison officers entered that room, they did so after they had heard a commotion in the room and they found that you had punched a hole in one of the walls, do you agree with that?--- the respondent: that’s – no, i don’t. absolutely not correct. no, i don’t agree with that at all. it wouldn’t say that. ms paterson: and as a - - -?--- the respondent: that’s absolutely - - - ms paterosn: all right. and as a result of that, of punching the wall, you [hurt yourself]?--- the respondent: no. no, it didn’t – that isn’t how it happened at all. ... ms paterson: when the prison officer entered the room, they found that you had [attempted to self-harm]?--- the respondent: that’s also wrong. that wasn’t how it went down at all. ms paterson: all right. so, when you were in the telecourt room and you heard that the matter was going to be adjourned, were you upset by that?--- the respondent: yes, i was. i was very upset. ms paterson: yes?--- the respondent: and i was crying and upset and – and there was a bit of a commotion, i must admit, and i got in trouble and i got – you know, thought i was – i was going to do something and they ripped me to the ground with about five officers and, you know, all that kind of stuff, which is what they do in prison. and dragged me off into a, you know, solitary room and stripped me naked, humiliated me and gave me some canvas cape to wear for a few days. and then i was all good, but there was no attempts at hurting myself. once they knew that i was – i was just, you know, carrying on like a bit of a pork chop, as they kind of said, you know, i was just a bit upset and annoyed and swearing a little bit. and i guess with prison officers, they just don’t take any rubbish. and so they shouldn’t because there’s a lot of violent serious offenders in there. and they just treated me like everybody else and ripped me to the ground and that was it.. ... ms paterson: ...do you agree or disagree that you punched a hole in a wall? the respondent: i disagree that i punched a hole in a wall. there was no - - - ms paterson: do you agree or disagree that you injured your hand?--- the respondent: i disagree that i punched a hole in the wall. ms paterson: all right. did you sustain an injury to your hand?--- the respondent: i sustained a few injuries to a few different places at the time. my hand would have been one of them at the time. and yes, i did actually, which resulted in me needing surgery. ... ms paterson: you [hurt yourself]?--- the respondent: yes. that’s right. ms paterson: and you had to have surgery?--- the respondent: yes. ms paterson: and you have arranged to do some follow-up at [hospital] with a plastic surgeon in relation - - -?--- the respondent: yes. ms paterson: - - - to this injury and the procedures that have been necessary to treat it, is that right?--- the respondent: yes. well, i had to – yes, i had the operation in prison. correct. ms paterson: all right. and did you [attempt self-harm]?--- the respondent: no, i – no, i didn’t. ms paterson: did you threaten to [self-harm]?--- the respondent: [details of self-harm incident], to be honest with you, and i carried on like a pork chop. ms paterson: and did you say you were going to [harm] yourself?--- the respondent: no. i don’t recall saying that. i was in a bit of a moment, very emotionally upset, first time in prison and my daughter’s birthday. there was lots of things, emotions at the time. i can’t recall saying anything in particular, except for screaming and crying, in my recollection.
prisoner was in telecourt room. we heard a big bang on the door. when we went to telecourt room he was on the floor and taken a how [attempted self-harm incident]. staff immediately got [the father] handcuffed and placed him in holding cell.
june 2022 69zw report
child impact report 21 june 2022
high risk family violence factors have been identified in this matter. this includes an observed pattern of [the respondent] breaching orders and continuing to escalate in threatening and intimidating behaviour towards [the applicant]. should this report be released to all parties, it could catalyse a further escalation in his behaviour, particularly in the context of [the respondent] possibly being granted bail. should this occur, it could place the mother and children at an escalated risk. consideration to be given to an alternate release. ... from speaking with [the applicant], in addition to reviewing the file material and the assessment by child protection, there appear to be a number of high risk family violence indicators present, that are associated with higher lethality rates. in the post-separation period however [the respondent]'s threatening behaviour continues to escalate. on reviewing the file material there are numerous examples of veiled threats being made, for example, "if i don't get a response, i'll treat that as you want to keep fighting? 1 'll finish you off once and for all", "i'll make your family pay" and "no wonder so many women are killed". this pattern of behaviour appears to be categorised by a high level of volatility, emotional reactiveness, and an enduring pattern of coercive control. these factors combined are indicative of high risk, and require cautious consideration by the court. [the respondent] is currently being held on remand in relation to breaches of the ivo. the material attached to [the applicant]'s affidavit dated 9 may 2022, and the content of the interview with [the applicant] are highly concerning and indicative of current significant high risk to the children and [the applicant]'s safety should the children spend time with [the respondent]. this risk may be further exacerbated by [the respondent] reporting to not respect authority such as court orders, and officials such as police and child protection. key considerations and opportunities for resolution this matter is assessed to have high risk family violence factors present, which have continued to escalate in this post separation period. [the respondent]'s behaviour is indicative of limited ability to behave in an appropriate and safe way, and is not reflective of a capacity to focus on and prioritise the children and their needs. it's is the writer's assessment that there should be no spend time between [the respondent] and the children until collateral information is obtained and further assessment is completed.
addendum child impact report 1 july 2022
the current circumstances of the children [x] and [y] reside in the primary care of their mother [the applicant]. the children are subject to family court orders in which they spend alternate weekends in the care of their father [the respondent]. the children are not currently spending time with [the respondent] due to him currently being remanded. [the respondent]’s next bail hearing is scheduled for [mid]-2022. child impact evaluation a 69zw report from child protection dated [mid]-2022 has been reviewed. this report identifies [the respondent]’s offending behaviour as “extensive and escalating”. child protection have recognised [the respondent]’s behaviour as consistent with a pattern of coercive control and emotional abuse, and have assessed this at a level in which places [the applicant] at “significant risk of serious injury and/or death”. it is reported that [the respondent] does not have an understanding of his behaviour and has failed to acknowledge the violence he has perpetrated. child protection have assessed [the respondent] as being unwilling to abide by legal interventions such as the current intervention order. this unwillingness to cooperate with the legal system and protective interventions significantly limits the safety they are able to provide for the children and [the applicant] when [the respondent] is released from remand. this is a high risk matter, in which some of the family violence factors identified are associated with higher levels of lethality. these factors are exclusively associated with [the respondent] in this matter and currently remain unaddressed. considering this any spend time, supervised or unsupervised between the children and [the respondent] could place [x] and [y] at an unacceptable risk of harm. recommendations no time to be spent between the children and their father until the risk can be further assessed.
parenting orders, trial directions and section 102na orders that are in effect
current ivo late 2022
late 2022: respondent’s release from prison & another complaint to child protection
property offer, dna question in late 2022 emails
hello[68], before any legal matters proceed any further. i am requesting the children are dna tested to prove they are my children...
thanks but i’m not interested. i don’t think the kids are even mine. i’m requiring dna testing. do what ever you want with your legal crap. got nothing to do with me anymore. kind regards [the respondent]
please don’t copy me into anymore of these family law proceedings. i’m not interested. i want nothing to do with the children or there mother. kind regards.
late 2022 & another child protection investigation  late] 2022, child protection conducted an unannounced home visit to [the applicant] and the children. in an interview with [the applicant], she vocalized her concerns that the person who made the report to child protection was someone ‘trying to make her look bad’. [the applicant ] denied the allegations of her using [illicit drugs], acknowledging that this has been alleged of her in the past. [the applicant ] was transparent with practitioners and acknowledged she used [illicit drugs] once off at the beginning of 2022 with friends, however with the children not present. [the applicant] acknowledged she engages in [illicit substance] use which she expressed supports with managing her high anxiety and to support her sleep. [the applicant ] advised if she were to complete a drug screen [illicit substance] is the only substance that would be detected. child protection requested [the applicant] complete a drug screen the following day and this was agreed to. child protection discussed mental health supports and encouraged [the applicant] to re-engage with family violence supports. [the applicant] advised that she believes her previous professional family violence supports may have closed as she obtained a new phone number and therefore may have been uncontactable. [the applicant] expressed concern and worry about the child protection reports and ongoing allegations raised against her. child protection interviewed [x] who spoke positively of [the applicant] and expressed feeling safe with her... ... child protection interviewed [y] who discussed feeling very safe and raised no concerns to child protection. following this, engagement with [the applicant] became challenging as she expressed feeling victimized by the systems that have been used to perpetrate further violence and control over her through making reports to child protection with allegations against her. [the applicant ] declined to complete a drug screen during this period.
mr q involved
early 2023 respondent replies & allegations of drug use, incest and neglect
dear his honour [and named lawyers] thank you kindly for your email~ i can confirm this is the first communication i have received about this matter (apart from a phone call i received)...
hello, i would like to request your client does a physiological assessment as i have been given some very serious correspondences by your client and a very concerned friend of hers...
honestly the way this is heading. the kids will be taken off both of us and be in foster care! great....
... 21. that regarding the property at [suburb d]: 60 days prior to the trial date, the parents to all things necessary obtain an updated valuation of the property from the firm known as [e company], the cost of such valuation to be paid initially by the mother and adjusted at a final settlement. in the event that the father fails to facilitate entry to the [suburb d] property when requested to, the valuer be permitted to revalue the property based on the criteria listed in the valuation report dated [mid]-2021, that 60 days prior to the trial date, the parties exchange their most recent superannuation statements and provide to the other party, a current screenshot of their superannuation entitlements. that within 60 days (or 90 days if he remains in custody), the father provide the following disclosure to the mother’s solicitor by email, to the extent such documents are in his power or possession: ... (list of documents) that within 30 days, the mother provide the following disclosure to the father or father’s legal representative if appointed by email: (list of documents)
hello, all my documents were sent to your clients previous lawyer... it wasn’t my fault she changed lawyers.... it was your client who opened this case up. not me. therefor i’m not liable for any fees. i’m not in a position to negotiate property... my only interest is the children and their welfare. which as you are aware i’m in contact with child protection and am very concerned about the allegations of neglect, incest and drug abuse. ... (emphasis added)
dear [the respondent] we would be pleased if you clarify whether you intend to sign the joint letter of instruction to [e company] to have an updated sworn valuation prepared...
once again! property settlement is on hold while there are allegations of abuse, drugs, molestation and violence around my children.... (emphasis added)
his honour: well, what’s the incest? why did you put that in there? what’s that about?--- the respondent: well, i would say the incest was – and the – a potential of – well, the allegations were that [y], my son, was fiddling with [the applicant]’s breasts actually, and this was told when my cousin, [mr cc] was speaking to [mr q]. so [mr q] spoke to [mr cc] – this is all by correspondences – and we took down a whole file down to the police station – and we spoke to – her name was [ms dd] – [ms dd], from dhs, who was the case worker.
march 2023: another child protection complaint
good afternoon ... i was advised just now that my client has a phone appointment at 11.30 on friday with [ms dd] at dffh (child protection) regarding his children whom he was told, are no longer in his former partner’s care. he was told she wanted to discuss what is to happen moving forward. he will provide me with an update when he knows more. can i enquire whether you know what is happening? kind regards ...
good morning, based on the conversation my client had with [ms dd] yesterday, are you able to advise what the situation is with dffh and their involvement with the children? it would also help if you could advise whether the children are presently in your client’s care i await to hear from you ...
... we refer to your emails to our office and the independent children’s lawyer dated 15 and 16 march 2-23 regarding your client’s instructions that the children, [x] and [y], are no linger in our client’s care. the children are still in our client’s care and have at no time been removed from her care. our client had discussions with [ms dd] from the dffh who confirmed that she does have an appointment with your client tomorrow and that the children will remain in our clients care and dffh are not seeking to change the current care arrangements. ...
thank you for your letter. would your client care to disclose why dffh have taken what appears to be a recent interest in these children. can i also enquire whether your client is willing to disclose any letters, documents or other paper writings that in any way relate to this issue ...
dear mr ..., it seems that someone has made an ‘anonymous’ report regarding our client, which we are advised by dffh was made very soon after your client was released from prison. there have been ‘numerous’ reports made by your client to dffh during these proceedings, all of which were unsubstantiated. it is important to note that we are unaware of any reports being made to dffh during the period that your client was incarcerated. we have not been provided with any documentation between out client and dffh at this point ...
first family report
... [the applicant ] spoke about life beginning to improve and she has an ivo protecting herself and the children from [the respondent] for five years and that her parents also have an ivo protecting them for five years. [the applicant ] reported that she feels safer that [the respondent] does not know her address and the fact she is together with the children is helping her and them to recover. ... [x] recalled her father and that he sometimes gave her whatever she wanted but that he did not seem to discipline her at all, but she recalled that he had put [y] in the bedroom for two hours with no toys or anything else. [x] identified her mother and the maternal grandparents as emotional supports for her. [x] believed that her father would be upset if she spent no time with him but that no one else in her family would be upset. [x] recalled that her father had retained her and [y] for the whole holidays and she had felt sad about it, and she believed that her father had lied to her. ... ...there was nothing overt about [y] that indicated he was struggling currently. it appeared that [y] recalled feeling sad about not seeing his father and that this may have seemed sudden. [y] was aware his father had been jailed and it is likely that both he and [x] will have questions about their father as they grow and mature. it would assist them if [the applicant] were to seek support from an appropriate professional to explore how she might inform the children about their lack of contact with their father in a manner that is appropriate for their understanding.
53. it is respectfully requested that the court consider the following: that the current parenting orders remain in place and that the children live with their mother 55. that the children do not spend any time or communicate with their father that [the applicant]’s address and the details of the children’s school, medical and other engagements not be disclosed to the father
email from child to respondent?
i love you dad love [x] and [y].kiss kiss love from [x] and [y].[emoji’s]
thanks for the beautiful voice message from my daughter. see below.. forwarded email made my day. a little suss if you look at the time it was sent. 1:49am....either the kids are up late on a school night which is wrong... or it’s a sick joke trying to get my to breech. right before court.... hmmm probably abit more accurate. fell free to forward this message to my lawyer. fyi. i didn’t reply. (because i’m not allowed too ) but it is good to know my baby girl misses me and loves her daddy. i miss her too soo soo much. hope you’re happy.
17 march 2023 second 69zw report
it was noted that the reporter was aware of the address [the applicant] resides at, despite her moving locations due to family violence reasons. ... [in early] 2023, child protection received information that there had been a family violence incident [in early] 2023 with [mr q] as the respondent and [the applicant] and the children as the protected persons. the police narrative indicated that [in] 2023, [the applicant] and [mr q] exchanged multiple text messages regarding the status of their relationship where [the applicant] explained that they would remain separated. late in the evening at approximately 10:20pm, [mr q] attended [the applicant]’s address and rang the doorbell. [the applicant ] was around the side of the house and believed it to be [mr q] at the door as she had received multiple abusive text messages from him earlier that day. [the applicant ] called out and requested him to leave. [mr q] was aggressive towards [the applicant] and threatened to slit her throat and the throats of the children. these threats were heard by the neighbours, who held concerns for [the applicant] and her children and contacted 000. [the applicant ] was fearful of [mr q] and loudly repeated his threats in the hope a neighbour would hear and call for help. there was a gate in between [the applicant] and [mr q] but she was scared that he would jump the gate to get to her. [the applicant] ran from the side of the house towards the street, whilst running for safety and yelling for help, [the applicant] fell over causing grazes [to her body]. [mr q] left the address and [the applicant] was able to go inside and contact police. ... [x] stated that she doesn’t like [mr q] because he hurts her feelings and he is mean. [x] referenced a previous family violence incident where she was present when [mr q] smashed the car window. ... [the applicant ] made disclosures of feeling scared of [mr q] and confirmed he had made a threat to kill her. [the applicant ] confirmed [mr q] has made threats of this nature about the children. ... during the time practitioners were inside talking with [the applicant], a further report was received by child protection alleging that [the applicant] is using illegal substances, and has now progressed to injecting illegal substances as opposed to smoking them. ... in an interview with [the respondent], he engaged in the discussion and appeared reflective of his past behaviours and offending against [the applicant]. [the respondent] made acknowledgements of his use of family violence directed at [the applicant ]. [the respondent] at points in the conversation minimized the level of violence used by stating ‘i never went to her house though, and i never touched her’. when challenged, [the respondent] then made acknowledgements that he understands perpetrating family violence can involve ‘using words’. [the respondent] vocalized he feels ashamed of what he did and the way he acted. [the respondent] reported he is engaged with a professional support network...reflecting that at the time of the offending he did not have this level of support. [the respondent] confirmed he is aware of [the applicant] and the childrens address, stating that this was provided to him on the day of his release from custody by [mr q] ...[the respondent] acknowledged historically he has not had respect for the law or the systems around him. it was noted [the respondent] at times digressed to discussing [the applicant] and alleging protective concerns against her, however was able to refocus on the issue of his use of violence when prompted. ... it is noted that [the respondent] made reference that [the applicant] knowing how to trigger him, and knowing his weaknesses, indicating that she deliberately aggravated him. ... should [the respondent] be permitted contact with [x] and [y], it is child protection’s recommendation that this occurs with safe conditions including supervision to begin with and then progress accordingly. this assessment of [the respondent] is based on his increased insight into his offending, however the need for sustained positive changed is noted further to this. child protection will be closing the investigation following a substantiation decision with [mr q] assessed as responsible for harm.
first adjournment of final hearing
assessment of dr r
conciliation conference: settled: no its not!
dear sir, i refer to the conciliation conference hearing which took place last wednesday 7 june 2023. on thursday 8 june 2023 we wrote to you and asked if your client was prepared to sign the orders on the terms reached at the conciliation conference. on the morning of 9 june 2023, we received an email from you stating that your client was content for the orders to be made on the agreed terms, yet we have not yet received a signed copy of the orders. as the conciliation conference took place a week ago and your client has often agreed to terms and then withdrawn that agreement at the eleventh hour, our client is prepared to give your client until 11am monday 19 june 2023 to send to our office a signed copy of the orders, altered as per the requirements of the registrar.
good afternoon, please be advised my client consents and the signed copy is attached
updated family report
... [the applicant ] stated that the children do not ask about their father, but she believes that they want to spend time with him because he allows them to do whatever they like. ... [the applicant ] spoke about [the respondent]’s use primarily of coercive control and that she was unaware it was happening as it built up over time to the point whereby she was eventually socially isolated and that she had been worn down to the extent it was easier to allow [the respondent] to win an argument than to stand up to him. ... [the respondent] admitted that he had told [the applicant] that she was a terrible mother. he appeared to believe that was because of her alleged drug use. [the respondent] accepted that the dffh had investigated and found [the applicant] not to be using illegal drugs. [the respondent] denied being a permissive parent and said there are rules in his home. he then reverted to criticising [the applicant] for sending the children to his home in “rags” and that he put them in beautiful clothes. ... [the respondent] appeared to lack insight about the impacts on [the applicant] of his family violence and persistent breaches of the ivo. [the applicant ] was hopeful that [the respondent] might receive a psychiatric diagnosis and treatment to manage what she perceived to be his unpredictability. she worried about the impact on the children of what she perceived to be [the respondent]’s permissive parenting style and whether that would undermine the children’s relationship with her. ... child protection interviewed the children about their father and both expressed that they missed him and wanted to spend time with him. ... [the applicant ] was assessed to be a protective parent and child protection had no concerns for the children in her care. child protection assessed that allegations about [the applicant] using drugs was disproved and stated that further allegations should not be investigated unless there is “credible new information.” ... in response to the writer’s questions about his affidavit at paragraph 47 whereby he stated that he had been having a mental breakdown and that he would not be available to have the children “for a while”, [the respondent] stated that he had been exaggerating how he felt and that he was “being dramatic.” in response to the writer’s questions about whether he was trying to manipulate and control [the applicant], [the respondent] stated that he was tired and upset about his situation and was not trying to control her. ... [x] was expressive about her wish to spend time with her father and that it had been “a whole year” since she had seen him [x] recalled that she has a “[her own] bed” at her father’s home and that she had so many toys there that she could do whatever she liked. ... [the respondent] had also been named as the respondent with [mr w] (maternal grandfather) as the afm [in early] 2022. [the respondent] had sent threatening messages to [mr w] after the parties had separated. police noted that [the respondent] had continued the abusive messaging after being interviewed and they had concerns he would continue. [the respondent] breached the ivo with the maternal grandfather by continuing to message him. ... [the applicant ] appeared cooperative and capable of supporting the children to have a meaningful relationship with their father. having said that if [the respondent] were to manipulate the children it is likely that [the applicant] and the children would be negatively impacted. ... recommendations 83. [the respondent] complete a men’s behaviour change program 84. [the respondent] undertake any recommendations made by [dr r] the parents do all things necessary to enrol at a professional children’s contact service 86. the children live with their mother once [the respondent] has completed at least four sessions of the men’s behaviour change program, provided evidence from the program coordinators that he has done so to [the applicant], and he has provided the psychiatric assessment report to the court, provided that report does not identify significant risk from the mental health of [the respondent], that the children commence professionally supervised time with him for up to 3 hours per fortnight, and that the service provide a report after 6 sessions (paid for by [the respondent]) that [the applicant] access family violence support counselling on an as needs basis through [a domestic violence support service] to support her during this process 89. that the children have access to psychological counselling on an as needs basis that if [the respondent] fails to provide the psychiatric assessment report to the court or to undertake other orders made, that consideration be given to suspending the children’s time with him save for the purposes of identification professionally supervised on 6 occasions each year.
first cco supervision report mid-2023
to date [the respondent] has engaged in treatment with [mr ee] [in mid]-2023. [the respondent] was directed to attend urinalysis testing [in early] 2023, which he did not complete as directed and was unable to provide an explanation for. he attended once again [in early] 2023, the results returned positive for [illicit substances]. when questioned about his drug use, [the respondent] reported he had abstained from substances for the last three months however speculated that the [illicit substances] may still have been in his system. [the respondent] was directed to attend testing [in mid]-2023, he stated he was unable to attend due to him being busy with work. he did not attend for a further test until [mid]-2023, the results returned negative for negative substances. [in mid]-2023 [the respondent] advised this service that he could not attend testing due to his partner going into premature labour. this absence was deemed accepted. ... although [the respondent] has been consistent with his supervision attendance and drug treatment appointments, he has failed to attend drug testing as directed on numerous occasions and has failed to attend his program assessment appointments. [the respondent] remains focused on successfully completing his community correction order and adhering to the current intervention order in place. although [the respondent] has failed to attend his problem behaviour program assessment on two occasions, this service has made him aware of the importance of attending and participating in this program. he assured this service he would not miss another appointment.
respondent becomes unrepresented
second adjournment
second cco supervision report late 2023  mid]-2023, [the respondent] failed to attend supervision due to being at the hospital with his newborn premature son. [the respondent] provided attendance certificate for this absence, which was subsequently deemed acceptable. [in late] 2023, [the respondent] requested to reschedule supervision due to being at an appointment with [the hospital] regarding his son’s discharge from the neonatal intensive care unit (nicu). [the respondent] is yet to provide a medical certificate for this absence. [in late] 2023, [the respondent]’s partner contacted this service to advise that he was unwell and unable to attend his appointment. his partner indicated he would provide a medical certificate for this absence. this is yet to be provided thus [the respondent] has incurred an unacceptable absence. [in late] 2023, [the respondent] incurred a further unacceptable absence due to non-attendance. he attributed his absence to his partner forgetting to place his appointment on the calendar. [in late] 2023, [the respondent] failed to attend for supervision. his partner informed this service he was unwell and intended on providing a medical certificate. at the time of writing, this certificate is yet to be supplied thus [the respondent] has incurred a further unacceptable absence. ... [the respondent] attended urinalysis testing as directed [in late] 2023, returning a negative result for all substances consistent with his self-reported abstinence. [the respondent] was further directed to attend urinalysis testing [in late] 2023, which he failed to attend. he cited a conflict in work schedules and expressed frustration with being required to continue complying with testing obligations stating ‘i'm also clearly not on drugs. it's almost a joke... i'll do my best to get there tomorrow’ and ‘i was hoping to have all this struck out as it's been 12 months now. i'm going to ask the judge when i have my hearing..’. [in late] 2023, [the respondent] failed to attend testing as directed reporting to be unwell. ... [the respondent] was referred to forensic intervention services (fis) to determine his eligibility for programs to address his offending behaviour. [the respondent] failed to attend two assessments for offence specific treatment through the problem behaviour program with fis [in early] 2023 and [mid]-2023, however an assessment [in mid]-2023. upon the completion of the assessment, [the respondent] was found ineligible for the problem behaviour program and recommended to continue to engage with a psychologist for individual offence specific intervention ... as indicated in the body of this report, although his initial compliance was satisfactory, [the respondent]’s compliance has started to deteriorate since [late] 2023 and requires improvement. [the respondent]’s attendance for supervision, treatment with his psychologist and attendance for urinalysis testing has been sporadic. [the respondent] attributes struggling to balance his work commitment and premature newborn with his order obligations. to his credit, [the respondent] has successfully completed aod treatment with the [ff] program.
respondent sends emails to the applicant’s solicitor
mr hale do you agree with me that they’re inappropriate, abusive and offensive?--- the respondent: yes. yes, i was – i was antagonising a little bit and being a bit cheeky. i - - - mr hale: you weren’t being cheeky, [the respondent]. you were being downright rude and offensive?--- the respondent: i was. i apologise. i was. i don’t like her very much. mr hale: you don’t have to like somebody to be polite to somebody, do you?--- the respondent: no, but i feel like that – that she has really kind of dragged me through the coals here and she hasn’t given me the respect or courtesy that i’ve also reserved as just someone, you know - - - mr hale: can i stop you there, [the respondent]?--- the respondent: yes. mr hale: if i put to you that you’re trying to justify something that’s unjustifiable, do you have any insight into what i’m trying to get through to you?--- the respondent: no, i’m not – i’m not justifying my actions. they were terrible, but i’m explaining my actions,...
jewellery incident
the applicant: the kids had seen them through the front window and met them at the front door to give them a – a cuddle and exchange pleasantries for christmas, ... [mr gg]: we had two large bags of christmas presents and yes, we really 30 wanted to give them those presents before we thought they would grow out of the presents that we had bought for them over the last couple of years, so we wanted to give them and – and yes and see the kids, too, which – we were happy to see them. ... [mr gg]: no, we were – just thought we were doing the right thing and – and seeing the kids, which, you know, they were happy to see us. ... his honour: the evidence is, [the respondent], that the children were happy to see [mr gg] and [the maternal grandmother] and receive the christmas presents.
dr r report released
current psychological symptoms [the respondent] states that he feels “a lot better” and rates himself at around 8 out of 10. he states that he sleeps well and does not have any lengthy periods of anxiety or of lowered mood. he has the occasional day when his mood is lowered but he is able to rebound the next day. he gave an example of the birthday of [x]. he denies that he has any symptoms suggestive of phobic anxiety or social anxiety and copes well at work on a full-time basis. he states that he has no impulse to call the mother, as had happened previously. his level of energy is good, and he does not have any appetite disturbance. however, he has put on 20 kg in weight following his period of incarceration last year. he sees his general practitioner, [dr r], on a regular basis. he is prescribed an antidepressant daily and a mood stabiliser twice daily. this was raised last year in his incarceration due to the presence of elevated mood, pressured speech and problems with sleep. this was reduced . prior to his incarceration he had been taking 800 mg of [antidepressant medication] daily. he does not take any [sleep medication] as had been prescribed in the past. ... between 2016 and 2019 his mood had continued to be varied, and he had been given prescriptions [for antidepressants]. however, he admitted that he had generally been non-compliant with his medication and had not taken either medication for any protracted period . in 2019, in the setting of the separation, he had a more lengthy period of lowered mood, however he stated that although his energy was lowered, he had still been able to work and to function adequately. in 2020 he had been recommenced [antidepressants] and again was largely non-compliant. he stated that he had periods of time where he experienced elevated mood, pressured speech, grinding his teeth, not needing to sleep, a marked increase in energy, overspending and marked irritability. these symptoms lasted for around two to three days and were usually followed by a period of markedly lowered mood and lowered energy which again would last for a number of days up to a week or so. he stated that for most of the time his mood was stable but for approximately a quarter of the time would have mood swings either up or down. he denied ever having any psychotic ideation or auditory or visual hallucinations. he had never needed a psychiatric hospitalisation and had never seen a psychiatrist. he commenced seeing a psychologist, [ms u], in 2020 and he continued seeing her every few weeks up until [early] 2022. he stated that he had stopped seeing her due to her being an older woman, and feeling that he could not discuss certain intimate matters such as sexual issues, with her. he also denied that he had ever been suicidal or homicidal as had been alleged by the mother. he admitted that he had only really been compliant with his psychotropic medication once he had been incarcerated. he stated that he had continued this compliance following his release from jail. ... forensic history in 2020 and 2021 he had been convicted of breaches of intervention order and received a fine on each occasion. in [mid]-2022 he had been charged with offences. this was reduced to 13 charges for which he received a sentence and a community correction order. he stated there had been no further charges pending since his release from jail. ... the relationship broke up in [late] 2019, at the mother’s instigation. [the respondent] stated that he had been greatly surprised by this and had not realised the mother’s level of unhappiness in the relationship. at that stage he stated that he began to decompensate and “i fell apart”. [the respondent] had continued to have contact with both children on alternate weekends and one evening in the other week up until 2022. he admitted that he had wanted more time with the children and this, together with his concerns about the mother’s alleged neglect of the children, resulted in him making two reports to dffh. the last one was in early 2023 relating to the mother’s ex-partner having threatened him. since 2020 his sense of grievance against the mother had escalated and he had become increasingly more angry with her ending in him sending multiple communications by text or email to the mother. he admitted that they were intimidating but denied that he had had any intent to carry out any action against himself, the mother or the children. this had further escalated in [early] 2022 when he had become aware of a relationship with another man and admitted that he had felt very jealous at this time. his level of anger, fuelled by drug and alcohol us, had gradually increased and he admitted that the incarceration in [mid]-2022 had been “a circuit breaker” and had made him realise the seriousness of his actions. ... impression and mental state examination [the respondent] was punctual to the assessment. he was pleasant and cooperative and was generally unguarded. he also made points against himself, e.g., his intentions of trying to hurt the mother by sending her threatening texts. he was initially inconsistent with regard to his history of mood swings and particularly of the treatment received, however he gradually became more revealing about the extent of his non-compliance with treatment and the level of severity of his alcohol and drug abuse. during the assessment there was no evidence of lowered or elevated mood, agitation or irritability. his level of eye contact was good, he was able to sit still in the chair and maintained a coherent narrative. he gave the impression of some degree of insight about his past behaviour (although he had wondered whether the mother might have deserved his past behaviour towards her) and partial insight into the presence of his mood swings and drug and alcohol abuse. he showed some partial remorse over his actions to the mother. he gave the impression that he had felt a great degree of hurt and of anger at the mother for ending the relationship and reducing the level of contact with the children. ... insight: he displayed a partial degree of insight into the presence of a mood disorder but had a considerable degree of insight about his past level of alcohol and drug abuse. although he had some degree of insight that his behaviour towards the mother, prior to the incarceration, had been unreasonable, there had still been thoughts that she might have deserved such treatment. he gave the impression that at the time of the offences he had simply not cared as to the possible consequences. ... i reviewed the dffh section 69zw response of [early] 2023. [in late] 2022 there had been a report regarding the mother’s drug use and neglect of the children. on investigation the mother had admitted [illicit substance] use, however the children had denied feeling unsafe with her. there had been three previous reports in 2021 and 2022 mostly relating to family violence by the father. [in early] 2023 the mother’s ex-partner, [mr q], had been the respondent in a family violence incident and had made threats to the mother following which the police had been called. the child [x] had raised a concern regarding this man smashing a car window with them inside. the mother’s drug screen at that time had only revealed [illicit substances]. at interview he had admitted remorse regarding his past behaviour and stated that he had engaged in professional supports. there had been no new family violence incidents since the father’s release from jail. the recommendation at the time was that the father should continue engaging with supports. it stated there were no concerns for the children in the mother’s care and that [mr q] had been assessed as responsible for harm. i reviewed the family report of 02 march 2023 by [the family consultant]. the father had refused to attend any interviews. an interview with the mother showed that she had stated that she was “a shell of a person” due to the father’s family violence including physical violence, strangulation, stalking her and threats to kill her. interview with the children however showed that they were not fearful of the father. the conclusion was that the mother had suffered from significant family violence at the hands of the father during the relationship and had been followed by stalking and threats to kill. the recommendation was that the children should have no time or communicate with the father. diagnoses other specified [mental health illness] since 2016, [the respondent] described the occurrence of multiple brief hypomanic periods (lasting 2-3 days) and periods of depressive symptoms that, although they did not meet full criteria for [a mental illness], were consistent with a diagnosis of a mood disorder. his mood swings were responsive to a combination of antidepressant and mood stabiliser medication, when he had been compliant with them. there is no evidence that continues to suffer from mood swings currently. he had observed that antidepressant medication on its own had exacerbated the tendency to have hypomanic episodes, which suggests a possible iatrogenic[82] component to his disorder. ... opinion ... prior to the separation in 2019, [the respondent] appears to have been a regular drinker and a heavy user of [illicit substances] ( the latter only up to the time of [x]’s birth), but had started to develop mood swings in 2016. his insight seems to have been poor, as had his level of compliance with psychotropic medication. the description of alleged physical violence to the mother is markedly different between the parties, with him denying there had been any violence at all. the court will need to evaluate the respective evidence and make a decision as to whose statements are more believable. if the mother’s version is believed, then his actions are very concerning, and he would appear to be in marked denial of his level of anger and aggression. following the separation, [the respondent] appears to have markedly decompensated, developing a sense of grievance against the mother, and desire for revenge, openly wishing to hurt her emotionally. he denied any homicidal or suicidal intent, stating that his threats were manipulative in their intent to cause the mother distress. this was at an extreme level, leading to the impression that he had been consumed with hatred, and oblivious to the consequences of his actions on both the children and himself, suggesting that he was somewhat out of touch with reality. it is not clear as to whether he had actually intended to physically harm the mother or himself. this state of hatred and desire for revenge, leading to his threatening behaviours, had been significantly fueled by his very high consumption of alcohol and his mood swings, aided by his [illicit substances] use, with a predisposition due to his [mental condition] traits. he had not been compliant with his psychotropic medications, suggesting that his level of insight into is psychiatric disorder was rather poor. the spiralling clinical picture, leading to intimidating and threatening communications to the mother ( and her lawyer, apparently) was only stopped in its tracks by his arrest, being charged with [32] counts of a variety of offences ( including breaches), and subsequently being incarcerated. it seems highly unlikely that [the respondent] would have voluntarily stopped his behaviours, without external intervention. since the incarceration, he has managed to considerably reduce his level of alcohol consumption, stop his [illicit substances] use, and become compliant with his medication. there do not appear to have been any further intimidatory behaviours, and no pending charges. however, his release was only from around [early] 2023, and so there may have been insufficient time to determine whether there is a permanent change in his attitude and behaviour. he has a stable relationship, and is expecting the birth of their child later this year. i note, though, that this relationship had commenced during the period of his decompensation, and had not ameliorated his behaviours prior to the incarceration. it is likely that his developmental history of paternal alcoholism, separation of the paternal grandparents and lack of a stable available maternal figure (described as a critical figure) who had gone on to have other children ( so displacing him) had been predisposing factors in the intensity of [the respondent]’s response to the separation of the parties, and difficulties in him being able to accept the mother’s wish to leave the relationship. the strong family history of mood disorders was a risk factor in him developing a form of [depression]. he appears to have had only limited insight in a number of areas, including the presence of a psychiatric disorder and need for treatment, his excessive alcohol and substance use, the effects of his developmental experiences on his responses to the separation, and especially the inappropriateness of his behaviours in his decompensation, and their possible effect on the children. he admitted non-compliance with his psychotropic medication, and failure to attend drug and alcohol services until this year. although he had sought psychological assistance in 2020, this had been essentially ineffective, probably due to the untreated nature of his psychiatric disorders. since his release, [the respondent] has made significant attempts to stop his behaviours, seek psychological assistance with a practitioner with whom he has a better engagement, engage in drug and alcohol counsellor, and be compliant with his medication. he appears to have partial insight into the need for treatment of his psychiatric disorder, and into the nature of his behaviour in the past. there is still some belief that the mother may have deserved such treatment, which is concerning. the increasing depth of his relationship with his current partner, with the imminence of the birth of their first child, may be acting to help draw him away from the intensity of his feelings against the mother. he denies currently having any strong feelings against the mother. the incarceration seems to have had a strong prohibitive effect of interrupting the level of his hate-filled behaviour, and bringing reality to bear on the situation. provided [the respondent] continues with his current treatment regime, including regular sessions with his psychologist and alcohol counsellor, being compliant with his psychotropic medication, and keeping his alcohol consumption at a moderate level, then his prognosis should be good. it needs to be remembered that the history of mood disorders is that they can remit and relapse, and that personality traits are enduring. it is premature to make an accurate estimation of whether this is likely to occur, although there are early promising signs. his level of insight into his behaviour and condition remains only moderate. if this were to increase, which would best be achieved by ongoing therapy, then it would provide more evidence that he would not repeat his past behaviour. he might be able to have a more stable mood state, if his antidepressant medication were to be reduced, but this should be monitored by a psychiatrist. if his current relationship were to founder, then [the respondent] may be vulnerable to have a relapse. recommendations ongoing regular sessions with a psychologist ongoing sessions with a drug and alcohol counsellor review of his psychotropic medication by a psychiatrist with a view to reduction of his antidepressant medication hair follicle tests every 3 months for 9 months, also testing for ethyl glucuronide as a measure of alcohol consumption
pre-trial correspondence of compliance check
the respondent’s lack of insight
mr hale: well, why don’t you go and see [dr s]?--- the respondent: wasn’t it [the applicant] that was, you know – was worried about my mood swings? isn’t that what everyone was saying before? not my mother. my mother is beside me. she wasn’t worried about my mood swings, i – i think. mr hale: see - - -?--- the respondent: i went and saw [dr r] - - - mr hale: i’m asking you, [the respondent]?--- the respondent: okay. so what – what i’m telling you - - - mr hale: why did you go to see [dr s] ?--- the respondent: what i’m telling you, mr hale, is that you need to move on from this one. i – i’m not comfortable answering it. i had a mental health issue, if you want to call it that, called depression, based on the way i was being treated at home and my ex-partner, [the applicant], being [a drug addict] and being on drugs all the time and me trying to run a business and trying to, you know, defend myself from day to day and without being gaslighted all the time, and, you know, after a while, when your partner is not coming home at night and she’s sleeping with other people and taking drugs and stealing your money, it gets pretty depressing. and if you want to read my affidavit, it’s all in there. ... mr hale: yes. thank you, your honour. the respondent: and it’s almost 5 o’clock, your honour, so i think, maybe, we should call it a day. ...
parenting
family law act provisions
major long‑term issues, in relation to a child, means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long‑term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent. to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new partner is not, of itself, a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. however, the decision will involve a major long‑term issue if, for example, the relationship with the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent. ... 4ab definition of family violence etc.   the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to):   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.
13c court may refer parties to family counselling, family dispute resolution and other family services   a court exercising jurisdiction in proceedings under this act may, at any stage in the proceedings, make one or more of the following orders: (a) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling,   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling,   that the parties to the proceedings attend family dispute resolution, (c) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   the court may suggest a particular purpose for the attendance or participation.   the order may require the party or parties to encourage the participation of specified other persons who are likely to be affected by the proceedings. (4) the court may make any other orders it considers reasonably necessary or appropriate in relation to the order.   the court may make any other orders it considers reasonably necessary or appropriate in relation to the order.   the court may make orders under this section:   on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of:  a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child's interests under an order made under section 68l  ) a lawyer independently representing a child's interests under an order made under section 68l
... 60ca child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 60cf informing court of relevant family violence orders   if a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that party must inform the court of the family violence order. (2) if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   if a person who is not a party to the proceedings is aware that a family violence order applies to the child, or a member of the child’s family, that person may inform the court of the family violence order. (3) failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.   failure to inform the court of the family violence order does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.
60cg court to consider risk of family violence   in considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the child’s best interests being the paramount consideration, ensure that the order:   is consistent with any family violence order, and (b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety of those affected by the order.
... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   family violence.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances equal time   subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.
substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:  days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant.
reasonable practicality   in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and
consent orders (6) if: (a) the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,
the court may, but is not required to, consider the matters referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or (if applicable) the matters referred to in paragraphs (2)(c) to (e).   to avoid doubt, subsection (6) does not affect the application of section 60ca in relation to a parenting order.
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility (1) this section applies if, under a parenting order:   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision ha s been made jointly.
... in helbig & rowe [2016] famcafc 117, the full court explained at [214] (citing a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800), that where a case is conducted on the basis of it being contended that there is an unacceptable risk of harm to a child in the care of one parent, “[t]he first enquiry is whether there is objectively an unacceptable risk. if there is the court must take steps proportionate to the degree of risk” (emphasis added). after referring to and applying that decision, the full court in keane & keane [2021] famcafc 1, (2021) 62 fam lr 190 at [84] stated:
in undertaking the task of considering what steps are “proportionate to the degree of risk”, the decision of blinko makes it clear that the mere finding that a child may be at an unacceptable risk as a result of spending time in the care of another parent does not conclude the task before the primary judge. a necessary consequence of that finding, having regard to the totality of matters that the court is required to consider pursuant to s 60cc of the act, is for the court to contemplate whether steps can be taken to ameliorate or mitigate against that risk such that the child can maintain a meaningful relationship with the other parent. phasis added) in summerby & cadogen [2011] famcafc 205 at [95], the full court also noted the potential adverse impact upon a child of permanent separation from their parent and, in the context of that case, agreed with and applied the analysis of the trial judge in those proceedings to conclude that “the termination of a child’s relationship with one of her parents is a course of last resort.” given the potential consequences for a child of such a separation, careful consideration is required on the part of a trial judge before reaching a conclusion of no time and no communication. this is made clear in blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 (“blinko”) where the full court said at [28]:
the authorities dealing with cases of unacceptable risk are replete with exhortations to trial judges to “consider deeply where the facts of the particular case fall, and to explain adequately their findings in this regard”: see for example n and s and the separate representative [1995] famca 139, (1996) flc 92-655 at 82,714. that extends not merely to the identification and analysis of the risk itself, but also to the imposition of conditions or other safeguards in relation to the non-resident parent. having determined that the children were at an unacceptable risk of harm in remaining in the primary care of the mother, it was incumbent upon the primary judge to consider whether that risk could be mitigated in a manner that was consistent with the objects to part vii to which we have referred. relevantly, in this case, that included the possibility of the children spending supervised time with their mother (see blinko at [83] referring to r & c [1993] famca 62).
section 60cc factors
benefit of a meaningful relationship with the children’s parents.
the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm
additional considerations
any views expressed by the children
nature of relationship with each of the children’s parents and other persons
extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take opportunities
other section 60cc(3) factors
capacity to provide for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs
maturity, background and culture of the children
attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood
family violence
the respondents mental health
ms paterson: yes, you said you had [a mental illness]?--- the respondent: yes, i did. exactly right. and at the time i believed i did. i mean, i was seeing – i was seeing [dr r]. i no longer – i do see him for other things, but i don’t see him for my mental stuff any more, except to get my regular pills. at the time i was led to believe and with [the applicant] telling me that i was mental and everyone telling me, you know, “there must be something wrong with you.” i was led to believe that i, you know, i think they call it gaslighting. you know, they make you think you’ve got the problem and you think that you’ve got the – the disorder. it turns out i was just a – you know, a little bit sad and i just needed a bit of help and needed to see a psychologist, and which i’ve been doing. i take some regular medication and i feel great. so that’s – that’s – that’s that one.
ms paterson: yes. and when you were asked about your history when you saw the psych nurse - - -?--- the respondent: yes. ms paterson: - - - you said that you had no psychiatric history?--- the respondent: yes, which i don’t. ms paterson: that’s your evidence, is it, that you have no psychiatric history?--- the respondent: well, i don’t, no. and that’s evident if you read [dr r]’s report. i’ve got no psychiatric history. i’ve taken antidepressant, but the psychiatric [condition], or whatever you want to call it, was diagnosed by a gp. he was actually underqualified to give that assumption and the prognosis was null and void. and the prognosis that i’ve been given from [dr r] isn’t [a mental illness] or any kind of personality disorders. and i must note, i’ve never been to a psychiatric treatment facility before either. taken antidepressant, that’s it, for a bit of depression.
ms paterson: ...prison identified that you were at that stage at high risk?--- the respondent: yes. they did. ms paterson: yes, including at high risk of what the prison refers to as sash, s-a-s-h, which stands for suicide and self-harm?--- the respondent: yes. they take these things very seriously, so they don’t muck around. i certainly won’t be – be carrying on like a pork chop again in prison, if i ever go back, hopefully not. ms paterson: and notwithstanding that assessment of high risk, you denied that you were any risk to yourself?--- the respondent: i believe i wasn’t any risk to myself. i mean, i knew i wasn’t going to do anything serious, but from an observation point of view and from a prison officer’s point of view, i see their point and i don’t – that’s what i mean. after i think two and a half days i was let out and back into the real world, you know, the real prison again.
the respondent: so ..... answer – answer to mr hale’s question, briefly, is, yes, i retract that. i had a mental health issue of depression, which i went and saw [dr r] for, who is my gp, who is a general practitioner, who is unqualified to give a – any kind of, you know, diagnosis of any mental disorder. that was made clear by [dr r]. [dr r] saw me for two hours. he’s not my treating doctor and he’s not my treating psychiatrist or psychologist. i saw [dr s] originally because [the applicant] was worried about my moods, and she encouraged me to go to the doctor and seek help, because it’s a good thing for people to admit when they’re struggling. but it has been turned around on me like i’m a psychopath and that it’s something wrong of me, because i sent a couple of text messages that said i – i was struggling, which i think is very unfair. that’s the end of my statement and i’m not talking about it any more.
the respondent: okay. yes. i understand the question now. no. there hasn’t been a deterioration in my mental health. basically this has been a lead up to this case. we knew it was all coming up. there was starting to be a lot of correspondences between – you – you have the lawyers. there’s starting to be a bit of action now. as – as you know, your honour, lawyers and barristers, they are said to do things that – at – at the very last minute, i’ve noticed.
final or interim orders
parental responsibility
conclusion as to parenting matters
property alteration
the applicable law
section 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (c) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (d) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (d) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,
including: (e) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (f) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (f) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),   an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),   either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),  ) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),
to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ...  the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,  ) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,   the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.
...
section 90sf(3) matter to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to `enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to `enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to `enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to `enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to `enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and
... (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account,... ...  any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account,...   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account,...
90ss general powers of court the court, in exercising its powers under this division, may do any or all of the following: order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments, order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum,  order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a de facto relationship, (d) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (e) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,  appoint or remove trustees,  order that payments be made direct to a party to the de facto relationship, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the de facto relationship, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,  impose terms and conditions, make an order by consent,  make any other order, or grant any other injunction, (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section) which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this division at any time before or after the making of a decree under another provision of this act.
stanford
[42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the respondent and applicant are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the respondent and the applicant. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) (and/or section 90sm(3)).
the preferred approach ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. (citations omitted and emphasis added)
the respondent’s property case
... at the commencement of the relationship, i owned the [suburb g] property. i purchased this property in 2010. the purchase price was $350,000. i utilised savings to pay a deposit in in the sum of $35,000 and obtained a home loan for the balance of $315,000. i also had a motor vehicle and superannuation. [the applicant ] owned a [motor vehicle] valued at approximately $10,000. [the applicant ] had unpaid fines in the sum of approximately $3,000. i recall not long after [x] was born [the applicant]’s car was clamped in the car park of [suburb g] shopping centre. i paid the fines for [the applicant] outright in order to get [the applicant]’s car unclamped. during the relationship [the applicant] and i both worked in various roles. we shared the homemaker and parenting role. in [early] 2017 i established the business. in or around 2018 we sold the [suburb g] property for $520,000 and purchased the [suburb d] property. the purchase price for the [suburb d] property was $532,000. the proceeds of sale from the [suburb g] property were applied to the purchase of the [suburb d] property. my income at the time of purchasing the [suburb d] property was approximately $30,000 per annum. i was not able to obtain a new home loan and the properties were transferred in way that enabled my existing home loan attached to the [suburb g] property to be transferred to the [suburb d] property. in or around 2007 i received an early inheritance from my stepfather in the sum of $110,000. i utilised the funds received from my stepfather to pay the costs associated with the purchase of the [suburb d] property, totalling approximately $60,000. the remaining $45,000 was spent on furniture and appliances. at the time of separation [the applicant] and i were both working in the business. [the applicant] managed the finances and administration. when [the applicant] left she did not complete a handover and did not provide me with any of the passwords for the various business accounts. it took a while for me to resolve these issues, this resulted in the business losing money and i was reliant on the business overdraft.
ms paterson: i have – no objection from me. my client would also like to know what final orders [the respondent] seeks in relation to property matters. his honour: yes. thank you. that’s a good point. thank you. [the respondent], the final orders that you seek in regard to property, what do you seek? the respondent: well, look, the property is basically simple to me, your honour. look, i’m happy just to go fifty-fifty, down the middle. you know, look, i’m not into a, you know, back-and-forth thing. all i want to do is see my kids and go fifty-fifty in property. his honour: yes. fifty-fifty. the respondent: and call it a day. ... his honour: and fifty-fifty on the basis – is the property to be sold and the proceeds divided fifty-fifty, or are you going to pay [the applicant] a sum representing 50 per cent of the equity in the property? the respondent: yes. so basically there was a valuation done, and what we propose to pay is 50 per cent of the proposed valuation minus the mortgage on the property. ...
the applicant’s property case
step one: identify the property and liabilities
conclusion as to the “pool”
step two: section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) contributions
... put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon the party’s contribution to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’ respective contributions within s 79. we prefer this approach to the concept of “negative contributions: which is sometimes referred to in this discussion. in the above formulation, we have referred only to domestic violence, for the reasons which we indicated earlier, but its application is not limited to that. ... however , in our view, s 79 should encompass the exceptional cases which we described above. ... to be relevant, it would be necessary to show that the conduct occurred during the marriage and had a discernible impact upon the contributions of the other party. it is not directed to impact which does not have that effect.  ] ... all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various contributions and weigh one again the remainder. [36] that principle has a counterpart in the application factors prescribed in section 75(2) or section 90sm(3) of the act. any adjustment to the parties contribution-based entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by aggregating incremental adjustment in respect of each relevant factor.  ] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship.
step three: section 75(2) factors 7] it is also important to recall what was said in phipson & phipson [2009] famcafc 28 when the full court was dealing with another appeal from the trial judge in the present proceedings:  ] it is always important to keep in mind that an adjustment of x% for s 75(2) factors leads to a disparity in the value of property received by the parties representing 2 x x%. it is that disparity, measured in “money terms”, that requires consideration in determining whether the result is just and equitable: see campbell v kuskey [1998] famca 10, (1998) flc 92-795 at 84,928.  8] the 10% adjustment his honour made on account of s 75(2) factors has led to a disparity in favour of the applicant equivalent in value to 20% of the assets. in money terms this represents $187,733 out of a total asset pool of $938,665... [109] in our view an assessment leading to a disparity of $187,733 in the capital/superannuation to be received by each party was outside the reasonable ambit of the trial judge’s broad discretion... the appeal will therefore be allowed. ... [113] taking these matters into account, and the failure of the respondent to pay child support after giving up his employment, we consider there should be a 4% adjustment for s 75(2) factors, creating a disparity of 8% between the parties – or in money terms an amount of $75,093.
discussion of the factors
age and state of health
income, property, financial resources and capacity for employment
reverse conundrum discussion.
care of children under 18 years
commitments of each of the parties to support themselves or a child
responsibilities of either party to support any other person
pension or benefit
reasonable standard of living
effect on creditors
protect parties role as a parent
whether party cohabiting with another person
child support to be provided and other section 90sf(3) factors
any fact or circumstances required to take into account
conclusion as to section 90sf(3) adjustment
step four: just and equitable and conclusion
associate: dated: 27 march 2024
dated: 27 march 2024
appendix one
exhibit no:
description:
party
11 september 2023
f1
respondents email chain in response of adjournment
respondent
icl1
icl email to chambers on 7 september 2023
icl
m1
applicant’s submissions dated 11 september 2023
applicant
monday, 22 january 2024
icl2
icl proposed orders sought
m2
applicants proposed orders sought
c1
email chain of respondent’s response to compliance email sent by chambers
court
c2
email chain of respondents response to the proposed trial plan
c3
respondents request to appear electronically
c4
email chain from the respondents response to the family report of the parentage of the children.
c5
email chain of chambers to legal aid following up the respondents 102na order.
m3
applicants bundle of documents in evidence in chief (9 pages)
tuesday, 23 january 2024
m4
photograph of the jewellery and the bag that is identical to the appearance of the object inspected in court.
m5
address of applicant marked not to be disclosed without further order.
m6
document shown to the respondent of his alleged motor vehicle 1 (wrong model)
f2
respondents sentencing history
f3
respondents email chain between himself and the solicitor for the applicant between 8 december 2023 and 11 january 2024/
f4
respondents leap vicpol record (pages 1-12)
wednesday, 24 january 2024
f5
court judicial monitoring reports.
f6
12 page document of arrival checklist of the subpoena documents
f7
page 4 of 104 of the “office of corrections” material produced on subpoena
f8
account ...91 and account ...70 screenshots of statements
m2.1
closing version of minutes of orders sought by applicant.
[1] exhibit m2.[2] oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66.[3] lainhart & ellinson [2023] fedcfamc1a 200.[4] 6 july 2022 orders.[5] for example, he challenged the alleged assault on the applicant’s father. and the father not being a witness, i do not make any finding as to that controversy.[6] for example the email from early 2022 from what appears to be ms u and is recited below and attached at page 21 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit[7] for example the email attachment on pages 33 &43 of the 9 may 2022 and the text message on page 15 of the applicant’s affidavit of 10 june 2024[8] an unintended consequence of the 102na scheme.[9] annexure d of the applicant’s affidavit of 4 march 2021.[10] also referred to in these reasons as child protection.[11] page 17 of the applicants affidavit of 9 may 2022.[12] annexure e of the applicants affidavit of 4 march 2021[13] annexed to the respondent’s affidavit of 28 april 2021.[14] the psychiatrist who prepared the single expert assessment.[15] the affidavit prepared by his then solicitor at an interim stage of proceedings and before the respondent had been imprisoned.[16] the 22 june 2022 section 69zw report at page 2.[17] attached to the respondent’s affidavit filed 28 april 2021[18] report of ms u including spelling mistakes. [19] recited in paragraph 32 of the applicant’s 9 may 202 affidavit.[20] as later summarised in the child impact report dated 30 june 2022 and relied on in this hearing and referred to later in these reasons.[21] this text was annexed to the applicants affidavit of 9 may 2022 on pages 85-96.[22] page 21 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit.[23] this email was attached as ms payne-4 to the applicant’s affidavit on 20 may 2022.[24] and recited at paragraph 36 of the applicants affidavit of 9 may 2022.[25]this text was annexed to the affidavit of 10 june 2022 at page 104.[26] as an associate and ex boyfriend of the applicant[27] annexed as ms payne-4 in the applicants affidavit of 9 may 2022.[28] this is also attached to the applicant affidavit of 9 may 2022 at ms payne-4. [29] this email was attached to the affidavit of 9 may 2022[30] page 34 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit[31] annexed to the 19 may 2022 affidavit.[32] this email was attached to the applicants affidavit of 9 may 2022.[33] page 45 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit.[34] email is annexed to the applicant’s affidavit of 9 may 2022 at pages 73-79.[35] 69zw report of 22 june 2022.[36] the evidence of the respondent withholding the children for 6 days was unchallenged and stated within paragraph 59 of the applicant’s affidavit of 9 may 2022[37]page 61 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit.[38] page 63 of the applicant’s 9 may 2022 affidavit.[39] email early 2022[40] this email can be found at page 112 and 113 of the affidavit of 9 may 2022.[41] ibid.[42] ibid.[43] ibid.[44] this email can be found at page 23 of the applicants affidavit of 10 june 2022[45] annexed at page 27 of the applicants affidavit filed june 10 2022.
[46] this email can be found at page 24 of the applicant’s affidavit filed 10 june 2022.
[47] at page 25 of the applicants affidavit filed 10 june 2022.[48] this email can be found at page 28 of the applicant’s affidavit of 10 june 2022.[49] this email can be found at page 31 of the applicants affidavit of 10 june 2022.[50] annexed at page 33 of the 10 june 2022 affidavit.[51]annexed at page 35 of the affidavit of 10 june 2022.[52] text message can be found at page 15 of the applicants affidavit of 10 june 2022.[53] found on page 30 of the applicants affidavit of 10 june 2022.[54] page 61 of the applicant’s 10 june 2022 affidavit.[55] page 45 of the applicant’s 10 june 2022 affidavit.[56] page 47 of the applicant’s 10 june 2022 affidavit.[57] page 48 of the applicant’s 10 june 2022 affidavit.[58] page 50 of the applicant’s 10 june 2022 affidavit.[59] page 55 of the applicant’s affidavit of 10 june 2022.[60] page 63 of the applicant’s affidavit of 10 june 2022.[61] page 19 of the applicant’s affidavit of 10 june 2022.[62] page 64 – 74 of the applicants affidavit of 10 june 2022[63] was exhibited as f6[64] orders of 6 july 2022[65] the people charged with the responsibility of preparing the family report.[66] exhibited c4[67] page 76 of the applicant’s trial affidavit of 28 july 2023[68] the applicant’s solicitor.[69] court exhibit c4.
[70] the email chain above was tendered as exhibit c4.
[71] annexed to the applicant’s trial affidavit filed 28 july 2023as ms payne-15[72] affidavit of 28 july 2023[73] affidavit of 28 july 2023[74] this email chain is attached to the applicant’s trial affidavit and marked as ms payne-6.[75] attached to the applicant’s affidavit filed ....as ms payne-7.[76] orders of 20 march 2022.[77] exhibit f1[78] orders of 11 september 2023.[79] exhibit f5.[80] within transcript page 300 line 44[81] the email chain that occurred over this time has been tendered as exhibit f3.[82] physician or treatment caused illness[83] this email chain has been tendered by the court and marked as exhibit c2.[84] and recited and applied by mcclelland dcj at [86] in grier & grier (2023) 94-135.[85] this was a case about a married couple but the observations are entirely applicable to de facto couples because for practical purposes sections 79(2) and 90sm(3) are identical, sections 79(4) and 90sm(4) are identical and sections 75(2) and 90sf(3) are identical. [86] recited in the affidavit of 28 april 2021[87] this value was not disputed and it was ultimately agreed the property would be sold.[88] see transcript page 61 and 341.[89] all whole dollars after rounding.[90] this value was not disputed and it was ultimately agreed the property would be sold.[91] kennon & kennon [1997] famca 27; (1997) flc 92-757 at 84,294[92] section 79(4) of the act applies to married or once married parties and for practical purposes here is conceptually identical to the principles applying to de facto parties pursuant to section 90sm9$) of the act.[93] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154[94] see at [58] and despite complaint the full court did not interfere with those findings.