last updated: 13 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
keneally & neaves [2024] fedcfamc2f 438
orders
the court orders that:  contacting or communicating with the child, including by social media or through a third party, (b) spending time with the child, (c) approaching the child or the mother, (d) approaching or attending at any school/s that the child attends, or at any place the child or the mother may reside, (e) removing the child from the care of any person or organisation (including any extra-curricular care provider) with whom the mother or maternal grandparents have placed the child.   spending time with the child, (c) approaching the child or the mother, (d) approaching or attending at any school/s that the child attends, or at any place the child or the mother may reside, (e) removing the child from the care of any person or organisation (including any extra-curricular care provider) with whom the mother or maternal grandparents have placed the child.   approaching the child or the mother, (d) approaching or attending at any school/s that the child attends, or at any place the child or the mother may reside, (e) removing the child from the care of any person or organisation (including any extra-curricular care provider) with whom the mother or maternal grandparents have placed the child.   approaching or attending at any school/s that the child attends, or at any place the child or the mother may reside, (e) removing the child from the care of any person or organisation (including any extra-curricular care provider) with whom the mother or maternal grandparents have placed the child.   removing the child from the care of any person or organisation (including any extra-curricular care provider) with whom the mother or maternal grandparents have placed the child.   at any time when the child is in her care, possessing, consuming or being in any way affected by, any illicit substance or any prescription medication that has not been otherwise properly prescribed to her, (b) knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” at any time when the child is in her care. for the purposes of this order “family violence” is defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders.   knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” at any time when the child is in her care. for the purposes of this order “family violence” is defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders.   if requested by the maternal grandparents, the mother is to provide the maternal grandparents with a letter from her treating general practitioner confirming that she is compliant with any relevant mental health plan, with the mother being required to provide her general practitioner with a copy of these orders and notify the maternal grandparents in the event she changes her general practitioner, (b) if requested by the maternal grandparents, the mother is to deliver the child to the maternal grandparents or otherwise allow the maternal grandparents to collect the child from her at any time in the event that the maternal grandparents express concerns to her about the child’s safety and wellbeing. (c) the mother is to notify the maternal grandparent’s within twelve (12) hours of the following: (i) nsw police or the department of communities and justice attending the mother’s residence, (ii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice interviewing the mother or the child, (iii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.   if requested by the maternal grandparents, the mother is to deliver the child to the maternal grandparents or otherwise allow the maternal grandparents to collect the child from her at any time in the event that the maternal grandparents express concerns to her about the child’s safety and wellbeing. (c) the mother is to notify the maternal grandparent’s within twelve (12) hours of the following: (i) nsw police or the department of communities and justice attending the mother’s residence, (ii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice interviewing the mother or the child, (iii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.   the mother is to notify the maternal grandparent’s within twelve (12) hours of the following: (i) nsw police or the department of communities and justice attending the mother’s residence, (ii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice interviewing the mother or the child, (iii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.   nsw police or the department of communities and justice attending the mother’s residence, (ii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice interviewing the mother or the child, (iii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.  ) nsw police or the department of communities and justice interviewing the mother or the child, (iii) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.  i) nsw police or the department of communities and justice removing the child from the mother’s care, or (iv) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.  ) the mother being charged with, or convicted of, any criminal offences. it is noted that this does not include traffic offences for which the mother is given a ticket, unless such ticket relates to driving with a prescribed blood alcohol concentration, driving under the influence of alcohol or a drug, driving dangerously while the child is in the motor vehicle or driving with the child unrestrained in a motor vehicle.   provide the maternal grandparents with copies of the child’s school reports, attendance records and any other documents ordinarily provided to parents as though the maternal grandparents were themselves parents of the child, (b) nominate maternal grandparents as emergency contacts for the child, and as the first points of contact in the event of any concern the schools have in respect of the child’s attendance, the child’s presentation, the child’s behaviour or any other concern the school may have about the quality of care being provided to the child. it is noted that this order is not intended to derogate in any way from the school’s mandatory reporting and notification requirements at law, but rather to provide additional support for the child in the event the school has any concerns about his care.   nominate maternal grandparents as emergency contacts for the child, and as the first points of contact in the event of any concern the schools have in respect of the child’s attendance, the child’s presentation, the child’s behaviour or any other concern the school may have about the quality of care being provided to the child. it is noted that this order is not intended to derogate in any way from the school’s mandatory reporting and notification requirements at law, but rather to provide additional support for the child in the event the school has any concerns about his care.   the father is in receipt of a grant of legal aid and would otherwise suffer hardship if the court were to make an order for costs against him in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer, (b) the mother would suffer hardship in the event that the court were to make an order for costs against her in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer, (c) the maternal grandparents have been privately funding this litigation including the mother’s costs, and, given the other findings the court has made in relation to this matter and particularly given the great sacrifice the maternal grandparents have and continue to make to ensure this child is safe, the court considers that circumstances could not “justify” the court making an order against them in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer.   the mother would suffer hardship in the event that the court were to make an order for costs against her in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer, (c) the maternal grandparents have been privately funding this litigation including the mother’s costs, and, given the other findings the court has made in relation to this matter and particularly given the great sacrifice the maternal grandparents have and continue to make to ensure this child is safe, the court considers that circumstances could not “justify” the court making an order against them in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer.   the maternal grandparents have been privately funding this litigation including the mother’s costs, and, given the other findings the court has made in relation to this matter and particularly given the great sacrifice the maternal grandparents have and continue to make to ensure this child is safe, the court considers that circumstances could not “justify” the court making an order against them in respect of the costs of the independent children’s lawyer.
it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge betts
overview
the hearing & material relied upon
chronology of events
the father
the mother
the early days of the parents’ relationship
the right thing for me now, after consent is given, entails me tearing whatever clothing you have on off, slapping your face, slapping your tits, fucking your face hard so you spew. then i will be bending you over whatever the fuck is closest and violently fucking the living fuck out of you. then fix the leaking tap. and yeah, that is literally all i can think about. i will fuck you so hard through your pain to the other side where you will float in bliss. this really isn't helping. fuck. or you could get stoned.
to whom it may concern. this is to certify that the above, has suffered from major psychiatric disorders since the age of approximately 16 years. this has included treatment from psychiatrists and psychologists with an acute psychiatric admission. her dsm-5 classification includes ptsd, [severe] anxiety [and other mental health conditions]. there is no cure for any of these complaints. treatments are designed to lessen the severity of her symptoms. these therapies are not always successful. her symptoms are so severe that she has trouble leaving her place of abode, and even on visits to myself, she has to be accompanied by her father. she lacks trust in others for obvious reasons, has difficulty concentrating on the most minor of issues, has very low self-esteem or confidence. given the nature and duration and severity of these illnesses, i believe that she will never be able to re-enter the workforce, and treatments at best can only lessen the severity of her symptoms.
this is to certify that the above, has suffered from major psychiatric disorders since the age of approximately 16 years. this has included treatment from psychiatrists and psychologists with an acute psychiatric admission. her dsm-5 classification includes ptsd, [severe] anxiety [and other mental health conditions]. there is no cure for any of these complaints. treatments are designed to lessen the severity of her symptoms. these therapies are not always successful. her symptoms are so severe that she has trouble leaving her place of abode, and even on visits to myself, she has to be accompanied by her father. she lacks trust in others for obvious reasons, has difficulty concentrating on the most minor of issues, has very low self-esteem or confidence. given the nature and duration and severity of these illnesses, i believe that she will never be able to re-enter the workforce, and treatments at best can only lessen the severity of her symptoms.
relationship following x’s birth  keneally] found my pocket knife and showed me that he had it in a threatening manner, before placing it on the bench. when i questioned why he had the knife, he said words to the effect, “what? it isn’t like i'm going to stab you or anything. i accept her evidence that she was frightened by this behaviour.
i accept her evidence that she was frightened by this behaviour.
final separation
events post-separation
i didn’t know. i didn’t know. i was off my fucking head. i didn’t know, [ms neaves]. i didn’t fucking know. i didn’t know. i was just going over there and getting off. thought you were into it. please believe me. please believe me, [ms neaves]. please believe me.
please, i didn’t fucking know. i didn’t know. i didn’t know and i found out. i felt bad. and then you woke up. and please, i fucking, the music was playing, you were moving, and it was all works and everything. i didn’t know. i didn’t know. i swear, i didn’t know. and you had gone off that.
i was off my head. i didn’t. i didn’t. i didn’t know. i didn’t know i did it. i promise. i promise i didn’t know.
i was off my fucking head, baby. i didn’t know. i couldn’t tell. i could hardly see. i didn’t know. i just didn’t know. i just didn’t fucking know. i’m so sorry hey. i’m so sorry. what are you going to do? i didn’t know. i honestly didn’t know. i couldn’t tell. i was just fucking fucked. i was caught up in it. i thought you were playing.
all right. i’m coming down. i’m going to be home in a minute. i understand you’re upset. i thought you were fucking awake. you were moving and making sounds and i thought you were awake, and then you weren’t. i’m fucked. i will message your dad and see if they can take [x] for the day or me mum. see if she can come and get him, so that we can get this shit done. relax. yeah. no. no. not. this isn’t going to. i’m fucking. nah. this isn’t. you make me. this is not undoing all the fucking good we’ve done. hey. this is a little bit of mess, babe. it’s not the end of the world, all right? it’s not the end of the fucking world.
i held you nose wanting you to wake up. i was frantic. i’m sorry. you make it sound like i was attacking you. you couldn’t even look at me. i’m sorry i scared you. i’ve never been like that. i’m speechless at what a shit cunt i've been. i’m unbelievable. you had to get [...] to come over, so i wouldn’t rock up, so you could feel safer. you need to feel safe. you need to feel loved. this isn’t right, what i’ve done. wtf, like why? i can’t seem to snap out of being an arsehole. it’s like i just hate everything. that is fucked. no wonder you do better without me. i scare the fuck out of you. i didn’t take on board how serious this is. i will stop. i can’t do this. not any more, not ever. fuck, baby, i really let you down and everyone. i’m pretty much out of control. this is fucked.
i couldn’t tell. i thought you were in it too. please believe it was an accident. please write back. i’m so sorry. it was an accident. i couldn’t tell. [...]... and this is a reference to the mother’s sister ms f: ...has told the world i’m a rapist because i this shit. i didn’t know [ms neaves]. please believe me. i just can’t believe it. this is the last night together. you were right about one thing. i am a pathetic loser. once i realised, i was mortified, and i stopped. i can’t explain how horrified and sick i feel. it wasn’t my intention. i couldn’t tell. i was too cooked. later on, i didn’t realise i woke you up. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked.
and this is a reference to the mother’s sister ms f: ...has told the world i’m a rapist because i this shit. i didn’t know [ms neaves]. please believe me. i just can’t believe it. this is the last night together. you were right about one thing. i am a pathetic loser. once i realised, i was mortified, and i stopped. i can’t explain how horrified and sick i feel. it wasn’t my intention. i couldn’t tell. i was too cooked. later on, i didn’t realise i woke you up. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked.
...has told the world i’m a rapist because i this shit. i didn’t know [ms neaves]. please believe me. i just can’t believe it. this is the last night together. you were right about one thing. i am a pathetic loser. once i realised, i was mortified, and i stopped. i can’t explain how horrified and sick i feel. it wasn’t my intention. i couldn’t tell. i was too cooked. later on, i didn’t realise i woke you up. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked.
and when i sleep, anyone could just have their way with me, and i will wake up to it, maybe, maybe not. but just know that something has been there, and it hurts physically, and it hurts that you don’t know what i’ve been through, and know how much i just want to be safe, and i don’t feel i’m safe anywhere any more, not even in my own home. it’s horrible. i’m ..... always fight or flight.
it is horrible, babe. i’m horrible or evil or something. there’s no reason to do it.
if you don’t recognise fucking me in my sleep is not rape when asked not to, and i’m the thing, i’m seriously thinking that you haven’t learnt shit, and maybe i made a mistake protecting you all this time. my nose is on my face, because you’re not the victim, cunt.
you were right about one thing: i am a pathetic loser. once i realized, i was mortified and i stopped. i can’t explain how horrified and sick i feel. it wasn’t my intention. i couldn’t tell. i was too cooked. i love you. i always will love you. i’m sorry i let you down again. i will leave you alone. i’m sorry. i really tried hard to give you my best. i’m really sorry. any favour, anywhere, anytime, i owe you. i don’t hurt people in any way and i don’t demand sex. anything else, i will do, and i was too fucked up to tell. i’m sorry. i honestly thought you were doing it.
your mum didn’t leave you at the house for two weeks. i don’t exactly fuck like a starfish [...]. i’m pretty sure it’s easy to tell when i’m into it, n when you woke me up, you tried to act like nothing happened.
i wasn’t trying to act like anything. i didn’t know you were awake. i was off my head. i realised what had gone on, and i stopped. i didn’t realise i woke you up. thanks for talking to me. i’m sorry. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked. sorry, i wasn’t being more sensitive around it.
i didn’t realise i woke you up. thanks for talking to me. i’m sorry. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked. sorry, i wasn’t being more sensitive around it.
thanks for talking to me. i’m sorry. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked. sorry, i wasn’t being more sensitive around it.
i’m sorry. i know what happened wasn’t cool. it is totally fucked. sorry, i wasn’t being more sensitive around it.
sorry, i wasn’t being more sensitive around it.
i’m not a trapist. i am sure that's meant to read rapist. i dom’t practise raping. i don’t go lokking to rape. im not doimg rapee regularly im not bany. i am not sure what that (bany) means. i did what i did. 2 times you were receptive [...]. so mamy other times and drifted off i didn’t know. the other time i went to pit... which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
i am sure that's meant to read rapist. i dom’t practise raping. i don’t go lokking to rape. im not doimg rapee regularly im not bany. i am not sure what that (bany) means. i did what i did. 2 times you were receptive [...]. so mamy other times and drifted off i didn’t know. the other time i went to pit... which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
i dom’t practise raping. i don’t go lokking to rape. im not doimg rapee regularly im not bany. i am not sure what that (bany) means. i did what i did. 2 times you were receptive [...]. so mamy other times and drifted off i didn’t know. the other time i went to pit... which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
i am not sure what that (bany) means. i did what i did. 2 times you were receptive [...]. so mamy other times and drifted off i didn’t know. the other time i went to pit... which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
i did what i did. 2 times you were receptive [...]. so mamy other times and drifted off i didn’t know. the other time i went to pit... which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
which i am sure means ‘put’ ...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
...the vibrator in i stopped and i heard a vouce say it would be rigbt. we had previously had sex, like half hour b4 hand, like a long sesh. i put it in and u woke up in sjock, and i realised what was going on. im so sorry naby.
the parents living entirely separate lives
wanted someone else so bad. you stole my car and then fucked with my head for hours. it’s really hard. i feel like i’m going insane. i know mmm.
please talk to me. are you on your way? yes, like i have that [drugs] again and a hundred dollars if you...
please. i have more of that good [drugs] from the other day here and cash for you, but you need to bring the car right now. i had to pull strings to get it here. people running around for me and everything, plus i got go as well. you promised. i need you right now. this is a bit too much for me. please, [mr q], why would you want this for me? [drugs] and cash here for you. just stop what or who you’re doing, and bring it back, please. i don’t want this stress any more. if, please, [mr q], i promised [x] you weren't taking our car anywhere without me. i promised him. please.
the law
section 60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests ... primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
section 61b meaning of parental responsibility in this part, parental responsibility, in relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children.
best interests findings
in this matter, the characteristics of the mother are important in the assessment of family violence. subpoenaed material and interview with the mother revealed she appeared fearful of both new south wales police and child protection services, and at times struggled to engage with new south wales police and child protection services with respect to reporting the father at her home, due to a belief that dcj would remove her child from her care if she continued engaging with the father. furthermore, it is acknowledged that the mother was a vulnerable person prior to the relationship with the father commencing, due to her historical mental health history from repeated trauma. and at times she has elected not to proceed with police or court intervention due to the potential toll upon her mental health. in this matter, the court child expert regards the mother’s reported mental health deterioration during and post the relationship as an indicator of the stress and trauma she was experiencing as a victim of family violence. given this pre-existing vulnerability and trauma diagnosis, there is concern that if the mother is required to engage with the father on a regular basis, a perpetrator of family violence, this will de-stabilise her mental health and consequently, decrease her parenting capacity.
conclusion
associate: dated: 15 march 2024
dated: 15 march 2024