last updated: 13 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
fannon & salzer (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 406
orders
the court orders by consent that:  x, born in 2018, and (b) y, born in 2021,   y, born in 2021,
such that the husband must pay the wife by way of periodic child support, $100 per child, per week, payable by monthly instalments, the first payment to be made on the first day of the first calendar month after the making of this order, and thereafter, by the first day of each calendar month.  educational expenses including but not limited to tuition fees, school uniforms, information technology expenses, books, and stationery, (b) extra-curricular activity expenses including but not limited to class fees, registration fees, uniform fees, and competition fees, and (c) private health insurance premiums at the current or better level and which are due and payable from time to time,   extra-curricular activity expenses including but not limited to class fees, registration fees, uniform fees, and competition fees, and (c) private health insurance premiums at the current or better level and which are due and payable from time to time,   private health insurance premiums at the current or better level and which are due and payable from time to time,   pay all such expenses to the relevant provider within 7 days of receiving an invoice from the wife or the provider, or (b) reimburse the wife if she has paid such expense at first instance within 7 days of receiving an invoice from the wife by making such payment into a bank account nominated by her.   reimburse the wife if she has paid such expense at first instance within 7 days of receiving an invoice from the wife by making such payment into a bank account nominated by her.
the court orders that:   $90,000 within 7 days of the date of these orders, and (b) the balance of $250,000 within 45 days of the date of these orders.   the balance of $250,000 within 45 days of the date of these orders.   from the date of these orders until the wife commences receipt of paid parental leave payments under the paid parental leave act 2010 (cth) (‘ppl payments’), an amount of $884 per week, and (b) from the time the wife commences to receive the ppl payments until she ceases to receive the ppl payments, an amount of $123 per week.   from the time the wife commences to receive the ppl payments until she ceases to receive the ppl payments, an amount of $123 per week.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge blake:  whether the husband should be ordered to pay spousal maintenance of $395 per week as well as further spousal maintenance of $500 per week for rental costs incurred by the wife (with such amount to be payable as a lump sum twice annually), and (b) whether, after paying $90,000 of the partial property settlement within seven days of the date of these orders, the husband is required to pay the balance of the partial property settlement within 45 days of the date of these orders (the wife’s position), or 90 days of the date of these orders (the husband’s position).   whether, after paying $90,000 of the partial property settlement within seven days of the date of these orders, the husband is required to pay the balance of the partial property settlement within 45 days of the date of these orders (the wife’s position), or 90 days of the date of these orders (the husband’s position).
background
asset
ownership
value (e)
real property at k street, suburb l
mr salzer
$830,000
real property at m street, suburb n
$625,000
o pty ltd atf o trust
joint
$187,237
25% interest in the p unit trust
$757,309
the trust
$2,968,010+
cash at bank
$n/k
me
$nil
motor vehicle 1
$17,000
motor vehicle 2
$35,000
motor vehicle 3
$2,500
motor vehicle 4
$25,000
gross assets
$5,447,056+
liability
loan secured against suburb n  40,645)
loan secured against suburb l (used to purchase property owned by o pty ltd)  18,631)
loan secured against suburb l (used to purchase property owned by trust)  19,544)
total liabilities  78,820)
net non-superannuation assets
$4,868,236+
legislation  a party to a marriage is liable to maintain the other party, to the extent that the first‑mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, if, and only if, that other party is unable to support herself or himself adequately whether: (a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   for any other adequate reason,
having regard to any relevant matter referred to in subsection 75(2). ...   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  a) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to:  a party to the marriage, or (ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by ubparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by ubparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by ubparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.
principles and approach
taken together then, we would state the law as being that an award of spousal maintenance requires:   a threshold finding under s 72, (2) consideration of s 74 and s 75(2), (3) no fettering principle that pre-separation standard of living must automatically be awarded where the respondent’s means permit, and (4) discretion exercised in accordance with the provisions of s 74, with “reasonableness in the circumstances” as the guiding principle.   to what extent can an applicant for spousal maintenance support himself or herself, (b) what are the applicant’s reasonable needs, (c) what capacity does the respondent have to meet an order, and (d) if steps 1-3 favour an applicant, what order is reasonable having regard to section 75(2) of the act.   what are the applicant’s reasonable needs, (c) what capacity does the respondent have to meet an order, and (d) if steps 1-3 favour an applicant, what order is reasonable having regard to section 75(2) of the act.   what capacity does the respondent have to meet an order, and (d) if steps 1-3 favour an applicant, what order is reasonable having regard to section 75(2) of the act.   if steps 1-3 favour an applicant, what order is reasonable having regard to section 75(2) of the act.
is the wife unable to adequately support herself for one of the stated reasons?
the competing positions of the parties  she has care of the two children of the marriage on an equal shared care basis, (b) her circumstances require her to live in between city g and town h to facilitate the orders. those circumstances include that mr d (as the father of e) is living in town h, while the husband, as the father of the children of the marriage, is living in city g, (c) she is unwell and her mental health has been affected, (d) she has the care of an infant (e). it is conceded that e is not a child of the marriage but it is submitted it is the reality and represents another adequate reason why section 72 is engaged, and (e) there are other adequate reasons that exist. these include her financial circumstances, that the husband is asset rich and controls the properties of the parties from which he derives income, and that he is the sole beneficiary of income generated from the assets of the marriage. this, in circumstances where both parties contributed to the marriage and its assets.   her circumstances require her to live in between city g and town h to facilitate the orders. those circumstances include that mr d (as the father of e) is living in town h, while the husband, as the father of the children of the marriage, is living in city g, (c) she is unwell and her mental health has been affected, (d) she has the care of an infant (e). it is conceded that e is not a child of the marriage but it is submitted it is the reality and represents another adequate reason why section 72 is engaged, and (e) there are other adequate reasons that exist. these include her financial circumstances, that the husband is asset rich and controls the properties of the parties from which he derives income, and that he is the sole beneficiary of income generated from the assets of the marriage. this, in circumstances where both parties contributed to the marriage and its assets.   she is unwell and her mental health has been affected, (d) she has the care of an infant (e). it is conceded that e is not a child of the marriage but it is submitted it is the reality and represents another adequate reason why section 72 is engaged, and (e) there are other adequate reasons that exist. these include her financial circumstances, that the husband is asset rich and controls the properties of the parties from which he derives income, and that he is the sole beneficiary of income generated from the assets of the marriage. this, in circumstances where both parties contributed to the marriage and its assets.   she has the care of an infant (e). it is conceded that e is not a child of the marriage but it is submitted it is the reality and represents another adequate reason why section 72 is engaged, and (e) there are other adequate reasons that exist. these include her financial circumstances, that the husband is asset rich and controls the properties of the parties from which he derives income, and that he is the sole beneficiary of income generated from the assets of the marriage. this, in circumstances where both parties contributed to the marriage and its assets.   there are other adequate reasons that exist. these include her financial circumstances, that the husband is asset rich and controls the properties of the parties from which he derives income, and that he is the sole beneficiary of income generated from the assets of the marriage. this, in circumstances where both parties contributed to the marriage and its assets.
the wife’s circumstances  while in city g, she has not been able to obtain accommodation because she is not in receipt of any income, (b) while in city g, she has been living with the children in motels and accommodation sourced through short stay accommodation. on occasion, she has had to check out of the hotels and been forced to try and entertain the children in local parks during the day times, (c) she is suffering from extreme guilt in relation to the children’s living arrangements, (d) for the last eight weeks, her only income has been the $866 per month that the husband is paying in child support, together with ad hoc support she has received from mr d, (e) she has had to borrow funds from her father for legal fees and living expenses, (f) she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   while in city g, she has been living with the children in motels and accommodation sourced through short stay accommodation. on occasion, she has had to check out of the hotels and been forced to try and entertain the children in local parks during the day times, (c) she is suffering from extreme guilt in relation to the children’s living arrangements, (d) for the last eight weeks, her only income has been the $866 per month that the husband is paying in child support, together with ad hoc support she has received from mr d, (e) she has had to borrow funds from her father for legal fees and living expenses, (f) she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   she is suffering from extreme guilt in relation to the children’s living arrangements, (d) for the last eight weeks, her only income has been the $866 per month that the husband is paying in child support, together with ad hoc support she has received from mr d, (e) she has had to borrow funds from her father for legal fees and living expenses, (f) she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   for the last eight weeks, her only income has been the $866 per month that the husband is paying in child support, together with ad hoc support she has received from mr d, (e) she has had to borrow funds from her father for legal fees and living expenses, (f) she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   she has had to borrow funds from her father for legal fees and living expenses, (f) she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   she intended to take 12 months parental leave, but now accepts she will be required to return to work earlier than originally intended, (g) her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   her engagement as a contractor at q company was terminated by the husband and his business partner (mr r) in mid-2023, and that her net income has decreased, (h) during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   during the marriage she received dividends and distributions from the various investments owned by the parties and she no longer receives these, and (i) she has $688.15 in her bank account.   she has $688.15 in her bank account.
income or funds available to the wife
the ppl payments
means a pension, allowance or benefit prescribed, or included in a class of pensions, allowances or benefits prescribed, for the purposes of this definition.
for the purposes of the definition of income tested pension, allowance or benefit in subsection 4(1) of the act, each of the following pensions, allowances or benefits is prescribed: (a) the following entitlements under the veterans’ entitlements act 1986: (i) a service pension within the meaning given by subsection 5q(1) of that act, (ii) a veteran payment within the meaning given by subsection 5q(1) of that act, (iii) income support supplement under part iiia of that act,   a service pension within the meaning given by subsection 5q(1) of that act, (ii) a veteran payment within the meaning given by subsection 5q(1) of that act, (iii) income support supplement under part iiia of that act,  ) a veteran payment within the meaning given by subsection 5q(1) of that act, (iii) income support supplement under part iiia of that act,  i) income support supplement under part iiia of that act,   a social security pension or a social security benefit within the meaning given by subsection 23(1) of the social security act 1991, (c) a family tax benefit within the meaning given by subsection 3(1) of the a new tax system (family assistance) act 1999, the part a rate of which is higher than the base rate under clause 4 of schedule 1 to that act, (ca) so much of an allowance under the aboriginal study assistance scheme, within the meaning given by subsection 23(1) of the social security act 1991, as is means tested, (d) the amount of a boarding allowance under the assistance for isolated children scheme, referred to in paragraph (a) of the definition of current special educational assistance scheme in subsection 3(1) of the student assistance act 1973, that is greater than the non means tested amount of the allowance,   a family tax benefit within the meaning given by subsection 3(1) of the a new tax system (family assistance) act 1999, the part a rate of which is higher than the base rate under clause 4 of schedule 1 to that act, (ca) so much of an allowance under the aboriginal study assistance scheme, within the meaning given by subsection 23(1) of the social security act 1991, as is means tested, (d) the amount of a boarding allowance under the assistance for isolated children scheme, referred to in paragraph (a) of the definition of current special educational assistance scheme in subsection 3(1) of the student assistance act 1973, that is greater than the non means tested amount of the allowance,  ) so much of an allowance under the aboriginal study assistance scheme, within the meaning given by subsection 23(1) of the social security act 1991, as is means tested, (d) the amount of a boarding allowance under the assistance for isolated children scheme, referred to in paragraph (a) of the definition of current special educational assistance scheme in subsection 3(1) of the student assistance act 1973, that is greater than the non means tested amount of the allowance,   the amount of a boarding allowance under the assistance for isolated children scheme, referred to in paragraph (a) of the definition of current special educational assistance scheme in subsection 3(1) of the student assistance act 1973, that is greater than the non means tested amount of the allowance,   a payment under the scheme known as the new enterprise incentive scheme, (ea) a payment under the program known as: (i) the self‑employment assistance program, or (ii) if the self‑employment assistance program is known by another name—that other name,   the self‑employment assistance program, or (ii) if the self‑employment assistance program is known by another name—that other name,  ) if the self‑employment assistance program is known by another name—that other name,   an austudy benefit under part 2 of the student and youth assistance act 1973 as in force immediately before 1 july 1998.   an age pension, or (b) a disability support pension, or (d) a carer payment, or (e) a pension pp (single), or (ea) a sole parent pension, or (k) a special needs pension.  b) youth allowance, or (aac) austudy payment, or (a) jobseeker payment, or (d) special benefit, or (f) benefit pp (partnered), or (g) parenting allowance (other than non‑benefit allowance).
the payments from mr d
the child support payments made by the husband to the wife
summary of the wife’s income position
the wife’s expenses
summary of wife’s expenses
is the wife unable to support herself for one of the stated reasons in section 72 of the act?  the wife has the care of three children, including a very young infant. true it is that section 72(1)(a) of the act refers only to children of the marriage, however, i am also required to take account of section 75(2)(l) which is ‘the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent’. i note that section 75(2)(l) does not limit the role of a parent to children of the marriage. it is plainly the wife’s desire to be a parent at this time not only to the children of the marriage, but also to newly born e. the parenting role in this respect not only encompasses what i have said above, but ensures the children of the marriage adjust to life with their new half-sibling, (b) i am also required to take account of section 75(2)(d), that is, both parties’ commitments that are necessary to enable them to support themselves and any child that the person has a duty to maintain. clearly, the wife is not able to maintain herself, given the evidence. further, her financial position means that her ability to maintain the children of the marriage and e is compromised, (c) there are additional rental costs that will be incurred because of the wife’s movement between city g and town h. i have referred earlier to the circumstances in which this occurred. it is an unfortunate situation. this is a significant additional expense. the wife would not have been able to meet it had she continued working. the fact that this has arisen around the time she likely commenced parental leave has exacerbated the situation. the wife ought not carry the consequence of this by herself, given the circumstances of how the wife came to incur additional cost in town h, and when one has regard to section 75(2)(o), (d) this is a relationship of around ten years duration, and a marriage of around five years duration. there are two children of that marriage. no doubt there are disputes about who made what contributions to the marriage. given the duration of the marriage, however, it is likely that both parties contributed to the income, property and financial resources of the marriage. i am required to take these matters into account given the terms of section 75(2)(j), (e) the wealth of these parties is to be found in the assets they control. as matters stand, it is the husband that has control over those assets. there is evidence before the court (that i expand upon below) that shows that the husband is drawing upon income generated by those assets to fund himself. this includes funding his representation in these proceedings. that of itself in my view, but certainly in conjunction with the other matters i have referred to above, leads me to conclude there are other adequate reasons why the wife is unable to support itself, and (f) it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.   i am also required to take account of section 75(2)(d), that is, both parties’ commitments that are necessary to enable them to support themselves and any child that the person has a duty to maintain. clearly, the wife is not able to maintain herself, given the evidence. further, her financial position means that her ability to maintain the children of the marriage and e is compromised, (c) there are additional rental costs that will be incurred because of the wife’s movement between city g and town h. i have referred earlier to the circumstances in which this occurred. it is an unfortunate situation. this is a significant additional expense. the wife would not have been able to meet it had she continued working. the fact that this has arisen around the time she likely commenced parental leave has exacerbated the situation. the wife ought not carry the consequence of this by herself, given the circumstances of how the wife came to incur additional cost in town h, and when one has regard to section 75(2)(o), (d) this is a relationship of around ten years duration, and a marriage of around five years duration. there are two children of that marriage. no doubt there are disputes about who made what contributions to the marriage. given the duration of the marriage, however, it is likely that both parties contributed to the income, property and financial resources of the marriage. i am required to take these matters into account given the terms of section 75(2)(j), (e) the wealth of these parties is to be found in the assets they control. as matters stand, it is the husband that has control over those assets. there is evidence before the court (that i expand upon below) that shows that the husband is drawing upon income generated by those assets to fund himself. this includes funding his representation in these proceedings. that of itself in my view, but certainly in conjunction with the other matters i have referred to above, leads me to conclude there are other adequate reasons why the wife is unable to support itself, and (f) it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.   there are additional rental costs that will be incurred because of the wife’s movement between city g and town h. i have referred earlier to the circumstances in which this occurred. it is an unfortunate situation. this is a significant additional expense. the wife would not have been able to meet it had she continued working. the fact that this has arisen around the time she likely commenced parental leave has exacerbated the situation. the wife ought not carry the consequence of this by herself, given the circumstances of how the wife came to incur additional cost in town h, and when one has regard to section 75(2)(o), (d) this is a relationship of around ten years duration, and a marriage of around five years duration. there are two children of that marriage. no doubt there are disputes about who made what contributions to the marriage. given the duration of the marriage, however, it is likely that both parties contributed to the income, property and financial resources of the marriage. i am required to take these matters into account given the terms of section 75(2)(j), (e) the wealth of these parties is to be found in the assets they control. as matters stand, it is the husband that has control over those assets. there is evidence before the court (that i expand upon below) that shows that the husband is drawing upon income generated by those assets to fund himself. this includes funding his representation in these proceedings. that of itself in my view, but certainly in conjunction with the other matters i have referred to above, leads me to conclude there are other adequate reasons why the wife is unable to support itself, and (f) it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.   this is a relationship of around ten years duration, and a marriage of around five years duration. there are two children of that marriage. no doubt there are disputes about who made what contributions to the marriage. given the duration of the marriage, however, it is likely that both parties contributed to the income, property and financial resources of the marriage. i am required to take these matters into account given the terms of section 75(2)(j), (e) the wealth of these parties is to be found in the assets they control. as matters stand, it is the husband that has control over those assets. there is evidence before the court (that i expand upon below) that shows that the husband is drawing upon income generated by those assets to fund himself. this includes funding his representation in these proceedings. that of itself in my view, but certainly in conjunction with the other matters i have referred to above, leads me to conclude there are other adequate reasons why the wife is unable to support itself, and (f) it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.   the wealth of these parties is to be found in the assets they control. as matters stand, it is the husband that has control over those assets. there is evidence before the court (that i expand upon below) that shows that the husband is drawing upon income generated by those assets to fund himself. this includes funding his representation in these proceedings. that of itself in my view, but certainly in conjunction with the other matters i have referred to above, leads me to conclude there are other adequate reasons why the wife is unable to support itself, and (f) it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.   it is by no means clear that the wife was adequately able to support herself prior to ceasing work and giving birth to e.
summary of the wife’s position
whether the husband is reasonably able to maintain the wife  the husband’s personal bank account shows deposits into it over the period 30 december 2023 to 21 february 2024 from v pty ltd, q company, and rent from a property at suburb n. these entities are connected with the trust. the total amount of these deposits over the period is approximately $19,990. there is a curiosity about the payments the husband has received into his personal account from q company: (i) there are three payments from q company to the husband’s personal account. those deposits are for the amounts of $3263.91 on 2 january 2024, $3613.40 on 2 january 2024, and $3613.40 on 13 february 2024, (ii) the husband says in his affidavit that he is temporarily acting as the manager for q company and he expects to conclude in that role ‘next month’. he says that from taking that role, he has been paid $3,700 gross per month, (iii) the amounts paid to the husband’s personal account from q company are not consistent with the amount the husband sets out in his affidavit, (iv) the income from q company has not been disclosed in the husband’s financial statement filed 6 march 2024, even though on his own evidence, he is performing that role until early 2024, (b) the account for u company shows a deposit on 24 november 2023 of $12,000 from the salzer family trust bank account. the statements also reveal the salzer account being used to cover a range of what would appear to be personal expenses including for various retail outlets as well as hotels and taverns, (c) the bank trust account shows a payment on wednesday, 10 january 2024 of $12,100 for what would appear to be counsel’s fees (noting that there was a hearing before the court on 11 january 2024), and (d) the trust account shows deposits in from a range of sources as well as payments out, including to the husband’s personal accounts.   there are three payments from q company to the husband’s personal account. those deposits are for the amounts of $3263.91 on 2 january 2024, $3613.40 on 2 january 2024, and $3613.40 on 13 february 2024, (ii) the husband says in his affidavit that he is temporarily acting as the manager for q company and he expects to conclude in that role ‘next month’. he says that from taking that role, he has been paid $3,700 gross per month, (iii) the amounts paid to the husband’s personal account from q company are not consistent with the amount the husband sets out in his affidavit, (iv) the income from q company has not been disclosed in the husband’s financial statement filed 6 march 2024, even though on his own evidence, he is performing that role until early 2024,  ) the husband says in his affidavit that he is temporarily acting as the manager for q company and he expects to conclude in that role ‘next month’. he says that from taking that role, he has been paid $3,700 gross per month, (iii) the amounts paid to the husband’s personal account from q company are not consistent with the amount the husband sets out in his affidavit, (iv) the income from q company has not been disclosed in the husband’s financial statement filed 6 march 2024, even though on his own evidence, he is performing that role until early 2024,  i) the amounts paid to the husband’s personal account from q company are not consistent with the amount the husband sets out in his affidavit, (iv) the income from q company has not been disclosed in the husband’s financial statement filed 6 march 2024, even though on his own evidence, he is performing that role until early 2024,  ) the income from q company has not been disclosed in the husband’s financial statement filed 6 march 2024, even though on his own evidence, he is performing that role until early 2024,   the account for u company shows a deposit on 24 november 2023 of $12,000 from the salzer family trust bank account. the statements also reveal the salzer account being used to cover a range of what would appear to be personal expenses including for various retail outlets as well as hotels and taverns, (c) the bank trust account shows a payment on wednesday, 10 january 2024 of $12,100 for what would appear to be counsel’s fees (noting that there was a hearing before the court on 11 january 2024), and (d) the trust account shows deposits in from a range of sources as well as payments out, including to the husband’s personal accounts.   the bank trust account shows a payment on wednesday, 10 january 2024 of $12,100 for what would appear to be counsel’s fees (noting that there was a hearing before the court on 11 january 2024), and (d) the trust account shows deposits in from a range of sources as well as payments out, including to the husband’s personal accounts.   the trust account shows deposits in from a range of sources as well as payments out, including to the husband’s personal accounts.   for the fy2021, total income was $245,173 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $179,460, (b) for fy2022, total income was $293,057 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $201,188, (c) for fy2023, total income was $174,479 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $21,999, (d) for fy2022, distributions were recorded as being made to ms w, mr z and the wife. the husband accepts that the amounts were not actually paid to those persons, and (e) for fy2023, distributions are recorded as being made to ms w and mr z. again, it seems to be accepted that these amounts will not be actually paid to those persons.   for fy2022, total income was $293,057 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $201,188, (c) for fy2023, total income was $174,479 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $21,999, (d) for fy2022, distributions were recorded as being made to ms w, mr z and the wife. the husband accepts that the amounts were not actually paid to those persons, and (e) for fy2023, distributions are recorded as being made to ms w and mr z. again, it seems to be accepted that these amounts will not be actually paid to those persons.   for fy2023, total income was $174,479 and profit after expenses, but before distribution was $21,999, (d) for fy2022, distributions were recorded as being made to ms w, mr z and the wife. the husband accepts that the amounts were not actually paid to those persons, and (e) for fy2023, distributions are recorded as being made to ms w and mr z. again, it seems to be accepted that these amounts will not be actually paid to those persons.   for fy2022, distributions were recorded as being made to ms w, mr z and the wife. the husband accepts that the amounts were not actually paid to those persons, and (e) for fy2023, distributions are recorded as being made to ms w and mr z. again, it seems to be accepted that these amounts will not be actually paid to those persons.   for fy2023, distributions are recorded as being made to ms w and mr z. again, it seems to be accepted that these amounts will not be actually paid to those persons.   there is no evidence before me as to the nature of the capital gain of $130,325 in fy2022 or whether it is a one-off matter, (b) accepting that the dividend from q company may not be repeated given the dispute between the owners in respect of that business, i note the following. first, while the husband says the business is being wound up, he also says it would be his preference that he and mr r (his business partner) pay mr d out. if that is the case, there may well be future dividends from q company, though i accept there will also be a cost with paying mr d. second, if the business is indeed wound up, i note the husband says that mr d will receive a substantial share. it is not clear how that would arise or what that means, or whether the husband may too receive a share from the wind up, and (c) the interest charges for the items identified appears to have doubled between fy2022 and fy2023. the only explanation given for that in submissions (not evidence) was that interest rates had increased. no evidence is before me as to effective interest rates and how they changed in fy2022 and fy2023, or whether the rates doubled in that time.   accepting that the dividend from q company may not be repeated given the dispute between the owners in respect of that business, i note the following. first, while the husband says the business is being wound up, he also says it would be his preference that he and mr r (his business partner) pay mr d out. if that is the case, there may well be future dividends from q company, though i accept there will also be a cost with paying mr d. second, if the business is indeed wound up, i note the husband says that mr d will receive a substantial share. it is not clear how that would arise or what that means, or whether the husband may too receive a share from the wind up, and (c) the interest charges for the items identified appears to have doubled between fy2022 and fy2023. the only explanation given for that in submissions (not evidence) was that interest rates had increased. no evidence is before me as to effective interest rates and how they changed in fy2022 and fy2023, or whether the rates doubled in that time.   the interest charges for the items identified appears to have doubled between fy2022 and fy2023. the only explanation given for that in submissions (not evidence) was that interest rates had increased. no evidence is before me as to effective interest rates and how they changed in fy2022 and fy2023, or whether the rates doubled in that time.
what order is reasonable?
when should the balance of the partial property settlement be paid?
associate: dated: 3 april 2024
dated: 3 april 2024
[1] item 13 of the wife’s second financial statement.[2] part o (iii) of the wife’s second financial statement.