last updated: 13 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
filipovic & filipovic (no 4) [2024] fedcfamc2f 439
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for reserved judgment
an application for costs  the wife to file and serve no later than 7 days after these orders, and (b) the husband, the brother and the companies file and serve no later than 14 days after these orders.  ferred to hereafter as order [8])
section 117 of the act
background
the july 2023 reasons phasis added)
the february 2024 reasons
... i am satisfied that the very late filing did prejudice the wife, at least to some degree. disputes as to disclosure are tedious and time consuming. time is required to properly deal with them. electronic filing on the thursday or friday before a hearing on the monday, fixed some three months previously, does not permit not only the lawyers but the lay party to come to grips with the substance and the detail of responding material. the judicial registrar had good reason to set out the filing regime he did. the late filing set that scheme at naught. the late filing seriously inconvenienced the court and the applicant party. the lay party has to provide instructions in a rush. that prejudices her. balancing all of the evidence, including the lack of deposed reasons for late filing, the very late filing (as opposed to late but still a month or couple of weeks before the hearing), the overarching purpose of the legislation and the rules and the fact that these were court orders (not advisory suggestions), i was and am, not satisfied i should vary the interim hearing orders to permit reliance on the very late filed and served material.
wife’s submissions  the conduct of each of the respondents in relation to the proceedings including in relation to discovery and production of documents (s 117(2a)(c)), (ii) the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of each of the respondents to comply with orders including order 3 of the orders of 16 august 2023 and the order of 11 october 2023 (s 117(2a)(d)), (iii) offers in writing (s 117(2a)(f)), (iv) other matters the court considers relevant (s 112(2a)(g).  ) the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of each of the respondents to comply with orders including order 3 of the orders of 16 august 2023 and the order of 11 october 2023 (s 117(2a)(d)), (iii) offers in writing (s 117(2a)(f)), (iv) other matters the court considers relevant (s 112(2a)(g).  i) offers in writing (s 117(2a)(f)), (iv) other matters the court considers relevant (s 112(2a)(g).  ) other matters the court considers relevant (s 112(2a)(g).
rule 1.33 failure to comply with a legislative provision or order
... (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:
... (d) order costs,
... note: this subrule does not limit the powers of the court. it is an expectation that a non-defaulting party will minimise any loss.
"we remind you also that the only basis upon which our client was prepared to agree to '"desktop" valuations, was that all existing or recently expired leases associated with the commercial properties were provided to [mr ee] from [dd] pty ltd. it is of significant concern that notwithstanding that concession made by our client, it is now being represented that leases may not be made available to the valuer. this is wholly unacceptable, and in the event that your client, being a director and shareholder of companies that own those properties, now asserts that he is not able to produce leases associated with those commercial properties, our client will have no choice other than to apply to the court seeking an order for the production of those leases. in the event that such an application becomes necessary, this letter will be tendered to the court on the a question of costs. (emphasis added)
husband’s submissions: the extant ruling: documents could not be relied upon
... the husband was not in breach of any orders concerning the disclosure/discovery at the time the wife’s application was filed, nor at the time of the hearing of the application. any assertion ... that the husband was in breach of orders relating to disclosure/discovery at the time of filing her application or at the hearing is misleading and denied. we refer to paragraph 23 and 24 of the husband’s affidavit filed 15 february 2024 which demonstrates the significant and complete production of documents made by the husband in answer to the wife’s request for documents made pursuant to order 3 of the orders dated 16 august 2023. it is also submitted that the wife makes her application seeking discovery from the husband in circumstances where she has failed, and continues with that failure (to date) to make proper discovery in relation to trusts of which she is a beneficiary. we refer to paragraphs 21 and 22 of the husband’s affidavit filed 15 february 2024 in that regard. the husband has also sought production of documents from the wife in his response to the wife’s application filed 15 february 2024. the documents sought by the husband are the same type of documents (ie documents relating to trusts in which the wife is a beneficiary) that this honourable court has ordered the husband to produce. this is relevant when taking into account section 112(2a)(g) of the family law act on a costs application - “other matters the court considers relevant”. ... it is submitted that the court may have regard to the affidavit of the husband filed 15 february 2024 for the purposes of determining the costs application made by the wife. while the affidavit was not accepted for the purposes of the substantive application, the matters set out in the husband’s affidavit will be, it is submitted, illuminating for the court. in that context, it is not surprising that the wife did all she could to prevent the court, successfully, from having regard to that affidavit and the husband’s response filed prior to the commencement of business on 15 february 2024 (4 days prior to the hearing). (emphasis added)
1.33 failure to comply with a legislative provision or order   if a step is taken after the time specified for taking the step by these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the step is of no effect. (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:   if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:   dismiss all or part of the proceeding, (b) set aside a step taken or an order made, (c) determine the proceeding as if it were undefended, (d) order costs, (e) prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04). (emphasis added)   prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).
implicit application to revisit extant ruling?
further submissions of the husband
the brother and the companies’ submissions
decision as to costs
“... ultimately, my submission was going to be based on one reading of both rules, and a reading of division 2 rules are very much event or court-based event orientated in terms of it being court-based events and little regard to the work backstage, if i can put it that way... in terms of the professional costs incurred by a party via lawyers or disbursements in terms of counsel and whatnot (as complied to the applicable scale for division 1)...”
husband to pay one half of the wife’s costs
brother and companies to pay one half of the wife’s costs
associate: dated: 11 april 2024 schedule of parties
dated: 11 april 2024 schedule of parties
schedule of parties
fourth respondent:
d pty ltd
[1] the husband, the brother and the companies are collectively referred to herein as the ‘2nd to 4th respondents’.[2] wife’s written submissions filed 5 march 2024, 1. [3] husband’s written submissions filed 12 march 2024, 2.[4] at [7].[5] at [7].[6] ibid, 3.[7] table of overlap of discovery/disclosure on pages 3 and 4 of the companies written submissions filed 13 march 2024.