last updated: 17 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jin & zhen (no 3) [2024] fedcfamc2f 440
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility   before a final decision is made, provide the mother with at least seven (7) days’ notice in writing of any long-term decision in relation to x’s care, except in the case of an emergency, (b) take into genuine consideration any views or opinions expressed by the mother, and (c) notify the mother in writing by email of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   take into genuine consideration any views or opinions expressed by the mother, and (c) notify the mother in writing by email of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.   notify the mother in writing by email of the final decision as soon as reasonably practicable.
live with
the mother’s time with x for the first month after orders are made  the father’s home, (b) the grounds of any school that x may attend from time to time, and (c) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that x may participate in from time to time.   the grounds of any school that x may attend from time to time, and (c) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that x may participate in from time to time.   any after school activity or extracurricular activities that x may participate in from time to time.
the mother’s time with x after the one-month moratorium   during the school term, each alternate weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until wednesday at the beginning of school (or 9.00 am if a non-school day) commencing 10 may 2024. (b) during nsw school holiday periods commencing from the term 3, 2024 school holidays: (i) for half of the nsw gazetted school holidays, being the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (ii) for the purposes of calculating time, the school holidays will commence on the first day following the last day of school term at 5.00 pm, and end on the day before the first day of the next school term at 5.00 pm. (iii) for the purposes of calculating time, the first half of the school holidays will end on the first sunday of the school holidays at 5.00 pm. (iv) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended. (c) on x’s birthday as follows: (i) if his birthday falls on a school day, from after school to 7.00 pm. (ii) if his birthday falls on a non-school day, from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 3.00 pm to 7.00 pm (or from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm if a non-school day). (e) on mother’s day, on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (f) such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   during nsw school holiday periods commencing from the term 3, 2024 school holidays: (i) for half of the nsw gazetted school holidays, being the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (ii) for the purposes of calculating time, the school holidays will commence on the first day following the last day of school term at 5.00 pm, and end on the day before the first day of the next school term at 5.00 pm. (iii) for the purposes of calculating time, the first half of the school holidays will end on the first sunday of the school holidays at 5.00 pm. (iv) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended. (c) on x’s birthday as follows: (i) if his birthday falls on a school day, from after school to 7.00 pm. (ii) if his birthday falls on a non-school day, from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 3.00 pm to 7.00 pm (or from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm if a non-school day). (e) on mother’s day, on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (f) such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   for half of the nsw gazetted school holidays, being the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (ii) for the purposes of calculating time, the school holidays will commence on the first day following the last day of school term at 5.00 pm, and end on the day before the first day of the next school term at 5.00 pm. (iii) for the purposes of calculating time, the first half of the school holidays will end on the first sunday of the school holidays at 5.00 pm. (iv) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended.  ) for the purposes of calculating time, the school holidays will commence on the first day following the last day of school term at 5.00 pm, and end on the day before the first day of the next school term at 5.00 pm. (iii) for the purposes of calculating time, the first half of the school holidays will end on the first sunday of the school holidays at 5.00 pm. (iv) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended.  i) for the purposes of calculating time, the first half of the school holidays will end on the first sunday of the school holidays at 5.00 pm. (iv) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended.  ) during school holiday periods the spend time with arrangement set out on order 8(a) will be suspended.   on x’s birthday as follows: (i) if his birthday falls on a school day, from after school to 7.00 pm. (ii) if his birthday falls on a non-school day, from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 3.00 pm to 7.00 pm (or from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm if a non-school day). (e) on mother’s day, on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (f) such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   if his birthday falls on a school day, from after school to 7.00 pm. (ii) if his birthday falls on a non-school day, from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm.  ) if his birthday falls on a non-school day, from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm.   on the mother’s birthday from 3.00 pm to 7.00 pm (or from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm if a non-school day). (e) on mother’s day, on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (f) such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   on mother’s day, on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (f) such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   such further time as may be agreed in writing between the mother and the father.   on father’s day, x shall spend time with the father on the weekend from friday after school (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) until sunday 5.00 pm. (b) on the day of lunar new year: (i) with the mother, in even numbered years: on school days, from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. (ii) with the father, in odd numbered years: on school days from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. (c) during christmas: (i) with the mother: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in even numbered years. (ii) with the father: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in even numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in odd numbered years.   on the day of lunar new year: (i) with the mother, in even numbered years: on school days, from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. (ii) with the father, in odd numbered years: on school days from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. (c) during christmas: (i) with the mother: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in even numbered years. (ii) with the father: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in even numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in odd numbered years.   with the mother, in even numbered years: on school days, from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. (ii) with the father, in odd numbered years: on school days from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm.  ) with the father, in odd numbered years: on school days from after school to 9.00 pm. on non-school days, from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm.   during christmas: (i) with the mother: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in even numbered years. (ii) with the father: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in even numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in odd numbered years.   with the mother: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in odd numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in even numbered years. (ii) with the father: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in even numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in odd numbered years.  ) with the father: from 10.00 am on christmas eve until 10.00 am on christmas day in even numbered years, and from 10.00 am on christmas day until 10.00 am on boxing day in odd numbered years.
changeover   speak to each other respectfully, and (b) limit their conversation to matters that only relate to x’s care, including but not limited to, the matters contained in orders 21(c), 25, and 26 herein.   limit their conversation to matters that only relate to x’s care, including but not limited to, the matters contained in orders 21(c), 25, and 26 herein.
communication   by phone call in relation to matters of an urgent nature, (b) by sms text message about day-to-day matters, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the child, and (c) by email when a document or attachment needs to be sent to the other parent.   by sms text message about day-to-day matters, including arrangements for each parent to spend time with the child, and (c) by email when a document or attachment needs to be sent to the other parent.   by email when a document or attachment needs to be sent to the other parent.   any change in telephone contact numbers and email address, and such notification be made in writing by sms text message and within three (3) days of any change, and (b) any proposed change to their place of residence, and such notification be made in writing by sms text message and no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed change.   any proposed change to their place of residence, and such notification be made in writing by sms text message and no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed change.
x’s health, education and extracurricular activities   attend upon x’s gp, or in the event x does not have a usual gp, the father’s own gp, for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment by a mental health professional in relation to managing the change in living circumstances, (b) provide a sealed copy of these orders and reasons for judgment to the referred mental health professional, and (c) ensure that x attends upon any referred mental health professional for as long as recommended by them.   provide a sealed copy of these orders and reasons for judgment to the referred mental health professional, and (c) ensure that x attends upon any referred mental health professional for as long as recommended by them.   ensure that x attends upon any referred mental health professional for as long as recommended by them.   by sms text message, provide the other parent with the names and addresses of x’s treating doctors, (b) by sms text message, inform the other parent as soon as practicable of any specialist medical appointments, including appointments with any dentist, optometrist, psychologist, psychiatrist, counsellor or therapist (“specialist medical consultant”) in relation to x, and (c) by email, ensure that the other parent is provided a copy of any report by any such specialist medical consultant in relation to x within fourteen (14) days of the parent’s receipt of such report.   by sms text message, inform the other parent as soon as practicable of any specialist medical appointments, including appointments with any dentist, optometrist, psychologist, psychiatrist, counsellor or therapist (“specialist medical consultant”) in relation to x, and (c) by email, ensure that the other parent is provided a copy of any report by any such specialist medical consultant in relation to x within fourteen (14) days of the parent’s receipt of such report.   by email, ensure that the other parent is provided a copy of any report by any such specialist medical consultant in relation to x within fourteen (14) days of the parent’s receipt of such report.   x is admitted to hospital, or (b) x is involved in a medical emergency, or (c) x is prescribed medication, they shall provide to the other parent sufficient medication to cover the period that x spends with the other parent, in which case the parent shall advise the other parent of the following: (i) the name of the prescribed medication that x must take, and (ii) the reasons why x is taking this prescribed medication.   x is involved in a medical emergency, or (c) x is prescribed medication, they shall provide to the other parent sufficient medication to cover the period that x spends with the other parent, in which case the parent shall advise the other parent of the following: (i) the name of the prescribed medication that x must take, and (ii) the reasons why x is taking this prescribed medication.   x is prescribed medication, they shall provide to the other parent sufficient medication to cover the period that x spends with the other parent, in which case the parent shall advise the other parent of the following: (i) the name of the prescribed medication that x must take, and (ii) the reasons why x is taking this prescribed medication.   the name of the prescribed medication that x must take, and (ii) the reasons why x is taking this prescribed medication.  ) the reasons why x is taking this prescribed medication.   inform the other parent as soon as practicable of the extracurricular activity x has been enrolled in, (b) provide the other parent of the schedule of this extracurricular activity, including times for any lessons, events, concerts, and/or competitions, and (c) ensure that x takes with him any item/s he requires to properly attend, engage and/or participate in the extracurricular activity, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that x returns with such item/s.   provide the other parent of the schedule of this extracurricular activity, including times for any lessons, events, concerts, and/or competitions, and (c) ensure that x takes with him any item/s he requires to properly attend, engage and/or participate in the extracurricular activity, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that x returns with such item/s.   ensure that x takes with him any item/s he requires to properly attend, engage and/or participate in the extracurricular activity, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that x returns with such item/s.
overseas travel   the parent intending to travel with x (“the travelling parent”) shall provide the other parent a written notice of the proposed travel at least 28 days prior to the date of departure from australia, including but not limited to, the following: (i) dates of departure and arrival, (ii) destination/s of travel, (iii) arrangements for the care and supervision of x during the period of proposed travel. (b) the period of proposed travel shall, as far as practicable, not affect x’s attendance at school and/or such other extracurricular activities as x is enrolled, (c) where the period of proposed travel will affect the other parent’s obligation to spend time with x, the travelling parent shall propose a suitable make up time for the other parent to comply with their obligations to spend time, and (d) where the period of proposed travel is for bereavement purposes or other circumstances of family emergency, the notice period in order 27(a) herein shall be reduced to 48 hours.   dates of departure and arrival, (ii) destination/s of travel, (iii) arrangements for the care and supervision of x during the period of proposed travel.  ) destination/s of travel, (iii) arrangements for the care and supervision of x during the period of proposed travel.  i) arrangements for the care and supervision of x during the period of proposed travel.   the period of proposed travel shall, as far as practicable, not affect x’s attendance at school and/or such other extracurricular activities as x is enrolled, (c) where the period of proposed travel will affect the other parent’s obligation to spend time with x, the travelling parent shall propose a suitable make up time for the other parent to comply with their obligations to spend time, and (d) where the period of proposed travel is for bereavement purposes or other circumstances of family emergency, the notice period in order 27(a) herein shall be reduced to 48 hours.   where the period of proposed travel will affect the other parent’s obligation to spend time with x, the travelling parent shall propose a suitable make up time for the other parent to comply with their obligations to spend time, and (d) where the period of proposed travel is for bereavement purposes or other circumstances of family emergency, the notice period in order 27(a) herein shall be reduced to 48 hours.   where the period of proposed travel is for bereavement purposes or other circumstances of family emergency, the notice period in order 27(a) herein shall be reduced to 48 hours.
restraints   speak of the other parent respectfully, (b) not denigrate or insult the other parent or any member of the other parent’s household or immediate family in the presence or hearing of x, and (c) use their best endeavours to ensure that other persons do not denigrate or insult the other parent or any member of the other parent’s household or immediate family in the presence or hearing of x.   not denigrate or insult the other parent or any member of the other parent’s household or immediate family in the presence or hearing of x, and (c) use their best endeavours to ensure that other persons do not denigrate or insult the other parent or any member of the other parent’s household or immediate family in the presence or hearing of x.   use their best endeavours to ensure that other persons do not denigrate or insult the other parent or any member of the other parent’s household or immediate family in the presence or hearing of x.   swearing or using obscenities in front of x or within x’s hearing, and (b) using physical force to discipline x.   using physical force to discipline x.
costs   $8,780 to the proper officer of legal aid nsw. (b) in payment to the child support agency of any monies currently outstanding in relation to child support assessed for x. (c) the remainder to the mother.   in payment to the child support agency of any monies currently outstanding in relation to child support assessed for x. (c) the remainder to the mother.   the remainder to the mother.
independent children’s lawyer
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
introduction
issues in dispute   which parent x should live with, (b) how much time x should spend with the parent he is not living with, (c) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x be allocated, and (d) international travel.   how much time x should spend with the parent he is not living with, (c) how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x be allocated, and (d) international travel.   how parental responsibility for long-term decisions about x be allocated, and (d) international travel.   international travel.
evidence
relevant facts and procedural background
proposals   the parties have equal shared responsibility for x. (b) x live with the father. (c) x spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term: each alternate week from 3.00 pm wednesday until 9.00 am the following monday, (ii) half the school holidays. (d) the parties ensure that x remains enrolled and attends any extracurricular activities he is enrolled in. (e) the parties are at liberty to contact or otherwise communicate with x when he is not in their care. (f) both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   x live with the father. (c) x spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term: each alternate week from 3.00 pm wednesday until 9.00 am the following monday, (ii) half the school holidays. (d) the parties ensure that x remains enrolled and attends any extracurricular activities he is enrolled in. (e) the parties are at liberty to contact or otherwise communicate with x when he is not in their care. (f) both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   x spend time with the mother: (i) during the school term: each alternate week from 3.00 pm wednesday until 9.00 am the following monday, (ii) half the school holidays. (d) the parties ensure that x remains enrolled and attends any extracurricular activities he is enrolled in. (e) the parties are at liberty to contact or otherwise communicate with x when he is not in their care. (f) both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   during the school term: each alternate week from 3.00 pm wednesday until 9.00 am the following monday, (ii) half the school holidays.  ) half the school holidays.   the parties ensure that x remains enrolled and attends any extracurricular activities he is enrolled in. (e) the parties are at liberty to contact or otherwise communicate with x when he is not in their care. (f) both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   the parties are at liberty to contact or otherwise communicate with x when he is not in their care. (f) both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   both parties be permitted to travel internationally with x. (g) the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   the parties be restrained by injunction from: (i) denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings. (h) the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   denigrating each other, any partner and members of the other party’s family to or in the presence of or hearing of x or allowing any person to do so. (ii) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings.  ) commenting upon, discussing or referring to any proceedings between the parties to or in the presence of or hearing of x. (iii) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings.  i) showing or leaving accessible to x any document connected with these proceedings.   the mother must enrol and complete a parenting after separation – focus on kids course provided by m centre. (i) the mother pay for the father’s costs.   the mother pay for the father’s costs.   she conceded that the parties would share parental responsibility for x, but she sought sole parental responsibility in relation to international travel and the issuing of travel documentation, including x’s passport. (b) x live with her. (c) x spend time with the father in accordance with his wishes and only during the day. (d) changeovers be facilitated by the maternal grandparents, or for x to take himself to and from the parties’ residences. (e) x contact and communicate with the father in accordance with his wishes. (f) x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   x live with her. (c) x spend time with the father in accordance with his wishes and only during the day. (d) changeovers be facilitated by the maternal grandparents, or for x to take himself to and from the parties’ residences. (e) x contact and communicate with the father in accordance with his wishes. (f) x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   x spend time with the father in accordance with his wishes and only during the day. (d) changeovers be facilitated by the maternal grandparents, or for x to take himself to and from the parties’ residences. (e) x contact and communicate with the father in accordance with his wishes. (f) x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   changeovers be facilitated by the maternal grandparents, or for x to take himself to and from the parties’ residences. (e) x contact and communicate with the father in accordance with his wishes. (f) x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   x contact and communicate with the father in accordance with his wishes. (f) x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   x be permitted to travel internationally with the mother only.   the father have sole parental responsibility for x in consultation with the mother. (b) x live with the father. (c) x spend no time with the mother for a period of four weeks from the date of the orders. (d) after a period of four weeks, the mother spend time with x as follows: (i) during the school term, each alternative weekend from after school friday (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on wednesday (or 9.00 am if a non-school day), (ii) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions. (e) changeovers to occur at x’s school. (f) within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   x live with the father. (c) x spend no time with the mother for a period of four weeks from the date of the orders. (d) after a period of four weeks, the mother spend time with x as follows: (i) during the school term, each alternative weekend from after school friday (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on wednesday (or 9.00 am if a non-school day), (ii) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions. (e) changeovers to occur at x’s school. (f) within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   x spend no time with the mother for a period of four weeks from the date of the orders. (d) after a period of four weeks, the mother spend time with x as follows: (i) during the school term, each alternative weekend from after school friday (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on wednesday (or 9.00 am if a non-school day), (ii) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions. (e) changeovers to occur at x’s school. (f) within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   after a period of four weeks, the mother spend time with x as follows: (i) during the school term, each alternative weekend from after school friday (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on wednesday (or 9.00 am if a non-school day), (ii) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions. (e) changeovers to occur at x’s school. (f) within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   during the school term, each alternative weekend from after school friday (or 3.00 pm if a non-school day) to the commencement of school on wednesday (or 9.00 am if a non-school day), (ii) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions.  ) during the school holidays, for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years, and (iii) on special occasions.  i) on special occasions.   changeovers to occur at x’s school. (f) within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   within seven days of the orders, the father attend upon a gp for the purposes of obtaining a referral for x for psychological treatment in relation to managing the change in living circumstances. (g) the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   the parties shall ensure that x remains enrolled and attends his extracurricular activities he is presently enrolled in for terms 1 and 2, 2024. (h) both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   both parties are permitted to travel internationally with x, and the father to hold x’s passport. (i) the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.   the parties pay the icl’s costs of $8,780 equally.
the expert evidence   the parties share parental responsibility for x. (b) x live with the mother. (c) x spend time with the father each alternate weekend, from after school on friday to before school on wednesday. (d) x spend half the school holidays with each parent. (e) the mother be ordered to complete a post separation group parenting program of four to six weeks duration. (f) the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   x live with the mother. (c) x spend time with the father each alternate weekend, from after school on friday to before school on wednesday. (d) x spend half the school holidays with each parent. (e) the mother be ordered to complete a post separation group parenting program of four to six weeks duration. (f) the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   x spend time with the father each alternate weekend, from after school on friday to before school on wednesday. (d) x spend half the school holidays with each parent. (e) the mother be ordered to complete a post separation group parenting program of four to six weeks duration. (f) the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   x spend half the school holidays with each parent. (e) the mother be ordered to complete a post separation group parenting program of four to six weeks duration. (f) the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   the mother be ordered to complete a post separation group parenting program of four to six weeks duration. (f) the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   the orders made should include an order that each parent is to ensure that x attends his extracurricular activities when they are in his care.   the father have sole parental responsibility for x, but consult with the mother before reaching a decision. (b) x live with the father for nine nights and spend time with the mother and maternal grandparents for the other five nights. (c) the change in residences from the mother to the father should happen quickly rather than gradually because of the nature of the parental conflict and x’s age. (d) x should not see the mother for a short period of around one month to settle him in the father’s home and minimise the negative impact of the mother’s distress on him. (e) x should attend counselling to assist him to manage this change.   x live with the father for nine nights and spend time with the mother and maternal grandparents for the other five nights. (c) the change in residences from the mother to the father should happen quickly rather than gradually because of the nature of the parental conflict and x’s age. (d) x should not see the mother for a short period of around one month to settle him in the father’s home and minimise the negative impact of the mother’s distress on him. (e) x should attend counselling to assist him to manage this change.   the change in residences from the mother to the father should happen quickly rather than gradually because of the nature of the parental conflict and x’s age. (d) x should not see the mother for a short period of around one month to settle him in the father’s home and minimise the negative impact of the mother’s distress on him. (e) x should attend counselling to assist him to manage this change.   x should not see the mother for a short period of around one month to settle him in the father’s home and minimise the negative impact of the mother’s distress on him. (e) x should attend counselling to assist him to manage this change.   x should attend counselling to assist him to manage this change.
x
the parental conflict  presented as withdrawn and anxious about [the mother] and the parental conflict. involving/exposing children to post separation parental conflict can significantly negative[ly] impact children’s short and long-term well-being. it can cause children to feel worried about the well-being of one or both parents, feel false guilt if they believe they are the cause of parental dispute and/or feel they are being drawn into loyalty conflicts in which the only way this can be resolved is to align with one parent and minimise or deny their relationship with the other parent. chronic exposure to parental conflict can lead to children developing depression and/or anxiety in the short, medium and long-term. it increases the likelihood that the child will develop problems managing strong affect such as sadness and anger and it can negatively impact their educational attainment. (as per the original)
judge: what method of communication is best for you? mother: none. judge: if the order requires you to communicate with the father – it could be something like, [x] is very sick and you need to tell him, how are you going to do that? mother: if it’s very serious, i will ask hospital to call him. judge: are you telling the court that you are unable to communicate with the father in any way? mother: i can try to use message, but he will put that in his affidavit as evidence. judge: but the court proceedings will finish – this is after court proceedings, because you will have at least another five years of [x] being at school and needing to communicate with the father. mother: i have already tried for 12 years. ... mother: i did try to send sms and also asked [x] to send his dad a sms before i drop him off, if i’m late. and i also tried to make a phone call on sunday try to remind [x] and to also call his dad to remind him – basically the school activity. but it is quite challenging because there are some orders that are very clear – i cannot, basically, to talk to his dad in some way that i shouldn’t. but if i need to contact him, probably the only opportunity i have to go to police station because he hangs up my mobile.
the father
conclusions   he has played a peripheral role in the day-to-day care of x to date but has a willingness and ability to take on much greater responsibility. (b) he has displayed an appropriate attitude to his responsibilities as a parent to x. (c) he has displayed a consistent desire to remain a part of x’s life and to be a part of the decision-making process for him.   he has displayed an appropriate attitude to his responsibilities as a parent to x. (c) he has displayed a consistent desire to remain a part of x’s life and to be a part of the decision-making process for him.   he has displayed a consistent desire to remain a part of x’s life and to be a part of the decision-making process for him.
the mother
...assist her to develop greater insight into the impact on [x] of exposing him to her negative views about [the father] and encourage her to explicitly give [x] psychological permission to enjoy his time with his father.   the primary day-to-day physical care for x continues to be provided by the maternal grandparents and the mother currently plays a “supervisory” role in x’s upbringing. (b) there was insufficient evidence to allow any findings to be made about the mother’s mental health. however, the proceedings have caused her a great deal of stress. (c) the mother continues to place x at the centre of the parental conflict. (d) the mother has been unable to shield x from the hostility and stress that she feels for the father. she also does not understand nor have insight into the negative emotional and psychological impact this has on x.   there was insufficient evidence to allow any findings to be made about the mother’s mental health. however, the proceedings have caused her a great deal of stress. (c) the mother continues to place x at the centre of the parental conflict. (d) the mother has been unable to shield x from the hostility and stress that she feels for the father. she also does not understand nor have insight into the negative emotional and psychological impact this has on x.   the mother continues to place x at the centre of the parental conflict. (d) the mother has been unable to shield x from the hostility and stress that she feels for the father. she also does not understand nor have insight into the negative emotional and psychological impact this has on x.   the mother has been unable to shield x from the hostility and stress that she feels for the father. she also does not understand nor have insight into the negative emotional and psychological impact this has on x.
the maternal grandparents
the relevant legal principles
what parenting orders are in x’s best interests?  the parents consult the other in relation to the decision to be made, (b) the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (c) the decision be made jointly by the parents.   the parents make “a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue”, and (c) the decision be made jointly by the parents.   the decision be made jointly by the parents.
live with and spend time with arrangements
the strengths and weaknesses of the father’s proposals   the father is more likely to be the parent more emotionally and physically available to x as he gets older. x will be less lonely in the father’s care. (b) the father is the parent most likely to promote and support the mother’s relationship with x. (c) it would involve little upheaval outside of the home. x will continue to attend the same school and participate in the same extracurricular activities. (d) x is more likely to be able to develop and maintain a healthy relationship with his extended paternal family if he lives with the father. (e) x will continue to progress well at school. indeed, his performance may improve with the father’s support and less screentime.   the father is the parent most likely to promote and support the mother’s relationship with x. (c) it would involve little upheaval outside of the home. x will continue to attend the same school and participate in the same extracurricular activities. (d) x is more likely to be able to develop and maintain a healthy relationship with his extended paternal family if he lives with the father. (e) x will continue to progress well at school. indeed, his performance may improve with the father’s support and less screentime.   it would involve little upheaval outside of the home. x will continue to attend the same school and participate in the same extracurricular activities. (d) x is more likely to be able to develop and maintain a healthy relationship with his extended paternal family if he lives with the father. (e) x will continue to progress well at school. indeed, his performance may improve with the father’s support and less screentime.   x is more likely to be able to develop and maintain a healthy relationship with his extended paternal family if he lives with the father. (e) x will continue to progress well at school. indeed, his performance may improve with the father’s support and less screentime.   x will continue to progress well at school. indeed, his performance may improve with the father’s support and less screentime.   x will be separated from the maternal grandparents who have provided consistent care to him throughout most of his life. this may cause stress to him. (b) the father has not been tested in relation to having x with him for more than a night. (c) the father has not yet established accommodation suitable for x to live with him on a full-time basis. (d) it is likely that, in the short-term, x will worry about his mother and be concerned that she blames him for the outcome. (e) it would be contrary to x’s expressed views. (f) the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.   the father has not been tested in relation to having x with him for more than a night. (c) the father has not yet established accommodation suitable for x to live with him on a full-time basis. (d) it is likely that, in the short-term, x will worry about his mother and be concerned that she blames him for the outcome. (e) it would be contrary to x’s expressed views. (f) the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.   the father has not yet established accommodation suitable for x to live with him on a full-time basis. (d) it is likely that, in the short-term, x will worry about his mother and be concerned that she blames him for the outcome. (e) it would be contrary to x’s expressed views. (f) the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.   it is likely that, in the short-term, x will worry about his mother and be concerned that she blames him for the outcome. (e) it would be contrary to x’s expressed views. (f) the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.   it would be contrary to x’s expressed views. (f) the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.   the court cannot be certain about whether x will be able to cope with such a major change.
the strengths and weaknesses of the mother’s proposal  it will accord with the express wishes of x. (b) x will continue to live with the mother and the maternal grandparents who provide good physical care for him and love him.   x will continue to live with the mother and the maternal grandparents who provide good physical care for him and love him.   x will continue to live in a household with family members who are openly negative about the father. leaving him in the primary care of the mother is likely to further expose x to the mother and the maternal grandparent’s negative attitudes. (b) it is unlikely that in the future the mother will support x’s relationship with the father. (c) at 12, x is at a critical stage of his development and unless orders are made to change the status quo, it is likely that the current arrangements will impact on his relationship with his father. he may find it easier to avoid the conflict and tension by spending no time with his father. (d) the single expert opined that there is a possibility that as x gets older, he may not be able to relate with the grandparents and may find being in their continued care difficult and tiring. she also felt that x may feel some frustration with remaining with them. (e) it may lead to further litigation due to the mother’s attitude towards the father and her inability to accept that there is any benefit to x in having a relationship with his father.   it is unlikely that in the future the mother will support x’s relationship with the father. (c) at 12, x is at a critical stage of his development and unless orders are made to change the status quo, it is likely that the current arrangements will impact on his relationship with his father. he may find it easier to avoid the conflict and tension by spending no time with his father. (d) the single expert opined that there is a possibility that as x gets older, he may not be able to relate with the grandparents and may find being in their continued care difficult and tiring. she also felt that x may feel some frustration with remaining with them. (e) it may lead to further litigation due to the mother’s attitude towards the father and her inability to accept that there is any benefit to x in having a relationship with his father.   at 12, x is at a critical stage of his development and unless orders are made to change the status quo, it is likely that the current arrangements will impact on his relationship with his father. he may find it easier to avoid the conflict and tension by spending no time with his father. (d) the single expert opined that there is a possibility that as x gets older, he may not be able to relate with the grandparents and may find being in their continued care difficult and tiring. she also felt that x may feel some frustration with remaining with them. (e) it may lead to further litigation due to the mother’s attitude towards the father and her inability to accept that there is any benefit to x in having a relationship with his father.   the single expert opined that there is a possibility that as x gets older, he may not be able to relate with the grandparents and may find being in their continued care difficult and tiring. she also felt that x may feel some frustration with remaining with them. (e) it may lead to further litigation due to the mother’s attitude towards the father and her inability to accept that there is any benefit to x in having a relationship with his father.   it may lead to further litigation due to the mother’s attitude towards the father and her inability to accept that there is any benefit to x in having a relationship with his father.
conclusions about live with orders   ensuring that the children have the benefit and involvement of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives: i am concerned that the mother’s proposal will not ensure the meaningful involvement of the father in x’s life to the maximum extent. by contrast, the father’s proposal will. (b) ensuring that the child receives adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential: i am concerned that the mother’s proposal will not ensure that x receives adequate and proper parenting to help him achieve his full potential. again, by contrast, the father’s proposal will. (c) when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the father’s proposal best achieves these objects.   ensuring that the child receives adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential: i am concerned that the mother’s proposal will not ensure that x receives adequate and proper parenting to help him achieve his full potential. again, by contrast, the father’s proposal will. (c) when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the father’s proposal best achieves these objects.   when i reflect on the principles underlying these objects that are set out in s 60b(2), i am also satisfied that the father’s proposal best achieves these objects.   the mother has demonstrated no capacity to shield x from these proceedings and the negative views she has of the father. leaving x to live with his mother will most likely result in a reduction of the time that he spends with his father, a poor relationship with the father, and this might be emotionally harmful for him. i am, however, more confident that the father will better ensure that x enjoys a meaningful relationship with each parent in the future. (b) it will most likely result in x spending reduced time with the maternal grandparents, however, he would be likely to continue to maintain a significant relationship with them. (c) the single expert observed that x was “moderately” resilient and that, while he was doing well and appeared to be thriving, it was clear that he was “under quite some pressure” in the current arrangement. she also noted that because x is a sensitive child, it is inevitable that he would be affected negatively and experience some discomfort and distress initially. however, she suggested that a change to the father’s care may have a more positive impact as he progresses into adolescence. (d) i am confident that the father will support x through these changes and seek out professional assistance. the orders made will require this and will allow the release of the orders and reasons for judgment for this purpose. (e) i am also confident that the father has given considerable thought to suitable living arrangements for x and will make appropriate changes to allow him to provide optimal care for x.   it will most likely result in x spending reduced time with the maternal grandparents, however, he would be likely to continue to maintain a significant relationship with them. (c) the single expert observed that x was “moderately” resilient and that, while he was doing well and appeared to be thriving, it was clear that he was “under quite some pressure” in the current arrangement. she also noted that because x is a sensitive child, it is inevitable that he would be affected negatively and experience some discomfort and distress initially. however, she suggested that a change to the father’s care may have a more positive impact as he progresses into adolescence. (d) i am confident that the father will support x through these changes and seek out professional assistance. the orders made will require this and will allow the release of the orders and reasons for judgment for this purpose. (e) i am also confident that the father has given considerable thought to suitable living arrangements for x and will make appropriate changes to allow him to provide optimal care for x.   the single expert observed that x was “moderately” resilient and that, while he was doing well and appeared to be thriving, it was clear that he was “under quite some pressure” in the current arrangement. she also noted that because x is a sensitive child, it is inevitable that he would be affected negatively and experience some discomfort and distress initially. however, she suggested that a change to the father’s care may have a more positive impact as he progresses into adolescence. (d) i am confident that the father will support x through these changes and seek out professional assistance. the orders made will require this and will allow the release of the orders and reasons for judgment for this purpose. (e) i am also confident that the father has given considerable thought to suitable living arrangements for x and will make appropriate changes to allow him to provide optimal care for x.   i am confident that the father will support x through these changes and seek out professional assistance. the orders made will require this and will allow the release of the orders and reasons for judgment for this purpose. (e) i am also confident that the father has given considerable thought to suitable living arrangements for x and will make appropriate changes to allow him to provide optimal care for x.   i am also confident that the father has given considerable thought to suitable living arrangements for x and will make appropriate changes to allow him to provide optimal care for x.
implementation of these changes   the father’s home, (b) the grounds of x’s school, and (c) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that x may participate in from time to time.   the grounds of x’s school, and (c) any after school activity or extracurricular activities that x may participate in from time to time.
spend time with orders
international travel
other orders
changeover
x’s health
x’s education and extracurricular activities
costs   $8,780 to the icl in payment of all costs and disbursements arising from these proceedings. (b) in payment to the child support agency of any money outstanding from any assessments from child support in relation to x. (c) the balance remaining to the mother.   in payment to the child support agency of any money outstanding from any assessments from child support in relation to x. (c) the balance remaining to the mother.   the balance remaining to the mother.
conclusions
associate: dated: 12 april 2024
dated: 12 april 2024