last updated: 20 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jarmon & tannen [2024] fedcfamc2f 479
orders
the court orders that:
filing of documents
subpoenas
disclosure
costs
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
issue
... the parties acknowledge that they have knowledge of the financial affairs of the other and that they have had an opportunity to fully investigate the financial circumstances of the other party including, but not limited to, the following:
5.1 they have each been fully informed of the wealth, property, estate and income of the other and that all questions asked of the other have been satisfactorily answered, and 5.2 they are each fully aware of their respective rights. neither party required the other to make further disclosure of their financial positions.
... it is agreed by the parties that in the event of the breakdown of the marriage evidence by separation as set out in paragraph 8 above, the property and financial resources of the parties will be divided as follows.
... 11.8 the parties will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to:
11.8.1 transfer all of [mr tannen]’s right, title and interest in [motor vehicle 1] to [ms jarmon] 11.8.2 transfer all of [ms jarmon]’s right, title and interest in [motor vehicle 2] to [mr tannen], and from the date of the transfers the parties will be responsible for all costs associated with the said motor vehicles including but not limited to insurance, registration and servicing expenses save that [ms jarmon] will continue to have access to the fuel card in [mr tannen]’s name until such time as she is earning at least $100,000 nett per annum or she is in a de facto relationship which continues for at least 12 months.
... 24. that for the purposes of section 90c(2)(b) and 90e of the act.
... 24.2 the parties each acknowledge that they have the capacity to support themselves having regard to their respective incomes and they are each able to, and do, support themselves without the benefit of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. 24.3 [mr tannen] will pay to [ms jarmon] periodic spousal maintenance at the rate of $800 per week commencing from the date of this agreement and said periodic spousal maintenance payments will continue until [ms jarmon] is earning an income which is at least $100,000 nett per annum. 24.4 in addition to the periodic spousal maintenance referred to at clause 24.3 hereof [mr tannen] will pay the following expenses for [ms jarmon]’s benefit and by way of non-periodic spousal maintenance:
24.4.1 private health insurance at the current lever of cover or higher, and 24.4.2 all outgoing and expenses associated with the [suburb g] property including but not limited to home and contents insurance, council rates and utilities 24.5 [mr tannen] will continue to pay the non-periodic  the relevance of documents was not limited to documents directly admissible in themselves in proof of an issue raised in pleadings, and (2) if a class of document which has material forensic relevance could be shown to exist, then a subpoena would not normally be set aside. in white v tulloch (1995) flc 92-640, the full court of the family court referred to the test in terms of documents having "a sufficient apparent connection to justify their production or inspection". 41. in trade practices commission v arnotts ltd (no 2) (1989) 21 fcr 306, beaumont j saw relevance as something where a document "could possibly throw light on the issues in the main case". in portal software international pty ltd v bodsworth, [2005] nswsc 1115, brereton j looked at a number of authorities including of this court and said: thus it is plainly not the question at this (first) stage whether the documents, production of which is sought, will definitely advance the case of the parties issuing the subpoena, nor whether they will be admissible in evidence at the trial. it is sufficient that they could "possibly throw light" on the issues in the substantive proceedings, or that it appears to be "on the cards" that they will do so. what are the issues in the proceedings will appear from the pleadings (where there are pleadings), the affidavits, and the legal principles which govern the claims for relief in the substantive proceedings. counsel for the objector did not dispute that what i had there said summarised the law. in papadopoulos and papadopoulos (no 2) [2007] famca 1683, i observed: the question of what is relevant takes on significance. the objective must be to assist the parties and the court in the determination of the issues in dispute. how does one determine that at an early stage? this issue was considered in the victorian supreme court in killorgan investments pty ltd v baycorp advantage business information services limited and ors where byrne j said: the degree of relevance for this purpose is not high: the inspecting party need only show a legitimate forensic purpose in the inspection. a party is entitled to inspect documents not only to see if they contain relevant facts, but also to see if they contain information which may be proved otherwise than through that document. accordingly, the bar is not set very high in respect to the question of relevance in a civil proceeding as between strangers. it should be less so in family law proceedings provided the pursuit of information is genuinely designed to assist in determining the issue and not for some illicit or harassing type of reason. the onus in establishing the relevance lies on the person seeking the production of the documents either by way of subpoena or through discovery.
conclusion
associate: dated: 17 april 2024
dated: 17 april 2024
[1] annexed to the wife’s affidavit of 30 june 2023