last updated: 20 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dalling & rait [2024] fedcfamc2f 564
orders
the court orders that:
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge betts  these are parenting proceedings concerning x, born in 2011, and y, born in 2014. they are the children of the relationship between the applicant father, mr dalling , and the respondent mother, ms rait. (b) the parents were together between 2007 and september 2018. the children have lived with the father since 19 january 2019. (c) in terms of the court proceedings themselves, they have a long and tortuous history. they were commenced by way of an initiating application filed by the father on 4 october 2019. the mother filed her response on 2 december 2019. the proceedings have limped along through the court system in the succeeding four and a half (4 ½) years. there have been numerous procedural orders as well as substantive orders of an interim nature, most particularly providing for the mother to have supervised time, subject to providing some hair strand or other drug tests in order for that time to graduate further. (d) the reality of the matter is that it remains in something of a ‘limbo’ situation because the court finds itself without the proper evidence needed to conduct a final hearing today. neither party has complied with court orders. this proceeding was set down on 24 july 2023 for a trial by the chief justice. it was specifically ordered that the family report in this matter be updated and there were specific orders that the parties were to ensure that both they and the children attended the family report interviews. (e) the family report of 20 february 2024 prepared in anticipation of the hearing noted that the father had not brought the children to the interviews. paragraph 6 records that: [x], aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the parents were together between 2007 and september 2018. the children have lived with the father since 19 january 2019. (c) in terms of the court proceedings themselves, they have a long and tortuous history. they were commenced by way of an initiating application filed by the father on 4 october 2019. the mother filed her response on 2 december 2019. the proceedings have limped along through the court system in the succeeding four and a half (4 ½) years. there have been numerous procedural orders as well as substantive orders of an interim nature, most particularly providing for the mother to have supervised time, subject to providing some hair strand or other drug tests in order for that time to graduate further. (d) the reality of the matter is that it remains in something of a ‘limbo’ situation because the court finds itself without the proper evidence needed to conduct a final hearing today. neither party has complied with court orders. this proceeding was set down on 24 july 2023 for a trial by the chief justice. it was specifically ordered that the family report in this matter be updated and there were specific orders that the parties were to ensure that both they and the children attended the family report interviews. (e) the family report of 20 february 2024 prepared in anticipation of the hearing noted that the father had not brought the children to the interviews. paragraph 6 records that: [x], aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   in terms of the court proceedings themselves, they have a long and tortuous history. they were commenced by way of an initiating application filed by the father on 4 october 2019. the mother filed her response on 2 december 2019. the proceedings have limped along through the court system in the succeeding four and a half (4 ½) years. there have been numerous procedural orders as well as substantive orders of an interim nature, most particularly providing for the mother to have supervised time, subject to providing some hair strand or other drug tests in order for that time to graduate further. (d) the reality of the matter is that it remains in something of a ‘limbo’ situation because the court finds itself without the proper evidence needed to conduct a final hearing today. neither party has complied with court orders. this proceeding was set down on 24 july 2023 for a trial by the chief justice. it was specifically ordered that the family report in this matter be updated and there were specific orders that the parties were to ensure that both they and the children attended the family report interviews. (e) the family report of 20 february 2024 prepared in anticipation of the hearing noted that the father had not brought the children to the interviews. paragraph 6 records that: [x], aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the reality of the matter is that it remains in something of a ‘limbo’ situation because the court finds itself without the proper evidence needed to conduct a final hearing today. neither party has complied with court orders. this proceeding was set down on 24 july 2023 for a trial by the chief justice. it was specifically ordered that the family report in this matter be updated and there were specific orders that the parties were to ensure that both they and the children attended the family report interviews. (e) the family report of 20 february 2024 prepared in anticipation of the hearing noted that the father had not brought the children to the interviews. paragraph 6 records that: [x], aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the family report of 20 february 2024 prepared in anticipation of the hearing noted that the father had not brought the children to the interviews. paragraph 6 records that: [x], aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.  , aged 12 years, did not attend the family interview. the mother reported [x] had messaged her saying that she would not be attending the family interview because the father had, “forgot”. this would have occurred before 11 am where there was sufficient time for the father to contact the family consultant and make a later arrival. his failure to respond to the family consultant’s contacts that morning suggest he had chosen not to attend the family interview. phone contact by the family consultant to the father’s legal service failed to evoke any response from the father. it is further noted that he had confirmed during a telephone call with the family consultant on 8 february 2024, that is to say, six days prior to when the interview was meant to happen, that he would be attending the family interview. information regarding [x] was provided by the mother who has limited direct contact with her, therefore may be considered to be incomplete. (f) the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the family report reads rather like the father frustrated the entire process by simply not attending with the children. (g) the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the proceedings were re-listed before me on 29 february 2024 when i made a section 102na order as well as specifically putting in place orders for the father to enable the icl to meet with the children. (h) following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   following that meeting, the matter was listed before me last week on 11 april 2024 at which time the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) orally applied to adjourn the final hearing in order to update the family report, noting the lacuna in the evidence at this stage. i dismissed that application on the day, noting that the icl may renew it at today’s hearing, being day 1 of the three (3) day final hearing. (i) the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the matter has come before me today, and i am told by mr graham, who appears for the father, and mr flanigan, who appears for the mother, that the parents have reached some form of agreement whereby the children will remain living with the father and that the mother will spend some time with the children of a fairly limited nature subject to some further drug tests which will then see her time graduate. (j) the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   the icl will not sign the orders and seeks instead that the final hearing be adjourned so that the updated family report can be prepared or, alternatively, that the icl be discharged. (k) i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.   i am going to annex to these reasons a copy of the icl’s case outline which sets out the basis for the icl’s argument in some detail.
i understand she may be squatting in an abandoned [house] nearby with her new baby and partner called [mr d].
costs application by the icl
associate: dated: 16 april 2024
dated: 16 april 2024
in the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) at newcastle file no: (p)ncc3181/2019 between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
family court of australia (division 2) at newcastle file no: (p)ncc3181/2019 between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts  vision 2) at newcastle file no: (p)ncc3181/2019 between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
at newcastle file no: (p)ncc3181/2019 between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
file no: (p)ncc3181/2019 between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
between: mr dalling (applicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts  plicant father) and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
and: ms rait (respondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts  spondent mother) and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
and: independent children’s lawyer before: judge betts
before: judge betts
case outline of the independent children's lawyer
a. proceedings
parenting proceedings concerning the children of the relationship between the applicant and the respondent, namely:
there was 1 year between final separation and the filing of these proceedings. the period between final separation and hearing was 5 years, and the time from filing to hearing has been 4 years.
b. documents relied upon
the independent children's lawyer reads the following documents: family report of ms c dated 09 april 2021, updated family report of ms c dated 20 february 2024, the icl has also reviewed the child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 january 2020, and material has been produced on subpoena including from the children’s schools and dcj, which is discussed below.
the icl has also reviewed the child inclusive conference memorandum dated 17 january 2020, and material has been produced on subpoena including from the children’s schools and dcj, which is discussed below.
c. brief submissions it is noted that the updated family report suffers from severe limitations which are set out at page 3 of the report, the most striking of which are that the father: failed to attend the family report interview, failed to respond to subsequent contact from the court child expert, and failed to present the subject children to the court child expert. it is noted that the court child expert indicated[1] that the information she had received suggested that the father had chosen not to attend, despite being aware of the interview and previously confirming his intention to attend. the icl is of the view that prima facie the father appears to have set out to deliberately frustrate the family report process. the limitations to the family report are so severe that the family consultant, despite having been involved in the case for nearly four years indicated that an extensive evaluation and/or recommendations would be premature and without balance and declined to make any.[2] the icl has twice had the matter relisted and attempted (unsuccessfully) to have the trial adjourned to permit a proper evaluation by the court child expert to take place. the only trial material filed by either party since 2021 is an affidavit filed by the father on 11 april 2024, three business days before the trial, despite the trial directions ordered on 24 july 2023, requiring the filing of that material no later than 26 march 2024. the mother has filed no trial affidavit. neither party has filed an amended application or response. the icl does not know what orders either party seeks. the icl has had no opportunity to investigate the new information and claims made by the father in his affidavit, nor to consider the most recent adults who have apparently moved in and out of the lives of the children, specifically including a person called ms e who the father deposes to having had a relationship with, and who “...seems to have some sort of mental health issue and she became quite erratic during our relationship”.[3] the father also deposes to some involvement with a female ms g. the father deposes that despite not being in a romantic relationship with this person, she visits the father “once or twice a week” and stays overnight, but never comes into contact with the children.[4] the father presents no evidence from ms g. the icl has recently met the children and is highly concerned about the presentation of x. the icl has reviewed material produced on subpoena, including from x’s schools. it contains exceptionally concerning entries from early to mid-2023, some of which are consistent with the presentation recently observed by the icl. that material includes entries such as the following: early 2023 – (school record) “all stage 3 staff have noted that x is sad, withdrawn and disengaged. she never smiles, does not talk with staff or peers like she used to and is not as engaged in learning. we are being as supportive. today x asked to speak to me. she said that things at home have got worse because dad is angry. she said that mum is pregnant, and dad doesn't want her to keep the baby. dad wants her to get rid of it. mum wants to keep the baby. parents are fighting about it. x has not returned the note for an excursion. she said she wants to go but she can't ask her father about it because he just gets angry with her" mid-2023 (mandatory report) “today [...] was informed that a fake account had been set up in [...]’s name. in response ... made threats to ... due to the messages on the account. the messages apparently told x to kill herself and that we would be better off without her. this afternoon whilst walking to [...] came to talk to me. ... said that she was very worried about x [...] because x is suicidal. [...] said they both have messages from x on their phone. they are both bringing their phones to me first thing in the morning. last night x told them she can't take it any more and wanted to kill herself. ... said that x had said she was trying to get some of her father's drugs to kill herself. ... told her mother and ...'s mother picked x up last night and took her home. i finished work early so i could talk to x. i told x i was very worried about her and so were her friends. i told x i was told she was having suicidal thoughts. x admitted this was true but pleaded with me not to tell her father. x said that the messages to kill herself have been happening for a while and that she has an album where she has saved them. x said that it is just everything that is making her feel that way and said her dad does not treat her well. ... said that x's father calls her a “dumb cunt.” x denied she was trying to find drugs to kill herself.”[5] mid- 2023 (counsellor notes) “transition to year 7. very smart. lots of social issues. level of engagement has really decreased. angry separation between parents. living with dad. mum is pregnant. so is dad's girlfriend. telling peers she was going to self harm. offered referral to counselling support which he declined.”[6] it also contains material including her semester 2 report at the end of 2023 which are highly praiseworthy of x as a student, including that: “x has outstanding qualities as a student, which consistently define her as a respectful and well-rounded individual. she often shows kindness, creating an inclusive and positive environment by her interactions with peers and teachers. x's friendly approach allows her to collaborate with peers naturally. she has developed meaningful friendships with peers and has made the effort to connect with her teachers on a personal level. x has exceeded in her role of well-being minister, consistently demonstrating motivation and initiative to support her school. she has rightfully earned her gold award for being a safe, respectful learner and completed her diamond award for acts of citizenship and leadership. x is commended for her significant achievements representing f school in sports. she showcased her exceptional abilities and sportsmanship, highlighting her immense potential for the future. it has been wonderful teaching x and i wish her all the best in her transition to high school.” the dcj have produced 1437 pages of material, which seems to be addressed primarily to the mother’s issues. it does not appear to address the issues related to x, despite the school material indicating a mandatory report on or about 19 june 2023 the court child expert does not appear to have seen any of the above material.[7] the icl is not in a position to support any orders, as she is unable to be satisfied that any order would be in the best interests of x. the icl renews her application for the matter to be adjourned for an updated family report. in the event that the court determines to proceed without an updated report, the icl seeks that she be discharged.
adam mooney counsel for the icl 15 april 2024
counsel for the icl 15 april 2024
15 april 2024
[1] 2024 family report [8][2] 2024 family report [38][3] affidavit of mr dalling filed 11 april 2024 (“f”) [18].[4] f [19][5] pkt 16 p76[6] pkt 17 p184-186[7] 2024 family report p2-3