last updated: 9 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
crouper & mitchell (no 2) [2024] fedcfamc2f 523
orders
the court orders that:  at his own expense, and (b) by no later than 5.00 pm on tuesday 23 april 2024.   by no later than 5.00 pm on tuesday 23 april 2024.   any notifications to any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland of suspected abuse of x to whom the proceedings relate or of suspected family violence affecting the child including but not limited to any intake reports, (b) any assessments of any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland of investigations into notifications of that kind or the findings or outcomes of these investigations including but not limited to copies of investigation and assessment outcomes, any grounds of substantiations, case plans and case closure summaries, (c) any reports commissioned by any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   any assessments of any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland of investigations into notifications of that kind or the findings or outcomes of these investigations including but not limited to copies of investigation and assessment outcomes, any grounds of substantiations, case plans and case closure summaries, (c) any reports commissioned by any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   any reports commissioned by any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   in the event that any child protection and/or child welfare authority and police force in the northern territory of the commonwealth of australia and the state of queensland have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background of the parties
these proceedings
issue of rice & asplund
transfer of the matter
material filed and orders sought
father seeking orders
substance of the matters in dispute
mother’s material
... b. because of my studies, i was traveling to and from [town d]. i met the father whilst in [city e], and found him charming. we struck up a close friendship and our relationship escalated. ... i transferred my scholarship and moved in with the father ... i fell pregnant with [x] and was due in 2009, but she would be born premature. ... it was a very difficult pregnancy. despite this, towards the end of my pregnancy, i recall the father leaving me at [town f] which is very far from where i lived . i had to start to walk home, and then managed to get a lift with someone who was kind enough to pick me up. ...
... ... [ms h] primarily lived with the father up until [mid]-2013 .
... b. [ms h] is the mother of the 4 children living with the father. i recall in late 2012/early 2013 the father told [ms h] she had to move out, and as a consequence she [harmed] herself in front of the children.
... i visited [ms h] upon release when [ms h] then went to stay at [ms g]’s home (being one of the fathers sisters). when i visited, i took the children so they could see her, and i saw the 2 puncture marks ..
... in 2008, whilst pregnant, of high concern, when i left my children with the father when i had to go to [city j] for my studies, the father without informing me kicked [my 8-year-old son] out. the police found him, and took him home. the father said he didn't want [my son]. [my son] was placed into care whilst i was in hospital at [city j]. when i got back to [city e], the department had [my son] at the airport ...
8. from the time i fell pregnant the relationship just fell apart. whilst pregnant i was assaulted by the father for the first time and i tried to leave him. initially i tried to go to the women's refuge but [my son] was too old for them to take me by this time, though they did let me in on one occasion. each time i left the father, i had no-where to go so i had to go back to the father as he would tell me he was sorry and things would change.
b. the father drinks heavily. when he is drinking he is very controlling - if he wanted sex, i had to give it to him. when he was hung over, he very easily got violent if disturbed. initially the violence was simply pushing, shoving, and slapping, but this developed into punching and kicking. this however quickly escalated over the 6 years we were together and i recall on one occasion he literally forced me to have sex with him, and by the time the police turned up after the neighbours had called them, the father told them we had just finished "making love" . i was repulsed by his statement and utterly ashamed.
... police were called on many occasions, predominantly by the neighbours. i recall on 2 or 3 occasions he was actually removed and placed in lockup to cool off, or taken to his relative's house to cool off there. there were multiple domestic violence orders made by the police against the father with myself as the aggrieved. i recall in at least one of them, the father was not to be drinking around me, but he would anyway. the father also took out applications against me, but i simply did not turn up to court and let him have his orders.
... i am extremely scared to go back to [city e] where the father lives, or anywhere near that area. ...
... 10. ... on another occasion in 2009, i was at the fathers home with [x], ... the father asked me to pick up [his children] from school, but the father did not return home. he did this on occasion and i had no idea where he was as his phone was switched off.
ii. after a couple of days i went looking for him. i went to ... home ... and that is where i finally found him - there was a large group of people drinking including both the father and .... i dropped off his children, and told the father off for his behaviour. the father told me to leave. as i was getting into the car, [ms h] came out and hit out at my car with a metal bar, [causing damage] just missing [x], but striking her safety seat. i got out of car to and grabbed the [object] flinging it up the road. i was in a frenzy at her almost hitting [x]and i could not believe what she had just done. the father grabbed me, [assaulted me] and told me to "fuck off', saying i had wreaked the party. he is very large, and easily picked me up tossing me into the car. ...
11. ... there were only 5 occasions in the last 12 months since [x] had stopped breast feedings that [x] was with the father alone at his home, ...
... on the forth occasion, [x] was again kept from me which ultimately lead me to going to the fathers home to try to get her back, and finally fleeing [city e] for fear of the fathers on-going abuse . in [early] 2014, i recall taking [x] to see the father after he had requested me to come over with her. i suspected it was more about the father wanting sex than anything else but agreed.
... when i came back a few hours later, it was already dark. i had to enter the fathers property and made my way to the back room where l found [x] asleep with [ms h] on the same bed. [ms h] smelt heavily of alcohol and there were wine bottles throughout the house . i tried to pick up [x] to head out of the house but was confronted by ... who tried to stop me. ... i got about [5]kms before running out of petrol. i realised at this point i had lost my phone, so i headed to the fathers nieces home for help as she lived nearby. ... i recall her then coming over and [assaulting] me for no reason, causing me to fall backwards from where i was sitting. [x] came out whilst i was being [assaulted]. a cousin of the fathers came over and pulled the niece off of me. shocked, i fled back to the car with [x] and we went to sleep in the car. the next thing i recall the police woke me up whilst i was in the car and the fathers family were with them (though the father was not there). the police arrested me, and took me to the watch house and [x] went with the family to be taken back to the fathers home. police let me out after i was finally allowed to contact a solicitor at legal aid. i initially tried aboriginal services but they told me there was a conflict of interest as they had previously acted for the father. i was released within the hour of contacting legal aid. ... i was bleeding at the time being covered in bruises and scrapes . ... i tried to recover [x] for about 10 days before i finally found she had been enrolled at [k school]. at no time did the father try to contact me or let me know where she was. i was not allowed to the fathers home as i had been told there was an order in place preventing me to going there . it was a terrible experience, and i was in shock at the beating i had taken. it was at this time i knew i simply had to get [x] and flee [city e]. i picked [x] up from the school on a friday afternoon, hiding at a [friend’s] home and i was on a flight back to [town d] by saturday. i had to leave everything behind. i was very scared, and had to swap cars throughout the process thinking this would help not being found by the father. i say i was petrified for my life, and terrified the father would take [x] from me and subjecting her to a life of neglect, drugs, alcohol, and abuse. i am very scared that if i go back to [city e], i will be killed.
... i am in fear of my life if i return to [city e]. the father has in no uncertain terms told me, that if i ever left him he will kill me, and that he would get away with it because he [has a mental illness], adding "he would get 3 years at the most and it would be worth it". ... [x] has taken up with the cultural heritage of our land, and has begun participating in ...
49. all previous orders be dismissed 50. the [x] (child) live with the mother. 51. the mother have sole parentally responsibility over the child 52. the father have contact with the child as agreed between the parents. the father be allowed telephone contact with the child twice per week, to be initiated by the father between 5:30pm and 6:00pm on a wednesday and a friday, queensland time . 54. the father is not to make any enquires or attempt to find the mothers address that within 5 years of these orders, the parents enter-into mediation in an attempt to increase contact between the child has with the father. i would also request each party do a disialo carbohydrate-deficient transferrin test (dcdt) to test for alcohol abuse , and for that test to be done with 48 hours of any orders being made. i would further seek an order that either parent may request from the other parent with 48 hour notice a drug screening test. where that test is negative, the parent requesting the test will be responsible for the cost of the test . neither parent shall request more than 2 tests per month. finally, i would also seek the matter be transferred to the queensland registry for the [town d] circuit with an independent children' s lawyer being appointed. all the facts and circumstances deposed to in this affidavit are from my own knowledge save as are deposed to from information only and my means of knowledge and sources of information are referred to in my affidavit.
2. it is submitted that the father has not satisfied the " rule" in rice & asplund. it is conceded by all parties that final orders were in place - likely made around 9 july 2015. copies of those orders are not to hand, but the father conceded the existence of the orders and the parenting arrangements that have been in place since at least 2015 - which has been that the child has been in the primary care of the mother and lived in [town d]. ... on 16 april 2024 the father admitted to the court to carrying out the plan and removing the child without notice to the mother and relocating the child to [city e]. it is submitted that there is no lawful or reasonable basis for the father to take such action. it is submitted that there is no evidence before the court that would satisfy the court that the steps taken by the father were in any way appropriate or in the best interests of the child. ... at items 11 to 16 of the father's notice, the father states that he has made at least 3 to 4 police welfare checks. it is submitted that these allegations should not persuade the court that the father's actions are appropriate. rather, it is submitted that no further action was at any time taken by police or any other authority. indeed, the mother deposes that after the last report in around mid 2023, police told the mother that they considered the father to be a vexatious complainant. ... further, it is submitted that there is no probative evidence before the court that would support an order that the child remain in the father's care. it is submitted that the father's conduct has significantly destabilised the matter and it is submitted that it is open to the court to find that the father actively sought to destabilise the child's living environment insofar as rather than take a proactive and supportive approach to the child's wellbeing, he has done very little to assist and or support the mother or the child. ... 25. in summary, the mother's position is that:
a. the child should be returned to the mother forthwith, b. that father has failed to particularise any risk, c. that the father has failed to satisfy the rule in rice & asplund, that the father presents an unacceptable risk of harm to the child - not only with the allegations of domestic violence and concerns regarding his parenting style generally, but also in relation to actual or potential emotional and psychological harm - particularly with respect to the child/parent relationship/dynamic between the child and the mother.
hearing this day
recovery order not pressed
section 60b objects of part and principles underlying it   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right:   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).  to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and   to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and   to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.
section 60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests
... (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. ... (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
balancing risk
associate: dated: 6 may 2024
dated: 6 may 2024