last updated: 17 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
english & eklund [2024] fedcfamc2f 578
orders
the court declares that:
and the court orders that:  without surety, (b) for a period of 12 months commencing from the date the respondent mother signs the bond, (c) to be of good behaviour, and (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   for a period of 12 months commencing from the date the respondent mother signs the bond, (c) to be of good behaviour, and (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   to be of good behaviour, and (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   without surety, (b) for a period of 12 months commencing from the date the respondent mother signs the bond, (c) to be of good behaviour, and (d) (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   for a period of 12 months commencing from the date the respondent mother signs the bond, (c) to be of good behaviour, and (d) (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.   to be of good behaviour, and (d) (d) to strictly comply with all orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.
reasons for judgment(delivered ex tempore, revised from transcript)[1]judge blake
the law
a person is taken for the purposes of this division to have contravened an order under this act affecting children if, and only if:   where the person is bound by the order – he or she has:  intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or  otherwise – he or she has: (i) intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.  ) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   this section applies to a parenting order that is in force in relation to a child to the extent to which the order deals with whom the child is to spend time with.   a person must not: (a) hinder or prevent a person and the child from spending time together in accordance with the order, or (b) interfere with a person and the child benefitting from spending time with each other under the order.   hinder or prevent a person and the child from spending time together in accordance with the order, or (b) interfere with a person and the child benefitting from spending time with each other under the order.   interfere with a person and the child benefitting from spending time with each other under the order.
meaning of reasonable excuse  the circumstances in which a person may be taken to have had, for the purposes of this division, a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children include, but are not limited to, the circumstances set out in subsections (2), (4), (5), (6) and (7). (2) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children if: (a) the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention. (3) if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (5) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (6) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act affecting children if: (a) the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention. (3) if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (5) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (6) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent contravened the order because, or substantially because, he or she did not, at the time of the contravention, understand the obligations imposed by the order on the person who was bound by it, and (b) the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention.   the court is satisfied that the respondent ought to be excused in respect of the contravention.   if a court decides that a person had a reasonable excuse for contravening an order under this act for the reason referred to in paragraph (2)(a), it is the duty of the court to explain to the person, in language likely to be readily understood by the person, the obligations imposed on him or her by the order and the consequences that may follow if he or she again contravenes the order. (4) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (5) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (6) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to live with in a way that resulted in the child not living with a person in whose favour the order was made if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (5) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (6) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the actions constituting the contravention were necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child did not live with the person in whose favour the order was made was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to spend time with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not spending time together as provided for in the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (6) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to spend time together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not spend time together was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to the extent to which it deals with whom a child is to communicate with in a way that resulted in a person and a child not having the communication provided for under the order if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a). (7) a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that not allowing the child and the person to communicate together was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of the contravention, the child and the person did not communicate was not longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   a person (the respondent) is taken to have had a reasonable excuse for contravening a parenting order to which section 65p applies by acting contrary to section 65p if: (a) the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the respondent believed on reasonable grounds that the action constituting the contravention was necessary to protect the health or safety of a person (including the respondent or the child), and (b) the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).   the period during which, because of that action, a person in whose favour the order was made was hindered in or prevented from discharging responsibilities under the order was not for longer than was necessary to protect the health or safety of the person referred to in paragraph (a).
...it seems to me that the passing of section 112ac(3) makes it clear that a reasonable excuse in respect of concern as to the welfare of a child is limited to a belief, on reasonable grounds, that depriving a person of access pursuant to the order was necessary to protect the health and safety of a person. it is not a question as to whether the view of the custodial parent or the view of the custodial parent on reasonable grounds that the carrying out of the access order might not be in the best interest of the child. the question is whether it is necessary to protect the health or safety of a person, including the child.
in my opinion the respondent, in order to exculpate herself from the contravention must establish that she has or had a reasonable excuse according to an objective test namely, whether a reasonable person in the position of the mother would consider on reasonable grounds that she had a reasonable excuse for the contravention.
standard of proof   subject to subsection (3), the standard of proof to be applied in determining matters in proceedings under this division is proof on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting subsection (1), that subsection applies to the determination of whether a person who contravened an order under this act affecting children had a reasonable excuse for the contravention. ...   without limiting subsection (1), that subsection applies to the determination of whether a person who contravened an order under this act affecting children had a reasonable excuse for the contravention. ...
...
the approach to contravention proceedings
the orders the father alleges were contravened  each alternate weekend from 9am saturday until 5pm sunday, (i) for the term 4, 2023 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 9am monday. (ii) for the term 1, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm monday. (iii) for the term 2, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm tuesday. (iv) for the term 3, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday until 5pm tuesday. (v) for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.   for the term 4, 2023 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 9am monday. (ii) for the term 1, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm monday. (iii) for the term 2, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm tuesday. (iv) for the term 3, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday until 5pm tuesday. (v) for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.  ) for the term 1, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm monday. (iii) for the term 2, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm tuesday. (iv) for the term 3, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday until 5pm tuesday. (v) for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.  i) for the term 2, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 9am saturday until 5pm tuesday. (iv) for the term 3, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday until 5pm tuesday. (v) for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.  ) for the term 3, 2024 school holiday period, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday until 5pm tuesday. (v) for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.   for the term 4, 2024 school holiday period and each school holiday period thereafter, the child’s alternate weekend time with the father shall extend to 5pm friday to 5pm wednesday.
... unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, changeover is to occur at the mcdonalds located at [handover location c]. the father is at liberty to communicate with the child by telephone or video call on each sunday that the child does not spend time with him pursuant to these orders. for the purposes of facilitating these calls, the father is to phone the mother’s nominated phone number between 7.30pm and 8.00pm and: (a) the mother is to ensure that the child is available to take the father’s call,   the mother is to ensure that the child is available to take the father’s call,   [order omitted], (c) the mother is to ensure that the child is able to receive the phone call without undue interference and in a private and quiet environment. ...   the mother is to ensure that the child is able to receive the phone call without undue interference and in a private and quiet environment.
19. each parent is restrained from:   [order omitted], (b) [order omitted], (c) enrolling the child in any additional hobby or activity where such activity would require each parent to facilitate the child’s participation in such hobby or activity from time to time, unless with the consent of the other parent. (i) the parents agree that the child is to continue her current enrolment in [sporting activities]. (ii) order 19(c) does not preclude either parent from enrolling the child in any activity which requires participation only during times the child is living or spending time with that parent. (d) [order omitted]. (e) enrolling the child in any educational institution, health care provider or extracurricular activity by any name other than “[x]”.   enrolling the child in any additional hobby or activity where such activity would require each parent to facilitate the child’s participation in such hobby or activity from time to time, unless with the consent of the other parent. (i) the parents agree that the child is to continue her current enrolment in [sporting activities]. (ii) order 19(c) does not preclude either parent from enrolling the child in any activity which requires participation only during times the child is living or spending time with that parent.   the parents agree that the child is to continue her current enrolment in [sporting activities]. (ii) order 19(c) does not preclude either parent from enrolling the child in any activity which requires participation only during times the child is living or spending time with that parent.  ) order 19(c) does not preclude either parent from enrolling the child in any activity which requires participation only during times the child is living or spending time with that parent.   enrolling the child in any educational institution, health care provider or extracurricular activity by any name other than “[x]”.
i. first name: [x], ii. middle names: [...], and iii. last name: [english],
nothing in these orders, or the final orders, limits [x] from using her chosen names for her own personal use.
contravention application
count 2
state the paragraph number of the order, bond, agreement, injunction or undertaking that you allege has been contravened. order 7a from the final orders made on the 24th august 2022 state precisely what the respondent did or did not do which you allege amounts to a contravention, including the date, time and place, if applicable.
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent failed to bring the child to the changeover location during the father’s easter weekend. order 8c allowed the child to spend time with the mother from 9-5pm saturday, however the child was not available after 5pm when she was due to enter the father’s care.
count 3
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent took the child to a [sports] event during the father’s weekend, and failed to make the child available.
count 4
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent picked up the child in her vehicle during the father’s weekend, and drove away with the child.
count 6
state the paragraph number of the order, bond, agreement, injunction or undertaking that you allege has been contravened. order 10a and 10c of the final orders made on the 24th august 2022 state precisely what the respondent did or did not do which you allege amounts to a contravention, including the date, time and place, if applicable.
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent did not make the child available for a phone call with the father between 7.30-8pm. later that night the child did ring, with background interference (shopping bag sounds).
count 8
state the paragraph number of the order, bond, agreement, injunction or undertaking that you allege has been contravened. order 19e from the final orders made on the 24th august 2022 and the enforcement order 2a made on the 28th june 2023 state precisely what the respondent did or did not do which you allege amounts to a contravention, including the date, time and place, if applicable.
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent failed to ensure the child was enrolled under her correct name for a [sports] competition.
count 9
count 10:
statement of the alleged contravention the respondent, [ms eklund], arrived with the child, [x] to the change over location. they did not exit the vehicle. without reasonable excuse, [ms eklund] drove away with the child less than 6 minutes after arriving, refusing to allow the applicant to spend time with their daughter.
penalty
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024
[1] the transcript produced by the court’s provider omitted a significant section of this judgment. to deal with this issue, regard has been had to the actual audio record of judgment delivery.