last updated: 17 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
karney & karney [2024] fedcfamc2f 558
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  for two weekends during the school term from 6.15 pm on friday until 6.15 pm on the following sunday (i.e. two nights) as agreed in writing between the parties but failing agreement on the fourth and eighth friday of each school term, with such time to take place in sydney or in region b for the first two visits and thereafter on an alternating basis between sydney or region b and region c, (b) for seven days in the autumn, winter, and spring school holidays: (i) first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or in region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c, (c) for seven days in the end of year school holidays, with such time to be spent in region c: (i) in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   for seven days in the autumn, winter, and spring school holidays: (i) first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or in region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c, (c) for seven days in the end of year school holidays, with such time to be spent in region c: (i) in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or in region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c,  ) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c,   for seven days in the end of year school holidays, with such time to be spent in region c: (i) in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.  ) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   if time is to be spent in new south wales, with the father collecting the children from the mother at e reserve, suburb d at the commencement of his time and delivering them to the mother at the same location at the conclusion of his time, (b) if time is to be spent in region c, then unless otherwise agreed: (i) the mother shall deliver the children to the father at sydney airport at the commencement of the father’s time and collect them from the father at sydney airport at the conclusion of the father’s time.   if time is to be spent in region c, then unless otherwise agreed: (i) the mother shall deliver the children to the father at sydney airport at the commencement of the father’s time and collect them from the father at sydney airport at the conclusion of the father’s time.   the mother shall deliver the children to the father at sydney airport at the commencement of the father’s time and collect them from the father at sydney airport at the conclusion of the father’s time.   provide the mother with flight details including copies of return tickets for the children no later than 21 days prior to the proposed travel, (b) unless otherwise agreed, accompany the children on such travel.   unless otherwise agreed, accompany the children on such travel.   denigrating the other party, members of the other party’s household or family, or the children in the presence or hearing of the children, and shall remove the child from the presence or hearing of any third party who may do so, (b) discussing with the children these proceedings or allegations raised in these proceedings, or allowing the children access to, or informing the children of the contents of documents filed or prepared for the primary purpose of these proceedings.   discussing with the children these proceedings or allegations raised in these proceedings, or allowing the children access to, or informing the children of the contents of documents filed or prepared for the primary purpose of these proceedings.
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records.
note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
part xivb of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction  the mother have sole parental responsibility for all four children, (b) the children live with the mother, (c) the two eldest children, y and z, spend time and communicate with the father in accordance with their wishes, (d) the two youngest children, w and x, communicate with the father via facetime each thursday evening and on special occasions.   the children live with the mother, (c) the two eldest children, y and z, spend time and communicate with the father in accordance with their wishes, (d) the two youngest children, w and x, communicate with the father via facetime each thursday evening and on special occasions.   the two eldest children, y and z, spend time and communicate with the father in accordance with their wishes, (d) the two youngest children, w and x, communicate with the father via facetime each thursday evening and on special occasions.   the two youngest children, w and x, communicate with the father via facetime each thursday evening and on special occasions.
proposals
material relied upon  precise minute of order, (b) affidavit of father filed 2 february 2024, (c) father’s case outline dated 6 march 2024, (d) father’s outline of adjourned case filed 14 april 2024.   affidavit of father filed 2 february 2024, (c) father’s case outline dated 6 march 2024, (d) father’s outline of adjourned case filed 14 april 2024.   father’s case outline dated 6 march 2024, (d) father’s outline of adjourned case filed 14 april 2024.   father’s outline of adjourned case filed 14 april 2024.   response to initiating application filed 1 february 2022, (b) her affidavit filed 8 february 2024, (c) notice of risk filed 1 january 2022, (d) child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (e) family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023, (f) case outline filed 5 march 2024.   her affidavit filed 8 february 2024, (c) notice of risk filed 1 january 2022, (d) child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (e) family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023, (f) case outline filed 5 march 2024.   notice of risk filed 1 january 2022, (d) child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (e) family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023, (f) case outline filed 5 march 2024.   child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (e) family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023, (f) case outline filed 5 march 2024.   family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023, (f) case outline filed 5 march 2024.   case outline filed 5 march 2024.   exhibit a: psychologist’s report of ms h dated 5 february 2024, (b) exhibit b: child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (c) exhibit c: family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023.   exhibit b: child impact report of ms f dated 28 april 2022, (c) exhibit c: family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023.   exhibit c: family report of mr g dated 15 september 2023.
evidence
evidence of the father
evidence of the mother
child impact report
... [mr karney] relocated to queensland, from sydney, in early 2020. it appears that the children’s time with [mr karney] was significantly adversely impacted by restrictions relating to the covid-19 pandemic, with [ms karney] estimating that the children had spent time with [mr karney] on approximately five occasions since he relocated. ... while [mr karney] reported that the extended maternal family were controlling during the relationship (e.g. that christmas would be spent with them and not the paternal family or decision making regarding his and [ms karney]’s wedding to exclusion of his family), neither parents’ account was suggestive that either of them had perpetrated family violence, coercion or control against the other. ... the children’s relationships with [mr karney], and consequently their views regarding spending time with him, appear to have been adversely impacted by his relocation and consequent reduction in time with him. however, it does not appear to be in dispute between the parents that [y], [w], and [x] want to spend regular time with [mr karney], which is consistent with the children’s stated views, rather the primary issue in dispute appears to be the frequency at which the children should currently spend time with [mr karney] and the manner in which the children’s time with him should progress. ... [mr karney] presented as attempting to consider the children’s needs in his proposals and indicated that he had incorporated information from the children’s treating psychologist into his proposals (e.g. that overnight time initially occur at the paternal grandmother’s residence before progressing to queensland) in order to support the children to adjust to changes in spend time arrangements. ... the children spending time with [mr karney] once per month, as he proposed, would provide increased opportunities for the children to maintain meaningful relationships with him and to adjust to separating from [ms karney] in order to spend time with him... as such, while the children would ideally spend time with [mr karney] once per month, this would only be recommended if [mr karney] is able to commit to such an arrangement.
the report of psychologist ms h, clinical psychologist, dated 5 february 2024 (exhibit a)
family report
3. the father relocated from sydney to [region c] in 2020. the children currently live with their mother and spend time with their father one day each month in sydney from 8:00am to 5:00pm. [z] is at liberty to determine the times he spends with his father. changeover between parent’s occurs via the mother’s home. the mother lives in sydney and is married to [mr m] aged (born [in] 1987). she works [as an allied health worker]. [mr m] has two children from previous relationships, [o] aged 7 years and [p] aged 4 years who spend time with him from friday to sunday each alternate weekend. the father lives [in region c] with his partner [mr j] aged 43 years (born [in] 1980). he works full-time in the [allied health] sector.
... the central issue in this matter appears to be in relation to whether the children can cope with extended blocks of time in the father’s care, or whether the mother is unnecessarily obstructing spend-time arrangements due to her own feelings of anxiety. ... i did not get the impression [y], [w] and/or [x] were anxious or apprehensive in relation to spending overnight time or travelling interstate with their father. the mother presented as anxious, however, cried profusely when discussing the father’s proposal for overnight time and indicated a belief that parents cannot “protect” their children “forever”. the mother suggested that the children would need “more therapy” if overnight time with the father is ordered. in the absence of any immediate risks to the children’s safety in the father’s care, however, i would not describe her actions as protective and would not endorse her proposal for the children to receive therapy. there may be some teething issues as the children adjust to new arrangements including resistance, fatigue and/or irritability though this should pass if the children are supported to enjoy time with their father and feel safe in his care. if [w] does experience feelings of anxiety caused by uncertainty, he could benefit from arrangements which are prescriptive and occur reliably. i would suggest that the mother undertakes a circle of security program so that she can learn how her own emotional responses influence her parenting and how she can balance being nurturing with promoting the children’s independence. after the mother completes this program, i would recommend she engages in one-to-one support from a mental health practitioner to address needs in relation to her mental health. the relevant practitioner should be provided with a copy of this report. ... the mother believes that any progression of the children’s time with the father needs to be “gradual” so that are not overwhelmed emotionally. given that the children ages range from 9-16, however, they should have a greater capacity to independently regulate their responses and spend longer blocks of time, up to one week, in the father’s care and away from their mother. the father is proposing that the children spend a combination of time with him and paternal family members [in region b], and at his residence [in region c]. the father indicated that he would fly to sydney to accompany the children during flights and absorb the costs of travel. he reported that the accommodation arrangements are suitable, and it is his responsibility to meet the children’s needs whilst they are in his care. the father’s proposal would entail that the children spend two nights in his care each 28-day cycle with additional time on school holidays. i did not identify any substantive risk issues which should preclude the children from spending overnight and/or substantial time in his care.
115. [y], [w] and [x] communicate and/or spend time with the father: via phone and/or video call a minimum of once per week and any other time they initiate a call. from 5:00pm friday to 5:00pm sunday once every four weeks. this could alternate between occurring [in region b] and [region c].
iii. for one week each school holiday. changeover between parents occurs via sydney airport or a neutral location as agreed by the parents.  s honour] what did you mean in that second sentence at paragraph 115(ii):
this could alternate between occurring [in region b] and [region c].
did you effectively mean that they could go to [region b] during – at the end of one four-week period? [witness] mmm. [his honour] and then, having gone to [region b] in – after four weeks, they could go to [region c] at the end of the next four weeks. is that what you meant? [witness] i – i didn’t mean it to be that prescriptive, your honour. [his honour] right? [witness] it could be at the father’s discretion. [his honour] right? [witness] i don’t see there being any substantive issue for the children whether they spend time in [region c] or [in region b]. there may be occasions, or special occasions, that the father seeks to facilitate time with paternal family members or events of significance to them, and there could be some flexibility to do that.  unsel] sorry – and does it change, or does your opinion concerning a gradual build-up of time – would that be changed by what was set out in the child impact report at paragraph 29, namely this:
[mr karney] presented as attempting to consider the children’s needs in his proposals, and indicated he incorporated information of the children’s treating psychologist into his proposals, eg, that overnight time initially occur at the paternal grandmother’s residence before progressing to queensland in order to support the children to adjust to changes and spend time arrangements.
does the father’s utterances to the court child expert in [early] 2022, when this report was made, cause you to change or express in a different opinion as to whether or not there ought to be a gradual progression from overnight time occurring in new south wales [in region b], before progressing to queensland? [witness] it could. i don’t have a strong view on this. i think these are quite – i’m trying to consider my words, but they’re not – i know i’ve said this already, but they’re not substantive issues. i think – or i believe there just needs to be a plan to progress the children’s time with the father. whether it occurs [in region b] or [region c], is not – it shouldn’t be the primary consideration. what needs to occur is for the children to spend more substantial time with their father. if both parents are more receptive to an arrangement that starts [in region b], then that might be a way of getting the ball rolling, and if [w] has a positive experience of that, then that might build his confidence, but i wouldn’t necessarily rely on what he’s telling his mum in isolation, because he may have some sense of what her views are or what her position is, and he may be overly cautious about that progression of time.  unsel] yes. and you didn’t ask, “are you anxious about spending time [in region c]?” to each of the children, did you? [witness] i didn’t ask, “are you anxious about spending time?” i ask them their views in relation to time – whether it occurs [in region b], [or region] – and i used my own observations of – of the children and the responses, coupled with observations of their interactions with the father, and i did not get the sense that they were at all fearful or apprehensive in his presence.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc(2) primary considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
summary  for two weekends during the school term from 6.15 pm on friday until 6.15 pm on the following sunday (i.e. two nights) as agreed in writing between the parties but failing agreement on the fourth and eighth friday of each school term, with such time to take place in sydney or region b for the first two visits and thereafter on an alternating basis between sydney or region b and region c, (b) for seven days in the autumn, winter, and spring school holidays: (i) first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c, (c) for seven days in the end of year school holidays, with such time to be spent in region c: (i) in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   for seven days in the autumn, winter, and spring school holidays: (i) first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c, (c) for seven days in the end of year school holidays, with such time to be spent in region c: (i) in even numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 22 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 29 december, (ii) in odd numbered years, commencing at 10.00 am on 29 december and concluding at 10.00 am on 5 january the following year.   first, commencing at 10.00 am on sunday 7 july 2024 and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in sydney or region b, (ii) thereafter, commencing at 10.00 am on the first sunday of the school holidays and concluding at 10.00 am the following sunday, with such time to be spent in region c,
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024