last updated: 9 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gazzi & khera [2024] fedcfamc2f 561
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
parental responsibility
child’s live and spend time with arrangements   stage 1: from the commencement of these orders and continuing for a period of four (4) weeks, from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until 6.00 pm on saturday, and each alternate weekend thereafter, (b) stage 2: commencing upon the conclusion of order 3(a) and continuing for a period of four (4) weeks, from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until 6.00 pm on sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (c) stage 3: commencing upon the conclusion of order 3(b), from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until commencement of school or 9.00 am monday and each alternate weekend thereafter. (d) during the school holidays as follows: (i) during the 2024 school holiday periods at the end of term 2 and each school holidays other than term 4 school holiday: unless otherwise agreed, from conclusion of school or 3:00pm on the last day of the school term for one half of the holidays, (ii) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed. (e) at such other and additional times as agreed to between the parents in writing.   stage 2: commencing upon the conclusion of order 3(a) and continuing for a period of four (4) weeks, from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until 6.00 pm on sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (c) stage 3: commencing upon the conclusion of order 3(b), from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until commencement of school or 9.00 am monday and each alternate weekend thereafter. (d) during the school holidays as follows: (i) during the 2024 school holiday periods at the end of term 2 and each school holidays other than term 4 school holiday: unless otherwise agreed, from conclusion of school or 3:00pm on the last day of the school term for one half of the holidays, (ii) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed. (e) at such other and additional times as agreed to between the parents in writing.   stage 3: commencing upon the conclusion of order 3(b), from the conclusion of school on friday (or otherwise 3.00 pm) until commencement of school or 9.00 am monday and each alternate weekend thereafter. (d) during the school holidays as follows: (i) during the 2024 school holiday periods at the end of term 2 and each school holidays other than term 4 school holiday: unless otherwise agreed, from conclusion of school or 3:00pm on the last day of the school term for one half of the holidays, (ii) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed. (e) at such other and additional times as agreed to between the parents in writing.   during the school holidays as follows: (i) during the 2024 school holiday periods at the end of term 2 and each school holidays other than term 4 school holiday: unless otherwise agreed, from conclusion of school or 3:00pm on the last day of the school term for one half of the holidays, (ii) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed. (e) at such other and additional times as agreed to between the parents in writing.   during the 2024 school holiday periods at the end of term 2 and each school holidays other than term 4 school holiday: unless otherwise agreed, from conclusion of school or 3:00pm on the last day of the school term for one half of the holidays, (ii) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed.  ) commencing from term 4 2024 school holidays, and each term 4 school holiday thereafter: on a week about basis commencing on the first friday of the school holiday, unless otherwise agreed.   at such other and additional times as agreed to between the parents in writing.   on father’s day from 10.00 am until 6.00 pm, (b) on the child’s birthday from 4.00 pm to 7.00 pm if on a school day, otherwise 9.00 am to 1.00 pm on any other day, and (c) on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message).   on the child’s birthday from 4.00 pm to 7.00 pm if on a school day, otherwise 9.00 am to 1.00 pm on any other day, and (c) on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message).   on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message).   on occasions that changeover coincides with the commencement or conclusion of school, then changeover shall occur with the father collecting/delivering the child to the child’s school, and (b) at all other times, the father or his nominee shall pick up the child from, and return the child to, the mother (or her nominee) outside suburb b library.   at all other times, the father or his nominee shall pick up the child from, and return the child to, the mother (or her nominee) outside suburb b library.   on mother’s day from 10.00 am until 6.00 pm, (b) on the child’s birthday, from 1.00 pm until 5.00 pm (if not on a school day), (c) on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message), and in the event the child is spending time with the father during the above periods, then the mother shall collect the child from the father outside suburb b library at the commencement of the periods and return the child to the father outside suburb b library at the conclusion of the periods (if the child is due to spend time with the father).   on the child’s birthday, from 1.00 pm until 5.00 pm (if not on a school day), (c) on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message), and in the event the child is spending time with the father during the above periods, then the mother shall collect the child from the father outside suburb b library at the commencement of the periods and return the child to the father outside suburb b library at the conclusion of the periods (if the child is due to spend time with the father).   on eid al fitr and eid al adha as agreed to between the parents in writing (via text message), and in the event the child is spending time with the father during the above periods, then the mother shall collect the child from the father outside suburb b library at the commencement of the periods and return the child to the father outside suburb b library at the conclusion of the periods (if the child is due to spend time with the father).
and in the event the child is spending time with the father during the above periods, then the mother shall collect the child from the father outside suburb b library at the commencement of the periods and return the child to the father outside suburb b library at the conclusion of the periods (if the child is due to spend time with the father).
communication   download and subscribe to the ourfamilywizard or such other agreed equivalent co-parenting app within seven (7) days from the making of these orders. the parties shall pay their share of the subscription fee or seek a waiver, and ensure that their subscription is renewed every year thereafter, (b) use the online communication feature to share all key documentary matters regarding the child, including school reports, (c) use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and online communication features.   use the online communication feature to share all key documentary matters regarding the child, including school reports, (c) use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and online communication features.   use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and online communication features.   use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and online communication features.   use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and online communication features.
restraints  discussing any proceedings between them or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in any proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, (b) permitting any person from discussing any proceedings between the parents or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, (c) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) permitting any other person from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (e) questioning the child concerning the personal and work matters of the other parent.   permitting any person from discussing any proceedings between the parents or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child, (c) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) permitting any other person from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (e) questioning the child concerning the personal and work matters of the other parent.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (d) permitting any other person from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (e) questioning the child concerning the personal and work matters of the other parent.   permitting any other person from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other parent or a member of that parent’s extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, (e) questioning the child concerning the personal and work matters of the other parent.   questioning the child concerning the personal and work matters of the other parent.
courses/programs
provision of information  any significant illness, significant injury or significant medical problem suffered by the child whilst in their care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed for the child, and (c) their respective telephone number(s) and email address and the parents shall advise one another within twenty-four (24) hours should these details change.   any medication that has been prescribed for the child, and (c) their respective telephone number(s) and email address and the parents shall advise one another within twenty-four (24) hours should these details change.   their respective telephone number(s) and email address and the parents shall advise one another within twenty-four (24) hours should these details change.
medical issues
schooling   sporting events, (b) extracurricular activities, and (c) school functions and events including concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and school functions.   extracurricular activities, and (c) school functions and events including concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and school functions.   school functions and events including concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews and school functions.
miscellaneous
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records.
note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
part xivb of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  initiating application for final orders filed 8 february 2021, (b) his affidavit filed 25 may 2023, (c) notice of child abuse family violence or risk filed 8 february 2021, (d) affidavit of ms f filed 25 may 2023, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   his affidavit filed 25 may 2023, (c) notice of child abuse family violence or risk filed 8 february 2021, (d) affidavit of ms f filed 25 may 2023, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   notice of child abuse family violence or risk filed 8 february 2021, (d) affidavit of ms f filed 25 may 2023, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   affidavit of ms f filed 25 may 2023, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   case outline filed 28 august 2023.   further amended response to final orders filed 28 april 2023, (b) her affidavit filed 15 may 2023, (c) affidavit of ms g filed 15 may 2023, (d) family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   her affidavit filed 15 may 2023, (c) affidavit of ms g filed 15 may 2023, (d) family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   affidavit of ms g filed 15 may 2023, (d) family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022, and, (e) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022, and, (b) case outline filed 28 august 2023.   case outline filed 28 august 2023.   exhibit a: pages 7, 8 and 11 of mother’s tender bundle, (b) exhibit b: pages 19, 20 and 21 of mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: page 127 of mother’s affidavit – black and white photo of the child’s body (d) exhibit d: bundle of text messages between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: pages 25 and 26 of the mother’s tender bundle, speech therapist’s recommendations, (f) exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit b: pages 19, 20 and 21 of mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: page 127 of mother’s affidavit – black and white photo of the child’s body (d) exhibit d: bundle of text messages between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: pages 25 and 26 of the mother’s tender bundle, speech therapist’s recommendations, (f) exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit c: page 127 of mother’s affidavit – black and white photo of the child’s body (d) exhibit d: bundle of text messages between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: pages 25 and 26 of the mother’s tender bundle, speech therapist’s recommendations, (f) exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit d: bundle of text messages between mother and father, (e) exhibit e: pages 25 and 26 of the mother’s tender bundle, speech therapist’s recommendations, (f) exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit e: pages 25 and 26 of the mother’s tender bundle, speech therapist’s recommendations, (f) exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit f: transcript of proceedings in local court, and, (g) exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.   exhibit g: family report of ms h dated 9 june 2022.
evidence
the father’s evidence
the mother’s evidence
family report
... [ms khera] reported that [x] has a speech development issue, and she reported that she has attended a speech pathology consultation. she said that that speech therapist also spoke to [x]’s school, who confirmed that she requires treatment and support. she said that [x] will be involved in group speech therapy to address her speech issues, which commences in [mid]-2022. [ms khera] also reported that [x] was assessed by an optometrist who visited her school, and noted that she has some issues with her [...] sight and requires spectacles. [ms khera] said that this seems to primarily be school based, as it not something she has noticed for [x] having difficulty with while at home. she said that [x]’s teacher has said that she does not always pay attention in class, but otherwise has no other issues.
... [ms khera] said that, during her relationship with [mr gazzi], he was physically violent to her including kicking her, slapping her and punching her. she said that this occurred all throughout their relationship, but intensified in 2019. she confirmed that he was charged with [assault], but was found not guilty. [ms khera] reported that there was an incident where there was a verbal argument between her and [mr gazzi] regarding the paternal grandmother cooking food instead of her ([ms khera]), and she went to the bathroom as the argument was escalating and she thought that [mr gazzi] was going to hit her. she said that he came into the bathroom and hit her so hard, she could not open her mouth for three days. she said that she did not report this to the police, as at the time she was new to australia and did not know what she could or should do. [ms khera] said that shortly after that incident, there was an occasion where [mr gazzi] twisted her finger and injured it, and that was the incident that she reported to the police. she stated that [mr gazzi] was aggressive and has made verbal threats against her, such as that if they were living in [country e], he would have killed her. ... [ms khera] stated that [x] has witnessed a lot of verbal abuse towards her from [mr gazzi]. she said that [x] has witnessed the two severe occasions of physical violence by [mr gazzi], that being when she ([ms khera]) could not open her mouth and when he twisted her finger, and [x] was scared and saw her ([ms khera]) screaming and crying.
... [mr gazzi] alleged that [ms khera] has issues with her mental health, although he was unable to specify what the issues were, beyond considering her to be “not normal”. [ms khera] reported that she experienced stress and anxiety in relation to her experiences in her relationship with [mr gazzi], and was planning on seeking support and treatment for this. if [ms khera]’s experiences of [mr gazzi] in relation to family violence are accurate, then her having issues with anxiety and managing stress would be considered a typical and predictable reaction to those life experiences. if [ms khera] has experienced family violence perpetrated by [mr gazzi], then her issues with her mental health are considered a psychological injury caused by [mr gazzi], and not a deficit in her personality or her parenting. if [ms khera] is able to manage her mental health through treatment by way of counselling and/or medication as is determined by her treating medical or allied health practitioners, then this would be considered adequate and appropriate. [ms khera] impressed as willing and able to obtain such treatment as required. there are allegations that [mr gazzi] perpetrated family violence against [ms khera] during their relationship. the account provided by [ms khera] during interview and in her affidavit material is one that contains very serious allegations of physical family violence, resulting in physical injury to her. she reported one particular incident where her face was so injured such that she could not open her mouth for several days, and another incident whereby her finger was injured. she described that [mr gazzi] was physically and verbally abusive towards her throughout their relationship, but this intensified towards the end of their relationship. she also described that he had threatened to kill her, and she described that he was verbally and emotionally abusive during their communications after their separation. she further described that he would attend her residence and be abusive outside the property. [ms khera] described behaviour from [mr gazzi] that included physical violence, intimidation and causing fear, threatening behaviour, and verbal and emotional abuse. she reported that [x] witnessed the abuse and the violence. a parent who perpetrates family violence is considered to be making a choice to cause harm to the victim, and it is also considered a parenting choice to cause harm to the child. a parent perpetrating family violence causes harm to the victim(s), which includes the children, in multiple ways. in general, it can cause trauma to children by effecting their physical and emotional safety, negatively effects family functioning by causing housing instability, loss of contact with friends and family, and educational difficulties for children. it also has a negative effect on the victim parent’s parenting by causing or exacerbating mental health issues, and making that parent less available to the children as they are preoccupied with managing the perpetrator parent’s behaviour. there is also loss of daily routines for the children, when there is family violence occurring in the household. it is not beyond possibility that [x]’s speech development may have been impacted by her witnessing family violence. if her development was impacted by trauma (experiencing family violence), then her development may have been disrupted. if a young child experiences trauma, this can also impact on their capacity to attain future developmental milestones, as future development relies on the foundation of reaching previous developmental milestones. furthermore, experiencing family violence as a young child would have put at risk the formation of important attachment relationships in the context of having a secure, calm and nurturing environment. if [mr gazzi] did perpetrate family violence, he also chose to cause harm to his child in this way. in addition, if [x] was exposed to family violence prenatally, she would have experienced physical maternal stress in utero, which may have impacted on her neurological development. if accurate, these are all considered parenting choices of abuse that [mr gazzi] made against his unborn/young child at the time, and are not of a parenting standard that would be considered in any way acceptable. ... [mr gazzi] alleged that [ms khera] was abusive towards him, including throwing [an object] at him. if [ms khera] was the victim of family violence from [mr gazzi], then if she acted in a manner of throwing something at him, this may have been in the context of violent resistance. there were also allegations that she was abusive to the paternal grandmother, however, what was described does not appear to constitute family violence, but rather a conflicted relationship with poor emotional regulation that at times escalated to physically violent acts. it is possible that, if [ms khera] was a victim of family violence from [mr gazzi] and the paternal grandmother did not intervene or inflamed the situation, [ms khera] may have developed a negative perception of her based on her experiences. it is also possible that the paternal grandmother had limited resources to act protectively or intervene in [mr gazzi]’s alleged behaviour. with regards to the allegations that [ms khera] threw [an object] at [mr gazzi], if he was violent towards her and is considered the primary perpetrator, her behaviour may have been violent resistance, or behaviour that occurs in self-defence, and if this is the more accurate explanation, [ms khera] would not be considered a perpetrator of family violence. if [mr gazzi] is a family violence perpetrator as alleged, as previously discussed, it would also be considered that he made a choice to perpetrate violence against [x]. a parent who perpetrates family violence will also have associated deficits in their parenting, including being likely to be more punitive and rigid, and more likely to engage in excessive physical discipline and tolerate challenging childhood behaviour. ... even if [mr gazzi] did provide substantial care to her as an infant, at her age now and because of the disruption in their relationship over several years, it is unlikely that that would be adequate for them to have a close relationship now, and it would be considered more likely that they have a developing relationship. ... given the history of the parenting arrangements, the nature of [x]’s relationship with [mr gazzi], the family violence allegations, and the co-parenting relationship, it is not recommended that [x] live in an equal time arrangement. [mr gazzi] appeared to be lacking in insight in regards to his view that [x] would be able to live with him for seven nights a fortnight immediately with no issues, despite their limited relationship. ... [ms khera] considered that [x] should spend some time with [mr gazzi] and have a relationship with him and it may be that an alternate weekend is appropriate. however, if there is veracity to the family violence allegations, alternate weekends would be considered the maximum amount of time that [x] should spend with [mr gazzi], for the reasons outlined previously related to the risks posed to her by his likely problematic parenting. ... if there is no veracity to the allegations of family violence against [mr gazzi] and [ms khera] is not being overly supportive of [x] and [mr gazzi] developing their relationship for other reasons, then [x] may benefit from spending more time with [mr gazzi]. it appears that, so far, [ms khera] has not been obstructive in [x]’s relationship with [mr gazzi], and it was rather that he did not seek substantial time with her to develop her relationship with him. giving consideration to the co-parenting relationship, and the history of [x]’s parenting arrangements, in this scenario it would be recommended that [x] spend alternate weekends with [mr gazzi], from after school friday until before school monday, with additional telephone contact twice per week. in the absence of safety concerns, it appears likely that [x] will be able to adjust relatively quickly to the above arrangement, however, for her comfort, it is recommended that this occur incrementally over a short period of time (for example, adding one night per month). with regards to school holiday time, [x] may be able to spend some extended time with [mr gazzi], although at her current age and over the next two to three years, she may find the summer holidays difficult to be away from [ms khera] for three weeks, and it would be suggested that this be a week about arrangement for the next three years, unless otherwise agreed.  unsel] and knowing that the mother’s stated concern is about communication, it seems that you would still say that from friday through to monday is probably the safer option than friday through to sunday afternoon, would that be right? [witness] in terms of [x] witnessing parental conflict, yes. [counsel] right. is there any other reason that – if there’s no unacceptable risk – that you suggested from friday through till monday morning? [witness] if there was no risk related to family violence, that arrangement, in my mind, wasn’t so much that was – would – would require a significant amount of communication between the parents. it would allow [x] to have recreational time with both parents, or weekend time with both parents. and additionally, it would allow [x] to have her father involved in picking her up from school, taking her to school on the monday. so in – in that scenario, she would have that experience of having both parents involved in both parts of her life – that is, day-to-day routine, school, and recreational weekend time. [counsel] all right. and absent violence, at paragraph 84, or absent safety concerns, you say that the child may be able to spend some extended time with the father in the school holidays? [witness] yes. [counsel] and correct me if i’m wrong, but it seems from reading that paragraph that you’re actually suggesting half school holidays with each parent. [his honour] well, she referred to – second-last line of paragraph 84: it would be suggested that this be a week-about arrangement for the next three years unless otherwise agreed. [counsel] yes. so that’s half the - - -? [witness] half, but broken up so it’s not a three-week block. [counsel] yes. but you do suggest that a three-week block might be possible when the child is a bit older? [witness] yes. ... [counsel] all right. now, during the school term, you’re suggesting friday through to monday means that there’s less requirement for communication, and that is – and in holidays, presumably, there’s less requirement for communication because the child is not moving back and forth to school, is that right? [witness] yes.  s honour] does – do the text messages in exhibit d that you’ve just read – do they shed any light, in your view, on how these parties in the future may be able to communicate with each other on day-to-day matters affecting the child? [witness] on day-to-day matters, i think that it would be drawn out, based on this – drawn out, and back and forth for who knows how long. and if it’s a day-to-day matter and it becomes quite simple matters that are, “who’s going to pick this child up and take her to her [sports] lesson?” and that becomes a back-and-forward, it just creates a situation for [x] where she will not be able to enjoy those type of things because her parents are – there’s so much back-and-forth about day-to-day, simple things. [his honour] did you form any impression as to the level of cooperation between the parties from exhibit d? did it strike you, for example, as a highly cooperative, communicative relationship between the parties - - -? [witness] no. ... [his honour] that is, if the parties were – if the child was spending more time with the father rather than less time, there would need to be a greater level of cooperative communication between the parties, wouldn’t there? [witness] yes. [his honour] yes. and that’s particularly the case in an equal time relationship, isn’t it? [witness] yes, absolutely. [his honour] there has to be, would you agree, a high level of cooperative communication between the parties in that sort of arrangement? [witness] i would go so far as to say it has to be a positive co-parenting relationship for equal time to be considered. ... [his honour] so are you saying, [ms h], just in summary from this last passage of cross-examination, that even assuming the mother’s family violence allegations are not made out, on the material that you’ve considered – putting the family violence allegations to one side – you still have a concern about the quality of communication that is able to occur between these parties in relation to the child? [witness] yes. [his honour] and you’ve got a concern, do you, about the nature and extent of their cooperative coparenting relationship for this child? [witness] yes.  unsel] is what you tell the court that if his honour makes a finding that there’s no family violence and his honour makes a finding that absent these proceedings, the parties communicate effectively, that there isn’t some other reason as to why midweek time couldn’t be a possibility for [x] and the father? [witness] that would then become a whole different assessment with a whole different set of circumstances where there’s no family violence and parties get along really well, and have an excellent coparenting relationship and all of these issues don’t exist, anymore. in that scenario, then, i would usually consider weekend time plus midweek time to allow for the child to benefit from having both parents involved in recreational time as well as routine day-to-day school life. that would have been something i would’ve considered in that scenario. [counsel] is there an age that [x] will get to where, given the current state of play, she would be able to cope with midweek time? [witness] absenting all those other issues, she’s of an age now where she could cope with that. however, the caveat to that is i think there would need to be a lead up to that and not just occur suddenly, but it would also be dependent on her. when i interviewed these parents and based on what i’ve seen today, there were real concerns about her development as well. so you can’t just look at age on its own. it’s also development and developmental issues for the child as well. [counsel] so if his honour made a scheme of orders that increased over a period of time which resulted in [x] spending midweek time with the father, would that be an appropriate way to get to her spending midweek time? [witness] if all those other issues weren’t there, yes.  unsel] if you take it from me that [x] has been diagnosed with a moderate developmental language disorder that’s in respect of her expressive language skills, and she’s within the low average range for her receptive language skills and she has ongoing speech therapy to assist her within the school environment. you were asked some questions about the communication between the parents with respect to managing, in particular, her medical needs. would you agree with me that a child with – that [x] is not just an ordinary child, shall we use that word. that she has got some special needs? [witness] yes. [counsel] would you agree with me that that requires an extra layer of competent communication between the parties? [witness] yes. and that’s what i was trying to explain when i was speaking about projected communication needs for [x] because at the time of interview, some of those – her – some of those additional needs had already been – well, there was queries around them and my impression of [x] was that she did have some – there was certainly speech issues there quite significantly. ... [counsel] needless to say, she has been diagnosed. now, this is going to require cooperation between the parents, isn’t it, in terms of the kind of work that [x] would do within each household outside of school to assist with her speech therapy? [witness] yes. [counsel] and once again, that requires an extra layer of agreement and communication between mother and father, doesn’t it? [witness] and cooperation.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence  the father has consistently denied such alleged violence, both to the police and in these proceedings (including in his oral evidence). (b) the only medical record in evidence, adduced by the mother, related to a sore finger. no health professional evidence was adduced by her in relation to, inter alia, her allegation that the father punched her in the face leaving her with a sore jaw. (c) the mother gave inconsistent evidence in relation to the circumstances of alleged family violence committed by the father in about late 2019 when comparing her oral evidence before the local court in early 2020 and her evidence in these proceedings. (d) whilst the court acknowledges that there are often sound reasons why victims of domestic violence do not report such violence to the police, the court nevertheless takes into account that the mother had not reported to the police, in a timely fashion, alleged instances of family violence by the husband in about early 2014, early 2015, and in late 2017. (e) the court attaches no weight to the learned magistrate’s remarks at the local court hearing in early 2020 that the father may well have perpetrated family violence against the mother on occasions other than on the charged occasions of assault the subject of the local court criminal hearing. the father was ultimately found not guilty in the local court. (f) the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   the only medical record in evidence, adduced by the mother, related to a sore finger. no health professional evidence was adduced by her in relation to, inter alia, her allegation that the father punched her in the face leaving her with a sore jaw. (c) the mother gave inconsistent evidence in relation to the circumstances of alleged family violence committed by the father in about late 2019 when comparing her oral evidence before the local court in early 2020 and her evidence in these proceedings. (d) whilst the court acknowledges that there are often sound reasons why victims of domestic violence do not report such violence to the police, the court nevertheless takes into account that the mother had not reported to the police, in a timely fashion, alleged instances of family violence by the husband in about early 2014, early 2015, and in late 2017. (e) the court attaches no weight to the learned magistrate’s remarks at the local court hearing in early 2020 that the father may well have perpetrated family violence against the mother on occasions other than on the charged occasions of assault the subject of the local court criminal hearing. the father was ultimately found not guilty in the local court. (f) the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   the mother gave inconsistent evidence in relation to the circumstances of alleged family violence committed by the father in about late 2019 when comparing her oral evidence before the local court in early 2020 and her evidence in these proceedings. (d) whilst the court acknowledges that there are often sound reasons why victims of domestic violence do not report such violence to the police, the court nevertheless takes into account that the mother had not reported to the police, in a timely fashion, alleged instances of family violence by the husband in about early 2014, early 2015, and in late 2017. (e) the court attaches no weight to the learned magistrate’s remarks at the local court hearing in early 2020 that the father may well have perpetrated family violence against the mother on occasions other than on the charged occasions of assault the subject of the local court criminal hearing. the father was ultimately found not guilty in the local court. (f) the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   whilst the court acknowledges that there are often sound reasons why victims of domestic violence do not report such violence to the police, the court nevertheless takes into account that the mother had not reported to the police, in a timely fashion, alleged instances of family violence by the husband in about early 2014, early 2015, and in late 2017. (e) the court attaches no weight to the learned magistrate’s remarks at the local court hearing in early 2020 that the father may well have perpetrated family violence against the mother on occasions other than on the charged occasions of assault the subject of the local court criminal hearing. the father was ultimately found not guilty in the local court. (f) the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   the court attaches no weight to the learned magistrate’s remarks at the local court hearing in early 2020 that the father may well have perpetrated family violence against the mother on occasions other than on the charged occasions of assault the subject of the local court criminal hearing. the father was ultimately found not guilty in the local court. (f) the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   the court acknowledges the father did not adduce affidavit evidence from his mother in relation to certain of the mother’s family violence allegations, however, even accepting that such evidence, if called, would not have assisted the father’s case on this issue, the court would still not make family violence findings as contended for by the mother. (g) the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.   the court found the evidence of the maternal grandmother to be unreliable in relation to her allegations of family violence by the father and it does not accept that evidence. in this regard it was telling that in her oral evidence she asserted initially, contrary to her affidavit, in respect to an alleged incident involving the father trying to hurt the mother with a weapon, that the father had taken the weapon from her (as opposed to having allegedly taken the weapon from a table). she had also stated in her oral evidence, which was not mentioned in her affidavit, in relation to this incident, that the father had pulled the mother’s hair, and pushed and kicked the mother.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility, equal time and substantial and significant time  there is no issue between the parties as to the child’s religion or schooling, (b) whilst the child’s development and related treatment is a current issue for the parties, there is no evidence that the parties have disagreed, for example, as to the need for the child to see a speech pathologist. the issues between the parties in this respect have been primarily logistical with respect to obtaining referrals and attending appointments, (c) there is probably sufficient communication between the parties to enable them to reach agreement on major long-term issues without conflict and in a timely fashion.   whilst the child’s development and related treatment is a current issue for the parties, there is no evidence that the parties have disagreed, for example, as to the need for the child to see a speech pathologist. the issues between the parties in this respect have been primarily logistical with respect to obtaining referrals and attending appointments, (c) there is probably sufficient communication between the parties to enable them to reach agreement on major long-term issues without conflict and in a timely fashion.   there is probably sufficient communication between the parties to enable them to reach agreement on major long-term issues without conflict and in a timely fashion.
summary  download and subscribe to the ourfamilywizard or such other agreed equivalent co-parenting app within seven (7) days from the making of these orders. the parties shall pay their share of the subscription fee or seek a waiver, and ensure that their subscription is renewed every year thereafter, (b) use the online communication feature to share all key documentary matters regarding the child, including school reports, (c) use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and communication features.   use the online communication feature to share all key documentary matters regarding the child, including school reports, (c) use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and communication features.   use the calendar feature to arrange any agreed variations to the order and/or record any medical appointments, (d) use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and communication features.   use the expense feature to record any child related expenditure that relates to the orders, (e) use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and communication features.   use the messaging feature when information cannot be conveyed in the calendar, expense, and communication features.
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024