last updated: 9 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
maddocks & sachdev [2024] fedcfamc2f 567
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records.note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).part xivb of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym has been approved pursuant to subsection 114q(2) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  amended response filed 15 march 2023, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 october 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 9 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 9 april 2024.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 9 october 2023, (c) her affidavit filed 9 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 9 april 2024.   her affidavit filed 9 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 9 april 2024.   child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 9 april 2024.   family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 9 april 2024.   case outline filed 9 april 2024.   amended initiating application filed 22 february 2024, (b) his notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 23 january 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 8 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 10 april 2024.   his notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 23 january 2023, (c) his affidavit filed 8 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 10 april 2024.   his affidavit filed 8 april 2024, (d) child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 10 april 2024.   child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (e) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 10 april 2024.   family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (f) case outline filed 10 april 2024.   case outline filed 10 april 2024.   child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023, (b) family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (c) case outline filed 12 april 2024.   family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (c) case outline filed 12 april 2024.   case outline filed 12 april 2024.   exhibit a: pages 36, 38, 39, 40, 43, 45 of mother’s tender bundle, (b) exhibit b: pages 3 – 5 of icl tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: pages 19 – 24 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (e) exhibit e: child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023.   exhibit b: pages 3 – 5 of icl tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: pages 19 – 24 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (e) exhibit e: child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023.   exhibit c: pages 19 – 24 of icl tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (e) exhibit e: child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023.   exhibit d: family report of ms h dated 9 january 2024, (e) exhibit e: child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023.   exhibit e: child impact report of ms h dated 26 june 2023.
evidence
family report
... [x] appeared to be happy in each observation with his parents, he was observed to engage in the games, and even with his limited speech he tried to converse with them, and [x] reciprocated each parent’s affection. overall, both parents equally presented as warm, nurturing, and affectionate parents. [x]’s general affect between the parents’ observation remained the same.
... ... the description that [mr maddocks] provided from the child impact report interview suggests that [mr maddocks] and [ms sachdev] had an unhealthy dynamic between them that resulted in conflict and the parents had poor emotional regulation, and they engaged in dysfunctional behaviour. ... ... [mr maddocks]’ proposal seems to be child focused and the gradual increase of time considers [x]’s stage of development, which will allow [x] to develop a stronger relationship with [mr maddocks]. the increase in time also allows [x] to maintain and further develop his relationship with his paternal siblings, which will be important for [x] as this will provide him a sense of identity that will provide him a sense of belonging that may assist his wellbeing and confidence as he grows. ... [mr maddocks] is proposing an introduction of overnights that would eventually lead to equal time as [x] grows. [mr maddocks]’ proposed introduction of overnight time appears to be appropriate for [x]’s age and stage of development. ... consistency and predictability are highly important for young children to thrive and an important aspect for overnight time and or an equal time arrangement for young children. it would have a less detrimental impact on children when the parents have similar approach to parenting, have positive communication and coparenting relationship. it does not appear that the parents have demonstrated any significant changes to the way they communicate or made any adjustments to improve their coparenting relationship as the court proceedings have continued and they have remained opposed to each other’s views. it is unlikely that the parents can make the positive changes required for effective coparenting relationship in the near future and therefore, it is not possible to comment too much at this stage on the possibility of [x] living in an equal time arrangement in the future. ... ... [ms sachdev]’s proposal is limited as it does not allow [x] to develop a meaningful relationship with his paternal siblings and it does not seem to progress as [x] grows where he enters the next stages of his development. it also does not take into consideration [mr maddocks]’ work commitments. it appears that [x] is familiar with [mr maddocks] and took comfort in his presence, and if the court determines that there is no significant risk to [x], it is considered that [x] could benefit from spending more time with his father and his paternal siblings.  s honour] and can i take it from that part of paragraph 83 of your report, where you say:
overnight time could be introduced when the child is in the preschool stage of development (ages 3-5) if the parents’ co-parenting relationship has significantly improved, and as long as there is no regression in the child’s overall behaviours.
if you assume that the parties’ co-parenting relationship is presently not optimal, but there is some co-parenting relationship, and if you assume the child is presently not regressing in his behaviour. consistent would (sic with) that part of your report, would you be comfortable with the child beginning overnight time in about six months time when the child is three, which would pick up your age range of three to five? yes, your honour.  unsel] my question is: do you consider that it would be important for there to be sort of a balancing act? we make sure that [x] can develop a secure attachment with his father, whilst also making sure that he – or that mum can manage his sleeping problems? [witness] that depends. [counsel] okay? [witness] yes. [counsel] on what? [witness] so routine you’re talking about is putting [x] to sleep and what that routine could be, because any caregiver can also be provided that routine to [x]. and it was clear for me that there was a bond between [x] and his father, so there’s already a trusting relationship to that caregiver.  s honour] so is it your general view that the greater amount of time that this child might spend with the father each fortnight would necessarily result in there having to be a greater need for the parties to communicate? so let’s look at one end, hypothetically, of the spectrum, there’s an equal time arrangement. i take it you would accept that in an equal time arrangement, the party’s level of communication, and their co-parenting relationship would have to be of a fairly high standard? [witness] yes, your honour. [his honour] to cope with equal time. and would you agree that the less time that this child is spending with the father, there would correspondingly be a reduced need for the parties, the mother and father, to have to communicate about day-to-day matters affecting the child? [witness] yes, your honour.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc(2) primary considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.
4.6 upon completion of order 4.5:
4.6.1 each alternate weekend from 3.00 pm or the conclusion of school friday until 9.00 am or the commencement of school monday  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
to assist with sleep maintenance overnight, i’ve prescribed a trial of long-acting melatonin. additionally, we discussed how elements of distress related to parental separation may be contributing to the issue. i plan to follow-up after a two week period to review the blood results and assess [x]’s response to the melatonin trial.   the father is now aware of the content of the above paediatricians’ reports relating to the child’s sleep issues, (b) the court is satisfied that the father has sufficient parenting capacity to adequately manage any sleep problems the child may experience, (c) the child has been assessed by paediatricians in relation to his sleep issues and a trial of long-acting melatonin was prescribed in early 2024, (d) the child will not commence spending overnight time with the father for about six months during which time the child’s sleep issues can be further managed by the mother through the paediatricians, (e) over the next six months the child’s relationship with the father can be enhanced through spending additional time with him leading to the real prospect that the child will feel comfortable in the father managing any sleep issues once overnight time commences, and, (f) the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.   the court is satisfied that the father has sufficient parenting capacity to adequately manage any sleep problems the child may experience, (c) the child has been assessed by paediatricians in relation to his sleep issues and a trial of long-acting melatonin was prescribed in early 2024, (d) the child will not commence spending overnight time with the father for about six months during which time the child’s sleep issues can be further managed by the mother through the paediatricians, (e) over the next six months the child’s relationship with the father can be enhanced through spending additional time with him leading to the real prospect that the child will feel comfortable in the father managing any sleep issues once overnight time commences, and, (f) the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.   the child has been assessed by paediatricians in relation to his sleep issues and a trial of long-acting melatonin was prescribed in early 2024, (d) the child will not commence spending overnight time with the father for about six months during which time the child’s sleep issues can be further managed by the mother through the paediatricians, (e) over the next six months the child’s relationship with the father can be enhanced through spending additional time with him leading to the real prospect that the child will feel comfortable in the father managing any sleep issues once overnight time commences, and, (f) the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.   the child will not commence spending overnight time with the father for about six months during which time the child’s sleep issues can be further managed by the mother through the paediatricians, (e) over the next six months the child’s relationship with the father can be enhanced through spending additional time with him leading to the real prospect that the child will feel comfortable in the father managing any sleep issues once overnight time commences, and, (f) the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.   over the next six months the child’s relationship with the father can be enhanced through spending additional time with him leading to the real prospect that the child will feel comfortable in the father managing any sleep issues once overnight time commences, and, (f) the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.   the court can make the icl’s proposed orders 8, 9, and 10, relating to, inter alia, the mother providing the father with details of all of the child’s current treating medical professionals, and any current reports from such professionals.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
associate: dated: 7 may 2024
dated: 7 may 2024