last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kapoor & kapoor [2024] fedcfamc2f 605
orders
by consent and pending further order, the court orders that:  their current residential address, (b) their current mobile, telephone number and email address, and (c) shall notify the other parent within 24 hours of a change occurring.   their current mobile, telephone number and email address, and (c) shall notify the other parent within 24 hours of a change occurring.   shall notify the other parent within 24 hours of a change occurring.   in the event that the child suffers any illness or injury requiring attendance at or admission to a hospital, requiring specialist medical treatment whilst they are in their respective care. (b) any non-urgent medical condition, health issue or illness the child suffers whilst the child is in their care for which the parent sought advice and provide the details of the practitioner consulted, the advice received, and any treatment provided to the child.   any non-urgent medical condition, health issue or illness the child suffers whilst the child is in their care for which the parent sought advice and provide the details of the practitioner consulted, the advice received, and any treatment provided to the child.
pending further order, the court orders that:  as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: (i) from the date of these orders: from 3:30pm tuesday until 6pm wednesday first week, and from 8am saturday to 6pm sunday each second weekend. (ii) following the completion of order 11(i) the father shall spend time as agreed and failing agreement: from 3:30pm tuesday until 6pm wednesday first week, and second week friday 3:30pm until monday 9am upon drop off to day care or school.   from the date of these orders: from 3:30pm tuesday until 6pm wednesday first week, and from 8am saturday to 6pm sunday each second weekend. (ii) following the completion of order 11(i) the father shall spend time as agreed and failing agreement: from 3:30pm tuesday until 6pm wednesday first week, and second week friday 3:30pm until monday 9am upon drop off to day care or school.  ) following the completion of order 11(i) the father shall spend time as agreed and failing agreement: from 3:30pm tuesday until 6pm wednesday first week, and second week friday 3:30pm until monday 9am upon drop off to day care or school.
b(i). if the above monday is a public holiday, the child will remain with the father until tuesday 9am upon drop off to day care or school.  father’s day and mother’s day: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for father’s day should it not be the father’s ordinary weekend then the child will spend time with the father from 6pm saturday before fathers day until monday 9am or before school. for mother’s day should it not be the mothers ordinary weekend then the child will spend time with the mother from 6pm saturday before mother’s day until monday 9am or before school. (b) christmas: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 2pm christmas day commencing from 2024 and each even year thereafter. the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas day until 2 pm boxing day commencing 2025 and each odd year thereafter. (c) diwali: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: each year on the date of diwali, the child spend time with the father overnight commencing from 10:00 am on diwali until 6:00 pm the following day. (d) easter weekend: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am on good friday until 6:00 pm holy saturday commencing at each odd numbered year. the child spend time with the father from 6:00 pm holy saturday until 6:00 pm easter monday commencing 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter. (e) birthdays: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:   as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for father’s day should it not be the father’s ordinary weekend then the child will spend time with the father from 6pm saturday before fathers day until monday 9am or before school. for mother’s day should it not be the mothers ordinary weekend then the child will spend time with the mother from 6pm saturday before mother’s day until monday 9am or before school.   christmas: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 2pm christmas day commencing from 2024 and each even year thereafter. the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas day until 2 pm boxing day commencing 2025 and each odd year thereafter. (c) diwali: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: each year on the date of diwali, the child spend time with the father overnight commencing from 10:00 am on diwali until 6:00 pm the following day. (d) easter weekend: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am on good friday until 6:00 pm holy saturday commencing at each odd numbered year. the child spend time with the father from 6:00 pm holy saturday until 6:00 pm easter monday commencing 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter. (e) birthdays: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:   as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 2pm christmas day commencing from 2024 and each even year thereafter. the child spend time with the father from 4:00 pm christmas day until 2 pm boxing day commencing 2025 and each odd year thereafter.   diwali: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: each year on the date of diwali, the child spend time with the father overnight commencing from 10:00 am on diwali until 6:00 pm the following day. (d) easter weekend: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am on good friday until 6:00 pm holy saturday commencing at each odd numbered year. the child spend time with the father from 6:00 pm holy saturday until 6:00 pm easter monday commencing 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter. (e) birthdays: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:   as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: each year on the date of diwali, the child spend time with the father overnight commencing from 10:00 am on diwali until 6:00 pm the following day.   easter weekend: (i) as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am on good friday until 6:00 pm holy saturday commencing at each odd numbered year. the child spend time with the father from 6:00 pm holy saturday until 6:00 pm easter monday commencing 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter. (e) birthdays: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:   as agreed between parties in writing, but failing agreement: the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am on good friday until 6:00 pm holy saturday commencing at each odd numbered year. the child spend time with the father from 6:00 pm holy saturday until 6:00 pm easter monday commencing 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter.   birthdays: (i) as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:   as agreed between the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for the child’s birthday:
a(i). on each odd numbered year, the child spend time with the father from 2pm until 2pm the following day.
a(ii). on each even numbered year, the child spend time with the father from 2pm to 2pm the following day.
b(i). the child spend time with the father from 10:00 am until 6:00 pm the following day.
c(i). the child spend time with the father overnight from 10:00 am until 6:00 pm the following day.
d(i). the child spend time with the father overnight for the grandmother’s birthday from 10:00 am until 6:00 pm the following day.  additional holidays (i) as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for a family wedding:   as agreed by the parties in writing, but failing agreement: for a family wedding:
a(i). the child shall spend time with the father from sunday 9 am until 7pm wednesday that week.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge street
documents relied upon  affidavit of applicant mother dated 3 may 2024. (2) affidavit of respondent father dated 3 april 2024.   affidavit of respondent father dated 3 april 2024.
chronology
parenting law – the relevant principles
60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests determining child’s best interests:   subject to subsection (4), in determining what is in the child’s best interests, the court must: consider the matters set out in subsection (2), and if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child—also consider the matters set out in subsection (3)
general considerations   for the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the following matters: what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse, neglect, or other harm) of: the child, and each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental responsibility for the child), any views expressed by the child, the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the child, the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs, the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the child’s parents, and other people who are significant to the child, where it is safe to do so, anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child. (2a) in considering the matters set out in paragraph (2)(a), the court must include consideration of: any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a person caring for the child (whether or not the person had parental responsibility for the child), and any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a member of the child’s family.
article 7 (1) the child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire a nationality and. as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents. (2) states parties shall ensure the implementation of these rights in accordance with their national law and their obligations under the relevant international instruments in this field, in particular where the child would otherwise be stateless. article 9 (1) states parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will, except when competent authorities subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child. such determination may be necessary in a particular case such as one involving abuse or neglect of the child by the parents, or one where the parents are living separately and a decision must be made as to the child's place of residence. (2) in any proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 of the present article, all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings and make their views known. (3) states parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child's best interests. (4) where such separation results from any action initiated by a state party, such as the detention, imprisonment, exile, deportation or death (including death arising from any cause while the person is in the custody of the state) of one or both parents or of the child, that state party shall, upon request, provide the parents, the child or, if appropriate, another member of the family with the essential information concerning the whereabouts of the absent member(s) of the family unless the provision of the information would be detrimental to the well-being of the child. states parties shall further ensure that the submission of such a request shall of itself entail no adverse consequences for the person(s) concerned. article 12 (1) states parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her own views the right to express those views freely in all matters affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the child. (2) for this purpose, the child shall in particular be provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings affecting the child, either directly, or through a representative or an appropriate body, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of national law. article 18 (1) states parties shall use their best efforts to ensure recognition of the principle that both parents have common responsibilities for the upbringing and development of the child. parents or, as the case may be, legal guardians, have the primary responsibility for the upbringing and development of the child. the best interests of the child will be their basic concern. (2) for the purpose of guaranteeing and promoting the rights set forth in the present convention, states parties shall render appropriate assistance to parents and legal guardians in the performance of their child-rearing responsibilities and shall ensure the development of institutions, facilities and services for the care of children. (3) states parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that children of working parents have the right to benefit from child-care services and facilities for which they are eligible. article 19 (1) states parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child. (2) such protective measures should, as appropriate, include effective procedures for the establishment of social programmes to provide necessary support for the child and for those who have the care of the child, as well as for other forms of prevention and for identification, reporting, referral, investigation, treatment and follow-up of instances of child maltreatment described heretofore, and, as appropriate, for judicial involvement.
submissions
findings and conclusions
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 may 2024
dated: 16 may 2024