last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
agarwal & desai [2024] fedcfamc2f 601
orders
the court orders that:  on diwali, the child shall spend time with the mother from 4:00pm until 7:00pm, and in the event diwali falls on a non-school day when the child is not already in the mother’s care, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm. (b) that the child spend time with the mother on the day of a community celebration of the festival of holi from 11:00am until 2:00pm provided that: (i) the celebration is in region b, (ii) the applicant provides not less than 7 days’ notice of the upcoming festival celebration with the date and location. (c) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on father’s day. (d) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on mother’s day, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (e) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on the father’s birthday. (f) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   that the child spend time with the mother on the day of a community celebration of the festival of holi from 11:00am until 2:00pm provided that: (i) the celebration is in region b, (ii) the applicant provides not less than 7 days’ notice of the upcoming festival celebration with the date and location. (c) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on father’s day. (d) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on mother’s day, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (e) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on the father’s birthday. (f) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   the celebration is in region b, (ii) the applicant provides not less than 7 days’ notice of the upcoming festival celebration with the date and location.  ) the applicant provides not less than 7 days’ notice of the upcoming festival celebration with the date and location.   that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on father’s day. (d) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on mother’s day, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (e) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on the father’s birthday. (f) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on mother’s day, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (e) that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on the father’s birthday. (f) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   that the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended on the father’s birthday. (f) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the mother’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm with the mother on the mother’s birthday and in the event the mother’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm. (g) that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   that in the event the child is not already in the mother’s care on the child’s birthday, the child shall spend time with the mother from 11:00am until 2:00pm on the child’s birthday and in the event the child’s birthday falls on a school day from 4:00pm until 7:00pm.   x born in 2012 from the commonwealth of australia.
from the commonwealth of australia.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge myers:
introduction
dear associate we continue to act on behalf of the wife. we have been advised by members of our client’s family and a social worker that our client is chronically ill and is hospitalised. it would seem that this is a change of circumstances that the court should be made aware of. we suggest that his honour relists the matter for directions in a month’s time to enable us to ascertain through medical evidence our client’s state of health and prognosis. we have been advised that the view of the social worker managing our client’s affairs at the hospital where she is a patient that an application is to be made to the guardianship division for our client’s affairs to be managed. as such it would seem unlikely that we are able to be properly instructed by our client. we have the consent of the husband’s solicitors to forward this correspondence to you and are advised that it is the respondent’s preference to appear via microsoft teams if this can be accommodated by the court.   within twenty-eight (28) days of today’s orders, the legal representative for the wife is directed to file and serve the following: (a) an application in a proceeding seeking the appointment of a litigation guardian for the wife and affidavit in support of the orders sought, (b) a further affidavit from the proposed litigation guardian notifying the acceptance of such appointment, and any conflict. (2) pending further order, the child the subject of the proceedings live with the father (3) pending further order, the father have sole parental responsibility for the said child. (4) the matter is adjourned for directions hearing on 5 june 2023 at 10:00am. and the court notes that:   an application in a proceeding seeking the appointment of a litigation guardian for the wife and affidavit in support of the orders sought, (b) a further affidavit from the proposed litigation guardian notifying the acceptance of such appointment, and any conflict.   a further affidavit from the proposed litigation guardian notifying the acceptance of such appointment, and any conflict.   pending further order, the child the subject of the proceedings live with the father (3) pending further order, the father have sole parental responsibility for the said child. (4) the matter is adjourned for directions hearing on 5 june 2023 at 10:00am. and the court notes that:   pending further order, the father have sole parental responsibility for the said child. (4) the matter is adjourned for directions hearing on 5 june 2023 at 10:00am. and the court notes that:   the matter is adjourned for directions hearing on 5 june 2023 at 10:00am. and the court notes that:
and the court notes that:
chronology
proposed orders  the father have sole parental responsibility for the child, (2) the mother spend time with the child from 5:00pm to 7:30pm each wednesday and from 12noon to 4:00pm each sunday, (3) the father shall deliver the child to the mother at the commencement of time and collect the child from the mother at the conclusion of time, and (4) the child shall remain on the airport watchlist until the child attains the age of 16 years.   the mother spend time with the child from 5:00pm to 7:30pm each wednesday and from 12noon to 4:00pm each sunday, (3) the father shall deliver the child to the mother at the commencement of time and collect the child from the mother at the conclusion of time, and (4) the child shall remain on the airport watchlist until the child attains the age of 16 years.   the father shall deliver the child to the mother at the commencement of time and collect the child from the mother at the conclusion of time, and (4) the child shall remain on the airport watchlist until the child attains the age of 16 years.   the child shall remain on the airport watchlist until the child attains the age of 16 years.   the father have sole parental responsibility for the child, (2) the mother spend time with the child as agreed and failing agreement on a three stage increase which ultimately sees the child spending time with the mother each wednesday from 4-7pm (provided the father has a car), from 11am saturday to 11am sunday (provided the child has suitable accommodation) or in the event the child does not have suitable accommodation overnight, from 11am saturday- 6pm saturday each alternate weekend, (3) when the child attains 14 years of age, the child shall spend time with the mother in accordance with the child’s wishes. (4) time on special occasions including: diwali, holi, father’s day, mother’s day, father’s birthday, mother’s birthday and the child’s birthday. (5) that the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father on the basis of certain conditions having been satisfied.   the mother spend time with the child as agreed and failing agreement on a three stage increase which ultimately sees the child spending time with the mother each wednesday from 4-7pm (provided the father has a car), from 11am saturday to 11am sunday (provided the child has suitable accommodation) or in the event the child does not have suitable accommodation overnight, from 11am saturday- 6pm saturday each alternate weekend, (3) when the child attains 14 years of age, the child shall spend time with the mother in accordance with the child’s wishes. (4) time on special occasions including: diwali, holi, father’s day, mother’s day, father’s birthday, mother’s birthday and the child’s birthday. (5) that the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father on the basis of certain conditions having been satisfied.   when the child attains 14 years of age, the child shall spend time with the mother in accordance with the child’s wishes. (4) time on special occasions including: diwali, holi, father’s day, mother’s day, father’s birthday, mother’s birthday and the child’s birthday. (5) that the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father on the basis of certain conditions having been satisfied.   time on special occasions including: diwali, holi, father’s day, mother’s day, father’s birthday, mother’s birthday and the child’s birthday. (5) that the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father on the basis of certain conditions having been satisfied.   that the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father on the basis of certain conditions having been satisfied.
issues for determination  the duration and the frequency of the time that the child is to spend with the mother, and (2) whether the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father, in particular to country e.   whether the child be permitted to travel overseas with the father, in particular to country e.
the primary considerations – best interest
section 60cc(2)(a)  c]: it is very – like, it’s a tough decision to make, because i am listening to you today, i am listening to them, i am listening to the father. i have been listening – sitting here listening to everyone, and i feel like i do want [ms c] to have a relationship with [x], like ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: all right?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ [ms c]: with the child. the thing is, we came down from having – wanting to have a relationship – like, coming every fortnight sleepover to, you know, having a few hours every weekend, not having holidays, full holidays, coming down to a few days in the holidays. i don’t know how short we can go because even if [x], the child, doesn’t want to be with the mother today, but mother – to her – to her intention or her strength to get better comes from seeing the child. she sees the child. she works hard. she is – like, you know, that is her motivation. his honour: all right?‑‑‑ [ms c]: i can’t forget that. his honour: all right?‑‑‑ [ms c]: you know, of all the things, i know the child is distressed. i can very well tell, because i work in the field, so i know that the child ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: when you say he is – when you say he is distressed, what distress are you observing?‑‑‑ [ms c]: like, the video you saw. if you saw something else, i saw something else. that’s the thing that ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: what did you ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ [ms c]: you know ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: what did you see?‑‑‑ [ms c]: i saw that a – a mum is trying to – you know, a mother’s point of view, where she is hugging, she is like showing the love, and – but the thing is that, at this point, the child is, “okay, i am sitting there. i don’t have to do anything. easy and relaxed. even if he goes there, sits overnight, just relaxing, not doing anything, not engaging with mum, the mum is getting all the things that she needs by seeing the child. (transcript dated 2 april 2024, p 83, lines 10-39).
section 60cc(2)(b)
the additional considerations, s60cc(3)
views expressed by the child/children, and the relevant weight the court should give to their views: s 60cc(3)(a)   paragraph 60cc(3)(a) requires the court to consider any views expressed by a child in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to the child. this section deals with how the court informs itself of views expressed by a child. (2) the court may inform itself of views expressed by a child:   by having regard to anything contained in a report given to the court under subsection 62g(2), or (b) by making an order under section 68l for the child's interests in the proceedings to be independently represented by a lawyer, or (c) subject to the applicable rules of court, by such other means as the court thinks appropriate.
note 1: paragraph (a)--subsection 62g(3a) generally requires the person giving the report to ascertain the child's views and include those views in the report. note 2: paragraph (b)--paragraph 68la(5)(b) requires the independent children's lawyer for the child to ensure that the child's views are fully put before the court.
14. [x] presented as an engaged and polite child. [x] said that living with his father is “good”, as they do activities together, such as going to the park. [x] described his father as kind and funny, and said they have a “good relationship”. 15. [x] said that he was “sad” about his mother’s medical condition initially, however, he is now “a bit angry” that she went to [country e] recently without telling him and he has not seen her for two months. [x] said that his relationship with his mother is not very strong, especially now, as he cannot communicate with her. [x] said that when he lived with his mother, he was unhappy because his mother would make him do chores and threaten to not allow him to spend time with his father if he did not complete his chores. 16. [x] stated that he wants to continue living with his father, and he would prefer to see his mother for “a few hours” on a weekend, without any overnights. [x] said that due to his mother’s medical condition, his (maternal) grandfather has to care for him, so he does not feel like he actually spends quality time with his mother and having overnights with her (and his grandfather) feels somewhat meaningless.
the nature of the child’s relationship with each of the child’s parents and any other persons including any grandparent or relative of the child: s60cc(3)(b)
this video shows, your honour – this video shows there’s a connection between these two people. there obviously is, your honour knows that this parent will not encourage this child to see his father – to see his mother. (transcript dated 2 april 2024, page 40, lines 43-45)
i – i believe from – from everything that i have – in terms of [x]’s (sic) age, the – i think he – and i – i observed in the video, as well, he seems to be quite – you know – withdrawn and a little – i suppose i think he feels unsure and uncertain of how – and he – he expressed that he finds it challenging to communicate with his mum. he has – so he has got underlying psychological – you know – issues in determining – you know – regarding grief and loss and confusion, which is understandable for a child of his age. his mother was his primary carer, regardless of what that relationship looked like. obviously, it has been reported to be quite positive in the past. [x]’s (sic) current – how he – his – his – his – his, i suppose, perception of his relationship with his mum currently is that it has deteriorated, and i think that that is – has – obviously is based a lot to do with the lack of communication and the difficulty in communicating with her, which you – you – you – we – we all saw in the – in the video as well. so there is, i think, a level of frustration that comes with that, and i suppose that is what i mean by pressure, the spending – you know – long periods of time without – without the necessary supports, because he actually has – he actually has no professional supports in place to support his relationship with his mother, that it is – it is – it is almost a – you know – could potentially become, if he – if he is not enjoying and feeling comfortable with the time that he spends with his mother and – and ultimately, his grandfather, then it – it could ultimately act as a deterrent for him to want to spend more time with – with her, which is a concern that i hold, which is why i made the suggestion in terms of key considerations for – for the moment, that he spends shorter but more – yet more regular periods of time with his mother, with the additional professional supports for both himself and [ms c]. (transcript dated 2 april 2024, page 101, lines 44-47 and page 102 lines 1-20).
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in the child/children’s life: s60cc(3)(c)
15. [x] said that he was “sad” about his mother’s medical condition initially, however, he is now “a bit angry” that she went to [country e] recently without telling him and he has not seen her for two months.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child: s60cc(3)(ca)
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of the parents or any other person with whom they have been living: s60cc(3)(d)
as i have highlighted in my – in my report, that he has had multiple changes in his care arrangements in his early childhood from, i believe, the age of three, including moving – living in [country e] for – and being separated from his parents for quite some time, and then obviously being in the primary care of his mother. he has had periods where he hasn’t seen either parent, like the non-residing parent, for a period of time, and then his mother becoming really unwell all of a sudden. this – this – you know, i believe that, in – in my – in my assessment, that [x] is actually struggling quite a lot with the – the changes in – with his mother’s health and the deterioration of that, which has actually impacted their relationship and his ability to communicate with her. so his – he definitely – i – i suppose, it – it seems that he really wants to spend time with her, but he just, at his age and stage of development, he doesn’t, and i did highlight in my report that he doesn’t have the support required to actually manage that relationship and to – the supports in place to help him almost rebuild and navigate that new relationship with his mother, given her – her capacity limitations at this time. [x] experienced a significant change in his circumstances following his mother suffering [an illness]. [x] was uprooted from his primary carer. his mother could no longer care for him, noting she can no longer properly care for herself. however, the father has been [x]’s primary carer now since [late] 2022. [x] appears to be well settled in the father’s care and he has expressed a desire to the child court expert to remain living in the father’s care. (transcript dated 2 april 2024, page 98, lines 21-35)
it may be beneficial for [x] to spend shorter, yet more regular periods of time with [ms c] under the current circumstances.
the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis: s60cc(3)(e)
the capacity of the parent or any other responsible adult to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs: s60cc(3)(f)
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant: s60cc(3)(g)
if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: s60cc(3)(h)
the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents: s60cc(3)(i)
any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family: s60cc(3)(j)
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order: s60cc(3)(k)
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child: s60cc(3)(l)
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant: s60cc(3)(m)   d]: ‑‑‑i – i have made – i have made several recommendations or key considerations for pathways and of – for decision-making, one of them being that he sees a psychologist or a counsellor, which would provide him with that opportunity to have that one-on-one – one-on-one support, psychological support, to allow him to – yes – express his emotions and discuss any matters that he may be feeling, sort of – whether it be uncomfortable or just unable to articulate himself, give him that space, that emotional space, to actually have that support, as well as other supports that, if you would like more information, i am happy to go into that. but i – i did – i did highlight my – the first key consideration was for him to have one-on-one psychological support ‑ ‑ ‑yes?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ to navigate him through this experience. his honour: and that is through – just so i can be clear, that is through getting a mental health plan put in place, is that right, or did you mean ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑it is at point 25. [ms d]: i – i don’t know if i mentioned a mental health care plan, but that is obviously possible. that is ‑ ‑ ‑ yes?‑‑‑absolutely. (transcript dated 2 april 2024, page 99, lines 25-40).
parental responsibility
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 may 2024
dated: 14 may 2024