last updated: 18 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
maginn & takara [2024] fedcfamc2f 679
orders
the court declares that:
the court orders that:  the applicant discharge the mortgage encumbering the property to remove the respondent from all liability, (b) the applicant indemnify the respondent in respect of all liabilities relating to the property.   the applicant indemnify the respondent in respect of all liabilities relating to the property.   pexa client authorisation form, (b) hard copy state revenue office and/or australian taxation office forms, (c) mortgage discharge authority forms.   hard copy state revenue office and/or australian taxation office forms, (c) mortgage discharge authority forms.   mortgage discharge authority forms.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses in action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of that party, (c) each party shall retain their respective superannuation funds, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property for the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of that party, (c) each party shall retain their respective superannuation funds, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property for the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party shall retain their respective superannuation funds, (d) insurance policies remain the sole property for the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property for the owner named therein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
no appearance by or for ms takara
whether to make orders sought
a. pexa client authorisation form, hard copy state revenue office and/or australian taxation office forms, c. mortgage discharge authority forms. for the purpose of implementing order 3, an affidavit sworn by the solicitors acting for the applicant shall be sufficient evidence of attempts made by the applicant to have the respondent execute the said documents. upon the registrar signing the pexa client authorisation form, the applicant’s solicitors are authorised to complete the transfer using pexa on behalf of the parties, including but not limited to the execution of any necessary electronic declarations (including to the australian taxation office and/or state revenue office).
... that unless otherwise specified in these orders and save for the purposes of enforcing any monies due under these or any subsequent orders: each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses in action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of that party,
c. each party shall retain their respective superannuation funds, insurance policies remain the sole property for the owner named therein, each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
a court may make an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to a de facto relationship only if the court is satisfied: (a) that the period, or the total of the periods, of the de facto relationship is at least 2 years, or (b) that there is a child of the de facto relationship, or (c) that: (i) the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   that the period, or the total of the periods, of the de facto relationship is at least 2 years, or (b) that there is a child of the de facto relationship, or (c) that: (i) the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   that there is a child of the de facto relationship, or (c) that: (i) the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   that: (i) the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or (d) that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.   the party to the de facto relationship who applies for the order or declaration made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), and (ii) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or  ) a failure to make the order or declaration would result in serious injustice to the applicant, or   that the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory.
associate: dated: 13 june 2024
dated: 13 june 2024