last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wetherill & alistro [2024] fedcfamc2f 697
orders
the court declares that:
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
background
issues for determination
i [mr alistro] is the father for both [x] and [y]
family law act 1975 (cth) section 69va declarations of parentage as well as deciding, after receiving evidence, the issue of the parentage of a child for the purposes of proceedings, the court may also issue a declaration of parentage that is conclusive evidence of parentage for the purposes of all laws of the commonwealth.
child support (assessment) act 1989 section 106a declaration that a person should be assessed in respect of the costs of the child (5) the court may grant the declaration if the court is satisfied that: (a) if the reason referred to in paragraph (1)(b) was the only reason for the registrar refusing to accept the application--the person should be assessed in respect of the costs of the child because the person is a parent of the child, or   if the reason referred to in paragraph (1)(b) was the only reason for the registrar refusing to accept the application--the person should be assessed in respect of the costs of the child because the person is a parent of the child, or
section 29 how decision is to be made   the registrar is to be satisfied that a person is a parent of a child only if the registrar is satisfied:
... (h) that the person is a man and: (i) the child was born to a woman who cohabited with the man at any time during the period beginning 44 weeks and ending 20 weeks before the birth, and (ii) no marriage between the man and the woman subsisted during any part of that period of cohabitation   the child was born to a woman who cohabited with the man at any time during the period beginning 44 weeks and ending 20 weeks before the birth, and (ii) no marriage between the man and the woman subsisted during any part of that period of cohabitation  ) no marriage between the man and the woman subsisted during any part of that period of cohabitation
application filed out of time
section 60i certificate
section 60i attending family dispute resolution before applying for a part vii order   subsection (7) does not apply to an application for a part vii order in relation to a child if:
... (e) one or more of the parties to the proceedings is unable to participate effectively in family dispute resolution (whether because of incapacity of some kind, physical remoteness from physical resolution services or for some other reason)   one or more of the parties to the proceedings is unable to participate effectively in family dispute resolution (whether because of incapacity of some kind, physical remoteness from physical resolution services or for some other reason)
rule 4.01 compliance with pre-action procedures   subject to subrules (2) and (3), before starting a proceeding, each prospective party to the proceeding must comply with the pre-action procedures. (2) compliance with subrule (1) is not necessary if: (a) the proceeding is an application for divorce only, or (b) the proceeding is an application relating to nullity or validity of marriage only, or (c) the proceeding is a child support application or appeal, or (d) the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   compliance with subrule (1) is not necessary if: (a) the proceeding is an application for divorce only, or (b) the proceeding is an application relating to nullity or validity of marriage only, or (c) the proceeding is a child support application or appeal, or (d) the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   the proceeding is an application for divorce only, or (b) the proceeding is an application relating to nullity or validity of marriage only, or (c) the proceeding is a child support application or appeal, or (d) the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   the proceeding is an application relating to nullity or validity of marriage only, or (c) the proceeding is a child support application or appeal, or (d) the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   the proceeding is a child support application or appeal, or (d) the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   the proceeding involves a court's jurisdiction in bankruptcy under section 35 or 35b of the bankruptcy act, or (e) the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.   the court is satisfied that, in the circumstances, it was not appropriate for a party to comply with the pre-action procedures.
the sensible letter
... including providing you with minutes of proposed consent orders. on 21 november 2023 you emailed confirming you are the father of the children. unfortunately, your email confirmation is insufficient for my client to receive child support for her children and a court application has been filed to resolve this matter. i now enclose the following documents by way of service: applicant’s documents: - sealed initiating application filed 22 november 2023 - sealed affidavit of [ms wetherill] filed 22 november 2023 - sealed genuine steps certificate filed 22 november 2023 - sealed financial questionnaire filed 22 november 2023 federal circuit and family court of australia brochures: - marriages, families and separation - child support application document to be returned: - acknowledgement of service - minutes of proposed consent orders hearing date this matter is listed for a first return date of 23 january 2024 at 9:30am before [a] judicial registrar. the hearing will take place online by microsoft teams and i will forward you the hearing link when it is received from the court. you, or a lawyer on your behalf, are required to attend the court hearing. if you do not, then you risk the court making an order in your absence. if you wish to respond to the application, then complete and file a ‘response to initiating application’ form. this document can be found on the federal circuit and family court of australia website at response to initiating application (do it yourself kit) - federal circuit and family court of australia (fcfcoa.gov.au). minutes of proposed consent orders if you wish to resolve this matter prior to the hearing on 23 january 2024, please sign the enclosed minutes of proposed consent orders confirming you are the father of [x] and [y]. i will then file the minutes of proposed consent orders with the court and request the orders be made administratively, without the need of the parties attending. the orders would then be provided to services australia (child support) and an assessment will commence shortly thereafter. if you do not agree that you are the father of the children, i can arrange for minutes of proposed consent orders to be sent to you for dna testing to occur. next steps i confirm i have sent you the acknowledgment of service document via email from adobe sign for you to electronically sign. i am required to file this document with the court to confirm you have received my client’s court documents. please sign it and return it within 7 days. if you wish to electronically sign the minutes of proposed consent orders confirming you are the father or for dna testing to occur, please respond by email so i can arrange for them to be sent. if the matter is not resolved before the hearing date, an application will be made for you to pay all costs, including legal costs of approximately $2,448.00. if you wish to discuss this matter, please contact me on [...] or by email [...] yours faithfully
associate: dated: 13 june 2024
dated: 13 june 2024