last updated: 31 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
salera & baranski [2024] fedcfamc2f 632
orders
the court orders that:
live/spend time/communication orders  professionally supervised on four occasions each year by agreement and failing agreement, in the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 victorian school term holidays, and in the first week of the long summer holidays, (b) the supervision to occur for no more than three hours, (c) the supervision to be carried out by c contact service or such other professional supervision service as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   the supervision to occur for no more than three hours, (c) the supervision to be carried out by c contact service or such other professional supervision service as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   the supervision to be carried out by c contact service or such other professional supervision service as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (g) at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   at such other times as agreed in writing by the parties in advance.   on x’s birthday each year from 10.30am to 11am if a non-school day or 5.30pm to 6pm if a school day, (b) on mother’s day each year from 10.30am to 11am, (c) on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11am, (d) at such other times as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, and (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.   on mother’s day each year from 10.30am to 11am, (c) on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11am, (d) at such other times as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, and (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.   on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11am, (d) at such other times as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, and (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.   at such other times as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, and (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.   the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, and (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.   the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour from which these orders restrain her.
information sharing  any school or other educational facility that x attends, (b) any medical practitioner or allied health professional that x attends on or may attend upon, (c) any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any medical practitioner or allied health professional that x attends on or may attend upon, (c) any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.
restraints  exposing x to parental conflict, (b) denigrating or saying negative things about the father, his family or any household members, to or in the hearing or presence of x, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   denigrating or saying negative things about the father, his family or any household members, to or in the hearing or presence of x, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.
change of name  the father be authorised to provide a copy of these orders to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages for the state of victoria, (b) the father be solely responsible for the cost of any change to x’s name, and (c) the mother’s consent is not required.   the father be solely responsible for the cost of any change to x’s name, and (c) the mother’s consent is not required.   the mother’s consent is not required.
passport
overseas travel
the court requests that:
general
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge burt:
background and procedural history
material relied upon  his further amended initiating application filed on 16 april 2024, (b) his affidavit filed on 16 april 2024, (c) the affidavit of ms k, paternal grandmother, filed on 2 march 2023, (d) the affidavit of ms e, father’s partner, filed on 2 march 2023 (e) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 30 march 2021, annexing the mother’s psychiatric assessment dated 30 july 2020 and the father’s dated 25 august 2020 (“the first dr p affidavit”), (f) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   his affidavit filed on 16 april 2024, (c) the affidavit of ms k, paternal grandmother, filed on 2 march 2023, (d) the affidavit of ms e, father’s partner, filed on 2 march 2023 (e) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 30 march 2021, annexing the mother’s psychiatric assessment dated 30 july 2020 and the father’s dated 25 august 2020 (“the first dr p affidavit”), (f) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the affidavit of ms k, paternal grandmother, filed on 2 march 2023, (d) the affidavit of ms e, father’s partner, filed on 2 march 2023 (e) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 30 march 2021, annexing the mother’s psychiatric assessment dated 30 july 2020 and the father’s dated 25 august 2020 (“the first dr p affidavit”), (f) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the affidavit of ms e, father’s partner, filed on 2 march 2023 (e) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 30 march 2021, annexing the mother’s psychiatric assessment dated 30 july 2020 and the father’s dated 25 august 2020 (“the first dr p affidavit”), (f) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 30 march 2021, annexing the mother’s psychiatric assessment dated 30 july 2020 and the father’s dated 25 august 2020 (“the first dr p affidavit”), (f) the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the affidavit of dr p, psychiatrist, filed on 19 september 2023, annexing the mother and the father’s updated psychiatric assessments both dated 17 june 2023 (“the second dr p affidavit”), (g) the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the family reports prepared by regulation 7 family consultant ms q dated: (i) 31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”), (h) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   31 october 2022 (“the first family report”), and (ii) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”),  ) 12 april 2024 (“the second family report”),   the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and (i) his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   20 september 2022, and (ii) 2 april 2024, and  ) 2 april 2024, and   his outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   her amended response filed on 18 april 2024, (b) her affidavit filed on 18 april 2024, (c) the first dr p affidavit, (d) the second dr p affidavit, (e) the first family report, (f) the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   her affidavit filed on 18 april 2024, (c) the first dr p affidavit, (d) the second dr p affidavit, (e) the first family report, (f) the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the first dr p affidavit, (d) the second dr p affidavit, (e) the first family report, (f) the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the second dr p affidavit, (e) the first family report, (f) the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the first family report, (f) the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the second family report, (g) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing dated: (i) 29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024, (h) the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   29 september 2020, (ii) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024,  ) 20 september 2022, and (iii) 2 april 2024,  i) 2 april 2024,   the affidavit of ms r filed on 18 april 2024, annexing the supervision report dated 17 april 2024, and (i) her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   her outline of case filed on 19 april 2021.   the first family report, (b) the second family report, (c) the first dr p report, (d) the second dr p report, (e) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing referred to at [62(g)] herein, and (f) her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the second family report, (c) the first dr p report, (d) the second dr p report, (e) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing referred to at [62(g)] herein, and (f) her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the first dr p report, (d) the second dr p report, (e) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing referred to at [62(g)] herein, and (f) her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the second dr p report, (e) the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing referred to at [62(g)] herein, and (f) her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   the s.69zw responses prepared by the department of families, fairness and housing referred to at [62(g)] herein, and (f) her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.   her outline of case filed on 17 april 2024.
the evidence
the father
the mother
credit finding
ms e– father’s partner
ms k – paternal grandmother
ms r -contact supervisor
dr p – consultant psychiatrist
the family consultant – ms q
parenting proceedings – legal principles
primary considerations
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
allegations of family violence made by the mother
incident in early 2018  when the father was cross-examined about this incident, the account that he gave was consistent with his affidavit. he denied that he attacked the mother as she alleges or at all. his denial has been maintained consistently since the incident occurred. (b) whilst the father’s evidence was not wholly consistent with the context of the incident described by ms k, who says in her affidavit that she had invited the mother and father to a friend’s home for lunch, she was not cross-examined about this discrepancy. however, the accounts of the father and ms k of the mother running down the road and punching herself in the stomach were wholly consistent. ms k gave a compelling account of the father turning “white as a ghost” when he saw the mother punching herself. (c) the mother adduced no evidence from her sister in support of her evidence that the father attacked her during their telephone call. no explanation was given for the absence of evidence from the sister. (d) the mother adduced no evidence from any treating doctor or hospital in support of her contention that the father’s assault caused her to have increased bleeding or pain. if her allegations were correct, one would have expected her to seek immediate medical attention.   whilst the father’s evidence was not wholly consistent with the context of the incident described by ms k, who says in her affidavit that she had invited the mother and father to a friend’s home for lunch, she was not cross-examined about this discrepancy. however, the accounts of the father and ms k of the mother running down the road and punching herself in the stomach were wholly consistent. ms k gave a compelling account of the father turning “white as a ghost” when he saw the mother punching herself. (c) the mother adduced no evidence from her sister in support of her evidence that the father attacked her during their telephone call. no explanation was given for the absence of evidence from the sister. (d) the mother adduced no evidence from any treating doctor or hospital in support of her contention that the father’s assault caused her to have increased bleeding or pain. if her allegations were correct, one would have expected her to seek immediate medical attention.   the mother adduced no evidence from her sister in support of her evidence that the father attacked her during their telephone call. no explanation was given for the absence of evidence from the sister. (d) the mother adduced no evidence from any treating doctor or hospital in support of her contention that the father’s assault caused her to have increased bleeding or pain. if her allegations were correct, one would have expected her to seek immediate medical attention.   the mother adduced no evidence from any treating doctor or hospital in support of her contention that the father’s assault caused her to have increased bleeding or pain. if her allegations were correct, one would have expected her to seek immediate medical attention.
alleged threats in mid-2018
allegation about the father’s behaviour at the time of x’s birth
alleged threats – early 2019
alleged threatening letter and usb – early 2020
if i get the best interest of [x] i will [harm] our daughter [x] so you don’t get to see [x] ever again. ... if you report me to the police station i will deny it and i will say that i never send you this letter and that you send that to yourself. my lawyer [ms t] will defend and protect me. if i get arrested again i will [harm] you you fucking slut. ... i don’t trust you with my child. i hate you! you are unfit and mentally sick to be a mother. i know your location i will trace you and [harm] you and [x]. i will [harm] you and [x] alive.
allegations in early 2020
other allegations of family violence  in mid-2021, the mother reported to police that the father shouted threats to take x away from her after a supervised visit in mid-2021. (b) in mid-2021, the mother reported to police that a man attended at her home, and alleged that the father had sent him to collect x. (c) the father deposes to the mother making further reports regarding incidents said to have occurred in late 2021, but he was not interviewed in relation to these allegations. (d) in mid-2022, the mother alleged to the police that the father had threatened to “bash her” at changeover at suburb b police station. the father says he showed the police officer video he had taken of changeover and the police officer agreed that what the mother had alleged had not occurred.   in mid-2021, the mother reported to police that a man attended at her home, and alleged that the father had sent him to collect x. (c) the father deposes to the mother making further reports regarding incidents said to have occurred in late 2021, but he was not interviewed in relation to these allegations. (d) in mid-2022, the mother alleged to the police that the father had threatened to “bash her” at changeover at suburb b police station. the father says he showed the police officer video he had taken of changeover and the police officer agreed that what the mother had alleged had not occurred.   the father deposes to the mother making further reports regarding incidents said to have occurred in late 2021, but he was not interviewed in relation to these allegations. (d) in mid-2022, the mother alleged to the police that the father had threatened to “bash her” at changeover at suburb b police station. the father says he showed the police officer video he had taken of changeover and the police officer agreed that what the mother had alleged had not occurred.   in mid-2022, the mother alleged to the police that the father had threatened to “bash her” at changeover at suburb b police station. the father says he showed the police officer video he had taken of changeover and the police officer agreed that what the mother had alleged had not occurred.
mother’s allegations about mistreatment of x in father’s care  the father deposes to receiving 70 messages from the mother in early 2022 in relation to what the mother described as a bruise on x’s arm. (b) in early 2022, the father says that the mother sent over 42 messages to him alleging that x had been distressed by the way in which he held her at changeover. (c) the father deposes to being told by the mother and by x’s childcare in mid-2022 that the mother did not intend to facilitate time. the father annexes to his affidavit a number of messages sent on appclose by the mother in this regard which refer to x having bruises and allege that she had been advised by the department, the police and by staff at o hospital to withhold x. the father also annexes a report from o hospital dated mid-2022 which indicates that the mother reported to staff there that the father had refused to explain the bruises and that x had been seen by a gp and maternal child health nurse who were “concerned”. the report says “child identifying ‘dadda’” from which i infer that x was asked at least some questions by hospital staff. (d) the father deposes to receiving messages from the mother on almost daily basis following x being placed in his care in mid-2022. those messages include allegations that x does not eat in his care, that she has been exposed to family violence in his care and that bruises on her knees suggest that she has been injured in his care. (e) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer alleging that the father was not meeting x’s medical needs in relation to skin rashes and a cough. the resulting email is annexed to the father’s affidavit. (f) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   in early 2022, the father says that the mother sent over 42 messages to him alleging that x had been distressed by the way in which he held her at changeover. (c) the father deposes to being told by the mother and by x’s childcare in mid-2022 that the mother did not intend to facilitate time. the father annexes to his affidavit a number of messages sent on appclose by the mother in this regard which refer to x having bruises and allege that she had been advised by the department, the police and by staff at o hospital to withhold x. the father also annexes a report from o hospital dated mid-2022 which indicates that the mother reported to staff there that the father had refused to explain the bruises and that x had been seen by a gp and maternal child health nurse who were “concerned”. the report says “child identifying ‘dadda’” from which i infer that x was asked at least some questions by hospital staff. (d) the father deposes to receiving messages from the mother on almost daily basis following x being placed in his care in mid-2022. those messages include allegations that x does not eat in his care, that she has been exposed to family violence in his care and that bruises on her knees suggest that she has been injured in his care. (e) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer alleging that the father was not meeting x’s medical needs in relation to skin rashes and a cough. the resulting email is annexed to the father’s affidavit. (f) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   the father deposes to being told by the mother and by x’s childcare in mid-2022 that the mother did not intend to facilitate time. the father annexes to his affidavit a number of messages sent on appclose by the mother in this regard which refer to x having bruises and allege that she had been advised by the department, the police and by staff at o hospital to withhold x. the father also annexes a report from o hospital dated mid-2022 which indicates that the mother reported to staff there that the father had refused to explain the bruises and that x had been seen by a gp and maternal child health nurse who were “concerned”. the report says “child identifying ‘dadda’” from which i infer that x was asked at least some questions by hospital staff. (d) the father deposes to receiving messages from the mother on almost daily basis following x being placed in his care in mid-2022. those messages include allegations that x does not eat in his care, that she has been exposed to family violence in his care and that bruises on her knees suggest that she has been injured in his care. (e) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer alleging that the father was not meeting x’s medical needs in relation to skin rashes and a cough. the resulting email is annexed to the father’s affidavit. (f) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   the father deposes to receiving messages from the mother on almost daily basis following x being placed in his care in mid-2022. those messages include allegations that x does not eat in his care, that she has been exposed to family violence in his care and that bruises on her knees suggest that she has been injured in his care. (e) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer alleging that the father was not meeting x’s medical needs in relation to skin rashes and a cough. the resulting email is annexed to the father’s affidavit. (f) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer alleging that the father was not meeting x’s medical needs in relation to skin rashes and a cough. the resulting email is annexed to the father’s affidavit. (f) in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   in late 2022, the mother wrote to the independent children’s lawyer accusing ms e of mistreating x by pulling her inside the police station. an email in response from the independent children’s lawyer, annexed to the father’s affidavit, confirms that the video supplied by the mother with the email did not evidence the alleged abuse.   in late 2022, a report was made alleging that x had been burnt whilst cooking with the father and had not received prompt medical treatment. relevantly, the department enquired of x’s childcare who advised “that since [mr salera] had full custody of [x], she had been attending more consistently and had made improvements” and that the burn mark was not significant. the report notes further that the father had x assist in preparing meals to help improve her eating patterns. the department took no action and closed the file. (b) in early 2023, a report was made about x having a rash on her body and bruises on her knees, noting that the mother had taken x to a hospital for assessment. the department took no action and closed the file. (c) in mid-2023, a further report was made to the department alleging that x had been hit by the father and alleging that he had poor mental health, and problems with illicit substances and alcohol use. the report notes that in mid-2023 the mother had provided a video of x alleging that ‘daddy hit me’ in which the mother was reported to be heard prompting x. no bruises or injuries were identified on x. the report goes on to state:   in early 2023, a report was made about x having a rash on her body and bruises on her knees, noting that the mother had taken x to a hospital for assessment. the department took no action and closed the file. (c) in mid-2023, a further report was made to the department alleging that x had been hit by the father and alleging that he had poor mental health, and problems with illicit substances and alcohol use. the report notes that in mid-2023 the mother had provided a video of x alleging that ‘daddy hit me’ in which the mother was reported to be heard prompting x. no bruises or injuries were identified on x. the report goes on to state:   in mid-2023, a further report was made to the department alleging that x had been hit by the father and alleging that he had poor mental health, and problems with illicit substances and alcohol use. the report notes that in mid-2023 the mother had provided a video of x alleging that ‘daddy hit me’ in which the mother was reported to be heard prompting x. no bruises or injuries were identified on x. the report goes on to state:
follow up occurred with [x]’s childcare who advised that [x] had progressed significantly over the past 18 months. [x] had improved in her eating, her speech and general development. she was linked in with an occupational therapist and speech therapist. no concerns were raised for her physical presentation or her presenting with any injuries or bruising.   a further report was made in early 2024 in the context of the mother overholding x which is discussed elsewhere in these reasons.
overholding of x by the mother in early 2024
..she asked [x] “what did daddy do to you” and [x] responded, “daddy hit me with his work boot” the police officer asked [x] “where did daddy hit you?” [x] responded, “on my bum bum!” the police officer asked [x] “are you lying to me” [x] then responded with an angry voice tone “no! i’m not lying! i said daddy hit me on my bum bum yesterday! okay?”
it was noted that when [ms baranski] asked [x] in front of police if she was lying, she smiled and said yes and laughed, [x] was however observed to immediately state that was she said was true and to laugh again.
the mother’s allegations against members of the father’s family and third parties
the father’s mental health
mother’s mental health
just letting you know that i saw that [ms e] and yourself had a discussion while you both were sitting down on your couch in your living room a few days ago about wanting to relocate to a new house since i was provided with your house address. [ms e] and yourself had been having deep thoughts of which suburb you both want to move to. you need to understand and accept that i’m a prophetess. did you really think that jesus didn’t revelled that to me and that i’m not aware that you both had discussed to move to a new home which i didn’t know. ... ... it actually does matter where you decide to move cause regardless to which suburb, state or country you want to move/ live in, i will always know because i’m a prophetess. i’m gifted by god and wherever [x] is, god always shows it to me and exactly which suburb, state or country she’s at. even though if you had decided to take [x] to [ms u]’s house i would know and i would be able to see it through my spiritual eyes. ... and there’s no way a police officer would have provided me this informations about your discussions because this is spiritual things and it was just [ms e] and yourself who was sitting on your couch just currently when you both had this discussion about needing to move houses. ... if i could hear [ms e]’s and your conversations in your home even though i’m inside my house in [suburb g] what makes you think that i wouldn’t know where your next destination of your new home would be at.
pending criminal charges against the mother
evaluation of risk
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents
additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs
the mother’s understanding of x’s needs
the father’s understanding of x’s needs
has demonstrated capacity to provide a structured and nurturing environment for [x] consistent with her age and developmental stage, to the extent that she has noticeably progressed developmentally and in her formerly delayed skills to the extent that she is thriving in health and in her first year at primary school.
the father’s ability to support x’s relationship with the mother
the mother’s ability to support x’s relationship with the father  a delay in supervised time recommencing in mid-2021, (b) only five supervised visitations taking place between mid-2021 and late 2021, and (c) no time taking place in early 2022, resulting in 15 missed visits between x and her father.   only five supervised visitations taking place between mid-2021 and late 2021, and (c) no time taking place in early 2022, resulting in 15 missed visits between x and her father.   no time taking place in early 2022, resulting in 15 missed visits between x and her father.
mother: your honour, to be honest, due to the past histories of family violence – even before, when [x] was not born – and to the physical, even when i living with [mr salera], so i can’t really sit here and to come and, you know, and forget about what has occurred. her honour: so is that a no?--- mother: your honour, due to the past family violence when we were together, so it would be hard for me to – to come – i don’t know, just to believe.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
if the children are aboriginal or torres strait islander children
attitude to the child, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
orders to be made
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[12]   is at the middle childhood stage of development. children at this stage and age need a safe and secure home base with a degree of routine from which to go out into their world at school to learn and develop academically and socially. children at this developmental stage also need a relationship with what might be considered their psychological parent/s. this may be a biological parent or someone else with whom they have a trusting emotional bond. the writer assessed that [x] seems to have that connection with [ms e] and [mr salera].
associate: dated: 22 may 2024
dated: 22 may 2024
appendix a
“regular font” orders refer to orders proposed by the father and the independent children’s lawyer. “italicised font” orders refer to orders proposed by the mother.
“italicised font” orders refer to orders proposed by the mother.
that the parents have equal shared parental responsibilities for the child x born in 2018 (the child).
that the child lives with the mother.  professionally supervised on four occasions each year by agreement and failing agreement, in the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 victorian school term holidays, and in the first week of the long summer holidays, (b) the supervision to occur for no more than 3 hours, (c) the supervision to be carried out by y contact service or such other professional provided as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.   the supervision to occur for no more than 3 hours, (c) the supervision to be carried out by y contact service or such other professional provided as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.   the supervision to be carried out by y contact service or such other professional provided as agreed between the parents in writing, (d) the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.   the supervision to be solely at the mother’s expense, (e) the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.   the supervision occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father, and (f) changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.   changeover to occur at a venue as agreed between the parents and failing agreement, as nominated by the father.
that the child spends time with the father as follows:  during school terms: (i) from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on wednesday until commencement of school or 9.00am on thursday, (ii) from conclusion of school or 3.00pm on the first friday of each school term until commencement of school or 9.00am on the following monday each alternate weekend, (iii) by facetime between 6.00pm and 6.30pm on each tuesday, (b) during school holidays, for the first week of each school term holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term and concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights later, and during the long summer school holidays on a week-about arrangement commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights latter, and each alternate week thereafter, (c) such other time as agreed in writing in advance.   from the conclusion of school or 3.00pm on wednesday until commencement of school or 9.00am on thursday, (ii) from conclusion of school or 3.00pm on the first friday of each school term until commencement of school or 9.00am on the following monday each alternate weekend, (iii) by facetime between 6.00pm and 6.30pm on each tuesday, (b) during school holidays, for the first week of each school term holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term and concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights later, and during the long summer school holidays on a week-about arrangement commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights latter, and each alternate week thereafter, (c) such other time as agreed in writing in advance.  ) from conclusion of school or 3.00pm on the first friday of each school term until commencement of school or 9.00am on the following monday each alternate weekend, (iii) by facetime between 6.00pm and 6.30pm on each tuesday, (b) during school holidays, for the first week of each school term holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term and concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights later, and during the long summer school holidays on a week-about arrangement commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights latter, and each alternate week thereafter, (c) such other time as agreed in writing in advance.  i) by facetime between 6.00pm and 6.30pm on each tuesday, (b) during school holidays, for the first week of each school term holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term and concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights later, and during the long summer school holidays on a week-about arrangement commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights latter, and each alternate week thereafter, (c) such other time as agreed in writing in advance.   during school holidays, for the first week of each school term holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term and concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights later, and during the long summer school holidays on a week-about arrangement commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term, concluding at 6.00 pm seven nights latter, and each alternate week thereafter, (c) such other time as agreed in writing in advance.   such other time as agreed in writing in advance.
that the child spends time with the parents on special occasions as follows:  on the child’s birthday, the child spend time with whoever she is not already with on this day from 10.00am to 2.00pm if a non-school day, and from after school to 6.30pm if a school day, (b) on mother’s day, with the mother from 6.00pm on the saturday prior to mother’s day until 6.00pm on mother’s day, (c) on father’s day, with the father from 6.00pm on the saturday prior to father’s day until 6.00pm on father’s day, (d) over christmas, with the mother, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all odd numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all even numbered years, and (e) over christmas, with the father, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all even numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all odd numbered years alternatively   on mother’s day, with the mother from 6.00pm on the saturday prior to mother’s day until 6.00pm on mother’s day, (c) on father’s day, with the father from 6.00pm on the saturday prior to father’s day until 6.00pm on father’s day, (d) over christmas, with the mother, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all odd numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all even numbered years, and (e) over christmas, with the father, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all even numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all odd numbered years alternatively   on father’s day, with the father from 6.00pm on the saturday prior to father’s day until 6.00pm on father’s day, (d) over christmas, with the mother, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all odd numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all even numbered years, and (e) over christmas, with the father, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all even numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all odd numbered years alternatively   over christmas, with the mother, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all odd numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all even numbered years, and (e) over christmas, with the father, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all even numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all odd numbered years alternatively   over christmas, with the father, from 10.00am on christmas eve to 3.00pm on christmas day in all even numbered years and from 3.00pm christmas day to 7.00pm on boxing day in all odd numbered years alternatively
alternatively
that the child lives with the father.
that the child spends time with the mother as follows:  on x’s birthday each year from 10.30am to 11.00am if a non-school day or 5.30pm to 6.00pm if a school day, (b) on mother’s day each year from 10.30am to 11.00am, (c) on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11.00am, (d) as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.   on mother’s day each year from 10.30am to 11.00am, (c) on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11.00am, (d) as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.   on christmas day each year from 10.30am to 11.00am, (d) as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.   as agreed between the parents in writing, (e) the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.   the mother to initiate the calls to the father and the father to facilitate same, (f) the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.   the father be authorised to terminate the call if the mother engages in any behaviour that these orders restrain her from.
that the parents communicate regarding all parenting issues in relation to the child through appclose, or by phone in case of emergency.
that both parents are at liberty to obtain all notices, reports and photographs or any other information or document usually available to parents from the child’s school.
that both parents are at liberty to attend any school function that parents are normally invited to attend.
that both parents be noted on all enrolment and student record forms as a parent and to be the next point of contact of the other parent cannot be reached and/or is not available to collect the child when necessary.
that each parent will notify the other as soon as practicable if the child suffers any serious injury or illness while in their care, and both parents be permitted to attend hospital or any doctor as necessary.
each parent be at liberty to attend any medical or allied health-related appointments for the child and to receive copies of any medical and allied health assessments and reports in relation to the child.  any school or other educational facility that x attends, (b) any medical practitioner or allied health professional that x attends on or may attend upon, (c) any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any medical practitioner or allied health professional that x attends on or may attend upon, (c) any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any professional supervisor/supervision agency, and (d) any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in relation to x.   exposing x to parental conflict, (b) denigrating or saying negative things about the father, his family or any household members, to or in the hearing or presence of x, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   denigrating or saying negative things about the father, his family or any household members, to or in the hearing or presence of x, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   discussing the court proceedings with x, or in her hearing or presence, or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   discussing future spend time arrangements that are not consistent with these orders.   the father be authorised to provide a copy of these orders to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages for the state of victoria. (b) the father is solely responsible for the cost of any change to x’s name. (c) the mother’s consent is not required.   the father is solely responsible for the cost of any change to x’s name. (c) the mother’s consent is not required.   the mother’s consent is not required.
[1] carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 at [165]- [169] (“carlson & fluvium”) quoted with approval in adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232 at [89]- [90] (“adamson”).[2] carlson & fluvium at [168] quoted with approval in adamson at [89]-[90].[3] in the marriage of hall [1979] famca 73 at [24], cited with approval in andrew & delaine [2009] famcafc 182.[4] masson v parsons [2019] hca 21 at [8]. [5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[6] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cc(2)(b).[7] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97.[8] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97 at [7].[9] including potter & potter [2007] famca 350 and johnson & page [2007] famca 1235.[10] mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, cited with approval in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92.[11] loddington & derringford (no 2) [2008] famca 925 at [169].[12] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21 at [18].[13] bielen &kozma [2022] fedcfamc1a 221 at [55].[14] b and b [1993] famca 143.[15] norton v landell (consent final parenting orders) [2015] famca 96 at [19] cited with approval in bielen &kozma [2022] fedcfamc1a 221 at [67].[16] champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96.[17] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102 at [32].