last updated: 4 june 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tandy & padula [2024] fedcfamc2f 671
orders
pending further order the court orders that:  delivering x to the offices of legal aid nsw, at a date and time proposed by the independent children’s lawyer, and thereafter (b) pursuant to s 68la(5aa) of the family law act 1975 (cth), at any other such times and dates as reasonably requested by the independent children’s lawyer in writing.   pursuant to s 68la(5aa) of the family law act 1975 (cth), at any other such times and dates as reasonably requested by the independent children’s lawyer in writing.
reasons for judgment
introduction
relevant background and procedural history   tandy] was from the outset extremely reluctant to bring [x] into court for her interview, requiring considerable reassurances by the cce that it would only be a short and comfortable play-focussed [sic] experience for her. accordingly, [mr tandy] left the court following his interview with the agreement that he would go to [x]’s school and bring her back to the court. however, when he returned it was without [x]. when the cce questioned him and expressed surprise and consternation, [mr tandy] told the cce that it was because [x] had not wanted to come and had become upset, so he had acquiesced to her wishes. the cce told him that he would be in breach of orders and the ensuing family report would be highly limited in nature if he did not present [x] and suggested to him that it reflected poorly on him as a parent if he could not get his eight-year-old child to co-operate in something so important. [mr tandy] was given another opportunity to go and collect [x] and this time he returned with her. when she arrived, [x] seemed briefly shy and agreed reluctantly to come with the cce for her interview. [mr tandy]’s anxiety was highly apparent, trying to secure promises from the cce about the duration of [x]’s interview in the presence of [x].
the relevant legal principles  the independent children’s lawyer must:   act impartially in dealings with the parties to the proceedings, and (b) ensure that any views expressed by the child in relation to the matters to which the proceedings relate are fully put before the court, and (c) if a report or other document that relates to the child is to be used in the proceedings: (i) analyse the report or other document to identify those matters in the report or other document that the independent children’s lawyer considers to be the most significant ones for determining what is in the best interests of the child, and (ii) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s attention, and (d) endeavour to minimise the trauma to the child associated with the proceedings, and (e) facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to the extent to which doing so is in the best interests of the child.   ensure that any views expressed by the child in relation to the matters to which the proceedings relate are fully put before the court, and (c) if a report or other document that relates to the child is to be used in the proceedings: (i) analyse the report or other document to identify those matters in the report or other document that the independent children’s lawyer considers to be the most significant ones for determining what is in the best interests of the child, and (ii) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s attention, and (d) endeavour to minimise the trauma to the child associated with the proceedings, and (e) facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to the extent to which doing so is in the best interests of the child.   if a report or other document that relates to the child is to be used in the proceedings: (i) analyse the report or other document to identify those matters in the report or other document that the independent children’s lawyer considers to be the most significant ones for determining what is in the best interests of the child, and (ii) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s attention, and (d) endeavour to minimise the trauma to the child associated with the proceedings, and (e) facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to the extent to which doing so is in the best interests of the child.   analyse the report or other document to identify those matters in the report or other document that the independent children’s lawyer considers to be the most significant ones for determining what is in the best interests of the child, and (ii) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s attention, and  ) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s attention, and   endeavour to minimise the trauma to the child associated with the proceedings, and (e) facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to the extent to which doing so is in the best interests of the child.   facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to the extent to which doing so is in the best interests of the child.   meet with the child,   provide the child with an opportunity to express any views in relation to the matters to which the proceedings relate.   the child is under 5 years of age, or   the child does not want to meet with the independent children’s lawyer, or express their views (as the case requires), or   there are exceptional circumstances that justify not performing the duty. (emphasis added)  ) without limiting paragraph (5b)(c), exceptional circumstances for the purposes of that paragraph include that performing the duty, would: (a) expose the child to a risk of physical or psychological harm that cannot be safely managed, or   expose the child to a risk of physical or psychological harm that cannot be safely managed, or   have a significant adverse effect on the wellbeing of the child.
the parties’ submissions and proposals   the father do all acts and things necessary to facilitate any request by the icl to meet with the child, pursuant to s 68la(5a) of the act, including but not limited to delivering the child to the offices of legal aid nsw at any such times and dates as reasonably requested by the icl in writing. (b) in the event that the father does not facilitate the icl’s request to meet with the child, leave is granted for the icl to relist the matter on 24 hours’ notice in writing.   in the event that the father does not facilitate the icl’s request to meet with the child, leave is granted for the icl to relist the matter on 24 hours’ notice in writing.  , would you like to meet with a lawyer from the court to express your point of view in relation to the proceedings.
no.   he recorded x saying to him that “she did not want to attend an interview with the icl”. (b) x wrote on a piece of paper: “no i don’t want to talk to a lawyer”. (c) in reply to the father’s text message asking x if she wanted to meet with the icl, x replied “no thankyou”.   x wrote on a piece of paper: “no i don’t want to talk to a lawyer”. (c) in reply to the father’s text message asking x if she wanted to meet with the icl, x replied “no thankyou”.   in reply to the father’s text message asking x if she wanted to meet with the icl, x replied “no thankyou”.
analysis  does the court have the power to compel the father to facilitate any request by the icl to meet with x? (b) should the icl meet with x? answering this question involves a consideration of two further sub-questions: (i) should the court accept the father’s evidence that x does not wish to meet with the icl? (ii) should a meeting between the icl and x take place if x does not wish to express a view? (c) if the father is required to facilitate a meeting between x and the icl, what orders are appropriate?   should the icl meet with x? answering this question involves a consideration of two further sub-questions: (i) should the court accept the father’s evidence that x does not wish to meet with the icl? (ii) should a meeting between the icl and x take place if x does not wish to express a view? (c) if the father is required to facilitate a meeting between x and the icl, what orders are appropriate?   should the court accept the father’s evidence that x does not wish to meet with the icl? (ii) should a meeting between the icl and x take place if x does not wish to express a view?  ) should a meeting between the icl and x take place if x does not wish to express a view?   if the father is required to facilitate a meeting between x and the icl, what orders are appropriate?
does the court have the power to compel the father to facilitate any request by the icl to meet with x?
should the icl meet with x?  x, who is eight years old, does not want to meet with the icl, and (b) x does not wish to express a view to the icl.   x does not wish to express a view to the icl.
should the court accept the father’s evidence that x does not wish to meet with the icl?
the significance of an object of the legislation being to give effect to the convention, is that it provides a basis to interpret the act within the context of international human rights principles (including the convention) to the extent that is compatible with the express intention evinced in the legislation.
article 12 states parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her own views the right to express those views freely in all matters affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the child. for this purpose, the child shall in particular be provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings affecting the child, either directly, or through a representative or an appropriate body, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of national law.
there is a well developed body of case law which highlights the importance of children’s views and that the ascertainment of children’s views should not be done in a superficial way. both the case law and now s 60ce provide that part vii does not permit the court or any person, for example a family consultant, to require a child to express his or her views in relation to any matter. for example, with whom the child would prefer to live. therefore, it can be seen that the act and cases strike a careful balance between affording a proper opportunity to children, whose care, welfare and development is at issue, to say, for example, what outcome the child wants ordered while the child’s right to remain silent on the matter is preserved. thus, a child caught between loved adults cannot be forced to say something which the child wants to remain private. in a similar vein, a child might decide that it would be unsafe to express a view contrary to that held by an adult of whom the child is afraid. it is because these dynamics have the potential to significantly impact on a child’s willingness and ability to discuss his or her circumstances and views that the ascertainment of children’s views should not be done in a superficial way. (citations omitted)
a clear wish to live with her father and to continue to attend [c school] and to spend time with her mother during school holidays. when the idea of half of all school holidays was put to her she said that she liked the idea. she said that she would have no difficulties in returning to brisbane, but she also stated that she would like it if her mother came to sydney to see her more, and the possibility of her mother watching her [extracurricular activities] was discussed.
should a meeting with between the icl and x take place if x does not wish to express a view?
nothing in this part permits the court or any person to require the child to express his or her views in relation to any matter.
makes clear that a child has choices about the way they want to engage with the icl. these must be the child’s wishes, and not those of others. the child may choose not to meet with the icl and not to express any views. the child may choose to meet with the icl but may not wish to express any views. alternatively, the child may wish to express a view but may not wish to meet with the icl. in these circumstances, the icl should organise for an alternative method for the child to communicate their views, for example, a letter or electronic communication.   to “establish a professional relationship with the icl” (part 5), (b) to explain the role of the icl and the court process (part 5.1), (c) to provide the child with the opportunity to express a view free from the influence of others (including parents) (part 5.3), and (d) so that a child can be “advised about significant developments in his or her matter” and, if the child so wishes, to ensure that “the child has the opportunity to express any further view or any refinement or change to previously expressed views” (part 5.3).   to explain the role of the icl and the court process (part 5.1), (c) to provide the child with the opportunity to express a view free from the influence of others (including parents) (part 5.3), and (d) so that a child can be “advised about significant developments in his or her matter” and, if the child so wishes, to ensure that “the child has the opportunity to express any further view or any refinement or change to previously expressed views” (part 5.3).   to provide the child with the opportunity to express a view free from the influence of others (including parents) (part 5.3), and (d) so that a child can be “advised about significant developments in his or her matter” and, if the child so wishes, to ensure that “the child has the opportunity to express any further view or any refinement or change to previously expressed views” (part 5.3).   so that a child can be “advised about significant developments in his or her matter” and, if the child so wishes, to ensure that “the child has the opportunity to express any further view or any refinement or change to previously expressed views” (part 5.3).
i do not believe that when the legislation made provision for the child to opt out of a meeting that the icl is otherwise required to have, that the law intended for substantial pressure to be placed upon the parent of the child to convince an unwilling child, undesirous to attend, to, as [ms e] states, influence a child to lose connection with their own wants and desires and go along with what they in fact do not want to do.
what order should the court make?  it is for the icl to exercise discretion to determine when, how often and where any meeting with a child should take place, (b) the purpose of the meeting with x goes beyond discussing the competing proposals with x, and (c) the icl would not necessarily restrict herself to one meeting with x.   the purpose of the meeting with x goes beyond discussing the competing proposals with x, and (c) the icl would not necessarily restrict herself to one meeting with x.   the icl would not necessarily restrict herself to one meeting with x.
the courts guidelines for independent children’s lawyers, provide guidance on meeting with and obtaining the view of the child. the national icl website provides resources and guides on the methods and expectations of icls when engaging with children. a comprehensive suite of resources for icls available on the national icl website, are listed at the end of this factsheet.
conclusion
associate: dated: 29 may 2024
dated: 29 may 2024