last updated: 1 august 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lambeth & quaid [2024] fedcfamc2f 659
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:  the respondent shall be solely responsible for all outgoings associated with the property situated at b street, suburb c more particularly described in certificate of title volume ... folio ..., (“the suburb c property”), including but not limited to utilities, rates, insurances etc. and shall indemnify the applicant in relation to same, (b) the respondent shall be solely responsible for all of the loan repayments as they fall due and shall indemnify the applicant in relation to same, and (c) the respondent shall have right to occupy the suburb c property including to the exclusion of the applicant.   the respondent shall be solely responsible for all of the loan repayments as they fall due and shall indemnify the applicant in relation to same, and (c) the respondent shall have right to occupy the suburb c property including to the exclusion of the applicant.   the respondent shall have right to occupy the suburb c property including to the exclusion of the applicant.   the parties shall take all steps and sign all necessary documents to arrange the suburb c property to be sold, (b) the sale of proceeds from the suburb c property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any including but not limited to rates and other outgoings, payable on the sale, (ii) payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, (iii) payment of any expenses to be reimbursed to an auctioneer (if any), (iv) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.   the sale of proceeds from the suburb c property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any including but not limited to rates and other outgoings, payable on the sale, (ii) payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, (iii) payment of any expenses to be reimbursed to an auctioneer (if any), (iv) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.   payment of the agent’s commission and advertising or other expenses, if any including but not limited to rates and other outgoings, payable on the sale, (ii) payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, (iii) payment of any expenses to be reimbursed to an auctioneer (if any), (iv) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.  ) payment of the legal costs and outlays relating to the sale, (iii) payment of any expenses to be reimbursed to an auctioneer (if any), (iv) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.  i) payment of any expenses to be reimbursed to an auctioneer (if any), (iv) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.  ) payment of the amount owing at the time on the loan and to discharge the mortgage, (v) to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.   to pay the applicant 16% of the net asset pool, and (vi) the net balance to the respondent.  ) the net balance to the respondent.   the parties place the suburb c property for sale with d company, suburb c / suburb e as the agent having carriage of the sale (“the agent”), (b) the parties engage f conveyancing to be the conveyancing solicitor for the sale or the suburb c property (“the conveyancing solicitor”), (c) the terms and conditions of the sale of the suburb c property shall be as agreed between the parties in writing within 14 days from the date of these orders unless otherwise agreed in writing, and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (d) the parties shall promptly sign all documents necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb c property including but not limited to the agency agreement, a contract for sale, a transfer of land and a discharge of mortgage, (e) the list price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (f) the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the parties engage f conveyancing to be the conveyancing solicitor for the sale or the suburb c property (“the conveyancing solicitor”), (c) the terms and conditions of the sale of the suburb c property shall be as agreed between the parties in writing within 14 days from the date of these orders unless otherwise agreed in writing, and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (d) the parties shall promptly sign all documents necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb c property including but not limited to the agency agreement, a contract for sale, a transfer of land and a discharge of mortgage, (e) the list price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (f) the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the terms and conditions of the sale of the suburb c property shall be as agreed between the parties in writing within 14 days from the date of these orders unless otherwise agreed in writing, and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (d) the parties shall promptly sign all documents necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb c property including but not limited to the agency agreement, a contract for sale, a transfer of land and a discharge of mortgage, (e) the list price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (f) the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the parties shall promptly sign all documents necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb c property including but not limited to the agency agreement, a contract for sale, a transfer of land and a discharge of mortgage, (e) the list price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (f) the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the list price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (f) the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the sale price for the suburb c property be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the suburb c property that is no less than 95% of the list price determined under order 3(e), (g) the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   the parties shall cooperate with the agent in relation to the marketing of the suburb c property for sale, including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the suburb c property at all times as reasonably requested by the agent.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property, including choses-in-action, in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named herein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (c) each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named herein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefit that is belonging to or owned by the other, (d) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named herein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named herein, (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (f) any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the applicant and respondent in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
respondent’s orders sought
termination of exclusive agency agreement the applicant [ms lambeth] (‘the applicant’) and the respondent [mr quaid] (‘the respondent’) (collectively ‘the parties’) do all things and sign all documents necessary to terminate the exclusive agency agreement with [d company suburb c/ suburb e] dated [mid]-2023, and for these purposes: the respondent shall prepare a draft joint letter to [d company suburb c/ suburb e] terminating the exclusive agency agreement and shall provide same to the applicant within 48 hours of the date of these orders, the applicant shall make any changes to the draft letter and shall return the draft joint letter to the respondent in such a form where those changes are evidence within two (2) days of receipt of the draft letter, and the respondent shall forward the settled draft joint letter to [d company suburb c/ suburb e] within 24 hours of receipt, copying the applicant or the applicant’s legal representatives into that correspondence. selection of settling agent within 7 days of the date of these orders, the respondent shall provide to the applicant a list of three real estate agents for the purpose of selling the property situate at and known as [b street, suburb c] in [city g] more particularly described in certificate of title volume [...] folio [...], division of [suburb c] (‘the [suburb c] property’), and with each proposed real estate agent shall be included the name of the agent so proposed (if any) and the agent or agency’s contact information. within 7 days of receipt of the list of proposed real estate agents, the respondent shall select one agent and communicate that selection to the respondent in writing, and as and from the respondent’s selection, that real estate agent shall be the nominated real estate agent for the purposes of these orders. sale of the [suburb c] property both parties do all things necessary to sell the [suburb c] property on such terms and conditions as agreed between them in writing and failing agreement as follows: the parties place the [suburb c] property for sale with the nominated real estate agent, the parties engage [f] conveyancing to be the conveyancing solicitor for the sale of the [suburb c] property (‘the conveyancing solicitor’), the terms and conditions of the sale of the [suburb c] property shall be as agreed between the parties in writing within 14 days from the date of these orders unless otherwise agreed in writing, and failing agreement, as recommended by the agent to both parties in writing, the parties shall promptly sign all documents necessary to facilitate the sale of the [suburb c] property including but not limited to: the agency agreement a contract for sale a transfer of land a discharge of mortgage the list price for the [suburb c] property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement as recommended by the nominated real estate agent to the parties in writing, the sale price for the [suburb c] property to be such amount as is agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the [suburb c] property that is lo less than 95% of the list price determined under order 1(d)(v), the parties shall cooperate with the nominated real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the [suburb c] property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the [suburb c] property at all times reasonably requested by the nominated real estate agent, the mode of sale – auction or private treaty – shall be as the parties agree in writing, and failing agreement between the parties, shall be as recommended by the nominated real estate agent in writing to both parties. upon settlement of the sale of the [suburb c] property, the parties shall do all things necessary to cause the proceeds from the sale of the [suburb c] property to be distributed in the following manner and priority: to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, including but not limited to the costs of the nominate real estate agent and the conveyancing solicitor, to pay usual rates adjustments and all outstanding rates and land tax, to pay the amount required to discharge the mortgage to [h bank] with dealing number [...] secured against the [suburb c] property, to quarantine such amount as may be required to pay any potential capital gains tax liability, and in this regard each party will provide to the other within 14 days of being requested to do so any documents that may be needed by the other party for the purposes of preparing their taxation returns and for the purposes of calculating the potential capital gains tax liability, to pay the balance then remaining as follows: 95% to the respondent or as he directs. 5% to the applicant or as she directs. other property except as otherwise specified in this order: each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses in action) and personal possessions or items of furniture, personalty and/or chattels in the possession of such party at the date of these orders, money standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account shall remain the property of the party in whose name such bank account is held, each party forego any other claims he or she may have to any superannuation interests or benefits belonging to or owned by the other, insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, and each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability currently standing in their sole names or liability encumbering any item of property to which the party is entitled pursuant to these orders. enforcement in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instruction, a registrar of the federal circuit and family court of australia be appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and do all acts and things necessary to give validity to the operation of the deed or instrument to effect compliance with the orders herein. the court notes that: pursuant to section 90st of the family law act 1975 (cth), these orders are intended to end the financial relations between the parties.
preliminary matters canvassed at the hearing
oral evidence of the wife
in the beginning of our relationship and until around july 2018, i usually slept at the [suburb k] property and [mr quaid] slept at the [suburb c] property. from july 2018 to [late] 2018, [suburb c] and i either primarily stayed at the [suburb c] property or at the [suburb k] property. from [late] 2018 to [early] 2019, we initially stayed in the [suburb k] property as my father lived in the [suburb k] property, however not far into this period we ended up back at [suburb k] most of the time as it was exhausting going back and forth between the houses continuing renovations. from [early] 2019, we either stayed in the [suburb k] property or the [suburb k] property, depending on which part of the house we were renovating. for example, we stayed in [suburb k] when the kitchen was being done in [suburb c], but from [mid]-2020 to november 2020 when we separated, we lived in the [suburb k] property.
oral evidence of the husband’s litigation guardian
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
case comparison russo and dorsey and anor [2014] famca 467: 3-year relationship, $4.75m pool, with a finding that the wife contributed 1.9% of the parties assets, as well as homemaker contribution (no children). wife received 8%. anson & meek [2017] famcafc 257: five-year relationship, $2.47m pool. wife held 3.5% of assets at commencement. at trial, first instance judge gave wife 40%. on appeal, review of comparable short marriage no children cases, all where financially weaker party had initial contribution of 1% - 3.5% and received 8% – 12.5% of the property. one exception in the list was hsieh & chow where husband made no initial financial contribution but made approximately 35% of contributions during 5.5-year relationship and received 40%. maguire & richter [2009] fmcafam 85: wife brought approximately 21% of non-super assets to a short relationship with no children. at hearing, she held approximately 30% of non-super assets. no adjustment from parties’ held assets. grunseth & whighton [2022] fedcfamc1a 132: de facto relationship of just under 3 years, but long period of post separation prior to trial. $2.43m asset pool. no children. finding that wife contributed 52.5% of assets and made greater homemaker contribution but result at hearing reduced division of assets to the wife of 47.5% of pool. on appeal, increased to 55% to wife. h & t [2002] fmcafam 209: four-year relationship, one young child, husband brought the only real asset to the relationship and wife made homemaker and parent contribution assessed at 20%. adjustment of further 25% to the wife due to small asset pool, income disparity and the ongoing care of children. bauer and bauer [2013] fcca 1125: wife made about 11% initial financial contribution assessed as 20% overall contribution at time of trial. one child. small pool – wife received 40% overall. perras & perras [2021] famcafc 109: 3.9-year relationship with two children. overwhelming financial contributions by the husband, when taken with wife’s homemaker and parent contributions assessed at 55/45 husband’s favour. overall, after s75(2) and justice and equity considerations, 60/40 division in wife’s favour. contributions at the commencement of the relationship in 2018, the applicant had savings of approximately $44,000, her car and $171,000 interest in superannuation. at cohabitation in june 2018, her savings were approximately $41,000. despite cross-examination on this point, there is no evidence that the applicant applied her savings other than for the benefit of the parties’ relationship. she was earning $38,000 a year at that time while the respondent was earning $98,000. she paid rent on her [suburb k] rental property that benefitted both parties, as they were residing between the two properties approximately half the time. she paid for groceries for their joint benefit as well as social events and vacations. the large expense of fertility treatment should be characterised as a joint expense, given the unchallenged evidence that, while the plan was made prior to the relationship, the procedure was undertaken at a time that the parties were planning to jointly benefit. at the time of cohabitation, the respondent held the [suburb c] property with his former partner. the court does not have the assistance of evidence in support of a value for the property at the time of cohabitation in mid 2018, however there is some evidence of the value of the property [in mid]-2016 when the respondent and [ms n] paid out their friend. better evidence of the value of the property in [early] 2020 is provided through the property settlement between the respondent and [ms n]. the [suburb c] property was then valued at $850,000 with a mortgage of $542,578 and a property settlement liability quantified at $162,500, leaving maximum equity of $144,922. the respondent also held (at the commencement of cohabitation and at the time of settlement with [ms n]) a substantial credit card debt, some vehicles and $94,000 in superannuation. if the respondent can be considered to have held at commencement the same interests he held at [early] 2020, then the applicant held 47% of the net assets inclusive of superannuation at that time. for the applicant to hold 47% of the total net pool inclusive of superannuation now, she would require a payment of approximately $225,300. excluding superannuation interests, the applicant held over 22% of the net assets at the commencement of the relationship. for the applicant to hold 22% of the net non-super pool, she would require a payment of approximately $135,800. the applicant made some important contributions that have not been successfully challenged: by joining with the respondent in a mortgage over the [suburb c] property, that property did not need to be sold. the parties have benefitted from a $505,000 increase in property value between [early] 2020 and [late] 2022. that increase is responsible for almost all of the equity available for distribution between the parties. the applicant assisted in the renovations that account for some of the increase in value that is not otherwise provided for by market forces. there is no evidence offered to the court to determine a specific value for the renovation work of either party or any of their supporters. the applicant, in accepting liability through the joint mortgage for the additional borrowings of $173,254 - made up of payment to [ms n] plus the respondent’s credit card debt, less the applicant’s credit card debt - contributed to liabilities that were of no benefit to her. the additional $173,254 liability represents 24% of the $720,000 that the parties borrowed to refinance the [suburb c] property. the applicant’s father lived in the property to undertake renovations for five months. it is noted that this significant contribution is reflected in the contemporaneous messages between the applicant and her friend [ms l] and is unchallenged. the court cannot but find that the applicant made the majority of the homemaker contributions as hers is the only evidence on this point. there has been a very long period post separation. the applicant managed the rental of the [suburb c] property and paid the mortgage, as well as paying her rent. there is no evidence of the respondent’s cost of living post separation prior to [mid]-2022 when he began living in [suburb c]. the applicant was paying rental while the respondent had the benefit of living in [suburb c], and for a period with the assistance of rental income. while meeting the shortfall in mortgage between [mid]-2020 and [mid]-2022 was modest, the applicant gave evidence of a more significant non-financial burden. she was protected by an fvo from separation until the respondent began living in [suburb c] in [mid]-2022, some eighteen months later. the respondent was found guilty of two breaches of the fvo, although the applicant’s unchallenged evidence was of more numerous breaches. in accordance with such cases as britt and britt (2017), giunta & giunta (no 3) [2021] and martell & martell [2023] the court should find that the applicant’s contribution in the post-separation period was made more arduous by the respondent’s actions. neither party seeks a superannuation splitting order. the applicant’s overall contribution is assessed at 27.5% of the estimated proceeds of sale of the [suburb c] property. future needs s90f(3) and justice and equity the respondent asserted through the litigation guardian that he was unable to perform ‘high risk’ [employment]. the respondent provided no evidence as to any lack of capacity to work, other than a medical certificate to indicate a temporary incapacity for three months. his litigation guardian indicated that the respondent was qualified to undertake [employment] shown at pages 410-413 of her affidavit, which was not high risk and so could not be considered inconsistent with any asserted incapacity to perform ‘high risk’ [employment]. whether the respondent is currently working or not, the court must consider the parties’ relative capacities to work. the respondent had taxable income of over $98,000 in 2019 and $86,000 in 2020. there is a gap in evidence about the respondent’s income until 2023, when his taxable income was reported as $69,437. compared with the wife’s income, the respondent has a far greater capacity. he will also receive the lion’s share of the property division. overall, this consideration favours the applicant. for the justice and equity considerations in this short relationship, the court will look at the monetary figure more than a percentage. the applicant seeks a defined figure of$170,000 from the proceeds of sale of the property, estimated to be around $618,000. other comments the court can only apply the value for [suburb c] that is provided in the valuation of $1,355,000. the parties have agreed mortgage and rates/land tax values. only debts to water and energy [providers] are relevant to the court’s determination. the applicant’s orders include that the agent for sale of the property be [d company]. that specification is necessary to avoid the potential waste relating to the payment of two agency commissions on sale. however, if the applicant is ordered to receive a fixed sum, that issue is clearly of less significance to her.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
introduction these are de facto property proceedings for a very short relationship. the respondent did not give evidence in this matter as he was assisted by a litigation guardian appointed with the consent of the applicant (without that matter proceeding to a judicial determination). the respondent’s difficulties in conducting these proceedings stem from his ill mental health. as noted by the court at various points during the hearing, this case comes down to what adjustment is just and equitable to be made to the applicant from the net proceeds of sale of the [suburb c] property. the law the relevant case law for short relationships was adverted to by the court at various times during the hearing. the court will have regard to the initial contributions of the parties. while the court will not undertake a dollar-for-dollar accounting exercise, the shortness of the relationship does mean that precision as to contributions will be required. the respondent’s application the respondent seeks that the court: make orders to change the real estate agent responsible for the sale of the [suburb c] property, and from the net proceeds of the [suburb c] property sale, that a figure equivalent to 5% of the net proceeds be paid to the applicant and the balance to the respondent. initial contributions the crux of the applicant’s case, that she made an initial contribution, appears to hinge on her initial contribution of $47,000 cash. further submissions are made about how those funds were utilised. the respondent brought in his interest in the real property at [b street, suburb c] (‘the [suburb c] property’). that asset is a dominant contribution in this matter. financial contributions – the use of the $47,000 that the $47,000 was all but spent by [late] 2019 is not of itself evidence that the funds are a contribution on behalf of the applicant. the court must have regard to the application of those funds and how they contributed to the relationship. as was gleaned under cross-examination, the vast majority of the $47,000 went to paying the applicant’s rent of the [suburb k] property during that period.4 in anticipation of the applicant’s submission, the evidence does not support a finding that the parties resided at the [suburb k] property with any regularity. at paragraph 8 of her affidavit, there is no mention of the time spent at both properties expressed as a percentage. the applicant should have given that evidence in her affidavit. under cross-examination, the applicant could not estimate the time the parties spent living at the [suburb c] property and the [suburb k] property. under a liberal re-examination, eventually the applicant proffered the figure of 50/50 time between both properties. this sequence can hardly give the court comfort that the applicant is assured of her evidence, to enable the court to make that finding. the respondent’s case is that the when the parties cohabited, they primarily resided at the [suburb c] property and the retention by the applicant of her lease of the [suburb k] property was a matter for her. on the applicant’s own written evidence, she deposes that the parties spent all waking moments that were not spent at their day jobs renovating the property. she deposes that the parties were not able to reside at the [suburb k] property during the period that her father resided at the [suburb c] property due to the inconvenience of travel between the residences. what the court could find is that while the parties occasionally stayed at the [suburb k] property, they primarily resided in the [suburb c] property. if that is the case, this would not make the substantial funds expended on the applicant’s rent of the [suburb k] property a contribution to the de facto relationship. financial contributions – discrete payments during the relationship the payments made for the asserted benefit of the respondent at paragraph 48 of the applicant’s affidavit are de minimus in the grand scheme of the matter. nothing turns on this contribution. financial contributions – application of income to the benefit of the relationship on the applicant’s own evidence, the respondent earned a greater income during the relationship. financial contributions – fertility treatment from the bank statements tendered into evidence and marked l4, the court would note the substantial payment made by the applicant [in late] 2018, being $9,371.00 spent by her for her own purposes. no contribution arises for the applicant obtaining fertility treatment. not only was the matter not canvassed in her affidavit, but her own evidence under cross-examination made clear that her pursuit of fertility treatment commenced prior to her relationship with the respondent. financial contributions – payment of the mortgage the applicant accepted under cross-examination that the funds expended by her to pay the shortfall between the rental income and the mortgage between [mid]-2020 and [early] 2022 were in the environ of $1000. the opportunity to improve her answer under re-examination did not materially change her evidence as to this contribution. the respondent took up the responsibility for the mortgage payments from [early] 2022. financial contributions – refinancing the mortgage it is acknowledged that the applicant took on the mortgage liability jointly with the respondent when the refinance occurred in [mid]-2020. the court does not have sufficient evidence to find that that constituted a material financial contribution, especially given that the refinancing of the mortgage enabled the applicant the chance to come on title to the [suburb c] property. non-financial contributions – renovations the court has minimal evidence that would enable it to assess the value of the contributions made by the applicant by way of renovating the property. the applicant certainly agreed that her contributions by this way did not exceed that of the respondent. of more pressing concern is the internal inconsistency between the applicant’s assertion that the parties spent half of their time living at the [suburb k] property (for which she paid rent) referred to earlier in these submissions, but that the parties also spent every waking moment after work and on weekends renovating the [suburb c] property. the court is in a better position to find that the parties resided at the [suburb c] property most of the time to undertake the renovations. the applicant accepted under cross-examination that at the height of her case, her contributions to the renovations did not exceed those made by the respondent, a [tradesperson] by trade. non-financial contributions – management of the tenants three specific duties arose from the applicant’s management of the tenants. very little was given in her affidavit. on the applicant’s own case, the respondent took up this duty after [mid]-2022. nothing of significance turns on this contribution. kennon the court may have been left with the impression that evidence was adduced in the last moments of the applicant’s re-examination which is relevant to a kennon claim. this evidence came late in the applicant’s re-examination regarding the operation of the family violence order. the court would note that no adjustment for a kennon purpose was expressed in the applicant’s case outline, and certainly none is apprehended at present. certainly, the court has insufficient evidence to establish what quantum of an adjustment the applicant seeks. furthermore, to the extent that the court finds anything turns on this evidence, the court should give this matter little weight on procedural fairness grounds. the respondent was (properly) limited in what could be explored on this line of evidence under cross-examination. notwithstanding this, the applicant had liberality in how her re-examination was approached, adducing this evidence that, properly, should have been in her trial affidavit and written submissions in her case outline document. change of real estate agents the court need not find that [d company] has engaged in nefarious, calculated conduct to determine that it is appropriate to order that there be a change in real estate agents. the respondent has reason to be apprehensive about [d company]’s continued involvement in the matter. this court cannot make findings on the state of the evidence as to whether the altercation at the auction occurred, or whether the real estate agent has, as a matter of fact, engaged in the asserted conduct. what the court would be able to find is that the agent’s conduct is of genuine concern to the respondent (and the respondent’s litigation guardian on his behalf). the reasonable confidence of both parties in the integrity of the sale process is something the court would be minded about.
outline of principle ] section 79 demands a consideration, separately, of all of its requirements without conflation. provided a trial judge has done so, and the reasons demonstrate that this has been done, no error is demonstrated by a failure to follow a particular order in doing so. further, the breadth and depth of the consideration of the s.79(2) issue, and the extent of an adequate exposition of it in the reasons, will vary from case to case. in that respect, the plurality in bevan said, at [82], that the separate s.79(2) issue will, “...in many cases ... [be] ... effectively answered in the affirmative by the way the parties present their cases.” [20] each of those conclusions conforms entirely with what was said about those issues by the high court in stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108. [21] first, it is “...not possible to chart [the] metes and bounds” of the relevant discretion. just as importantly, it was recognised specifically that the characteristics of individual marriage unions, in so far as they acquire, hold and deal with property, differ. in “many cases”, the union is underpinned by “...stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of the husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage” (stanford, at [41]). and, in “many cases”, (but, not all) the “...just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied...” by the fact of separation: “[i]t will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order ... because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife” (stanford at [42]).
“...what is ‘plainly wrong’ will vary in the eyes of different beholders” and also the fact that the “...functions and purposes of the court ... [involve] ... difficult and evaluative decisions...” such that “...any two decision-makers may, with complete integrity and upon the same material, often come to differing conclusions”. (cdj at [186(2)], per kirby j).  ] ... as we have already said, there is no requirement to attribute different percentages to different periods in the relationship. indeed the full court has cautioned against it: see dickons & dickons (2012) 50 fam lr 244, lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 and bolger & headon [2014] famcafc 27 where the full court said at [28], “[d]oing so ... is not consistent with a holistic assessment of the parties’ contributions which is what s.79(4) requires.” it is only if error can be demonstrated in the overall result that the appeal would succeed.  8] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by s.79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  ] any and all such contributions, whether or not they sound in, or are directly linked to, the property available for distribution, should be considered and assessed together with the nature, form and extent of all other contributions of all types contemplated otherwise by s 79(4). [19] that is true of assets or income generated within the relationship and it is equally true of assets or income coming from outside of the relationship (for example, as here, in the form of inheritances). in the same way, s 79(4) specifically requires the court to take into account contributions made to the welfare of the family (and substantively and “...not in any merely token way...”, see, mallett v mallett [1984] hca 21, (1984) 156 clr 605 at 636 per wilson j) notwithstanding that those contributions may not be, or cannot be seen to be, directly linked to the available property at trial, or any increase or decrease in the value of the property. [20] put another way, consistent with authority, the s 79 discretion involves as a necessary requirement that “... trial judges weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation and then translate such an assessment into a percentage of the overall property of the parties or provide for a transfer of property in specie in accordance with that assessment.” (in the marriage of aleksovski [1996] famcafc 111, (1996) 20 fam lr 894 at 903). in aleksovski, kay j outlined the well-known “gold bar” analogy and said “[w]hat is important is to somehow give a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making up the entirety of the marriage relationship” (at 83,443). [21] those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79. that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at 640-641 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives? [22] the analysis just referred to might, obviously enough, also involve an examination of when contributions were made and the use made of contributions. but that is quite different to attributing to, or searching for, a necessary causal connection between contributions and the available property as a requirement for a particular contribution having significance in the overall assessment of what is just and equitable.  ] we wish also to refer to the approach of the federal magistrate in attributing percentages to differing periods within the relationship, or types of contribution made. there is in our view little to be gained, and much to be said against, approaching the task of assessing contributions by attaching percentages to components of it. (the same, it might be said, applies to attributing a percentage to each of the relevant s 75(2) factors). [24] there can be little doubt that the classification of contributions by reference to terms such as “initial contributions”, “contributions during the relationship”, and “post-separation contributions”, can be helpful as a convenient means of giving coherent expression to the evidence in a s 79 case and to giving coherence to the nature, form and extent of the parties’ respective contributions. however, the task of assessing contributions is holistic and but part of a yet further holistic determination of what orders, if any, represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of this particular relationship. so much is clear from the terms of s 79 itself and, in particular, s 79(2). the essential task is to assess the nature, form and extent of the contributions of all types made by each of the parties within the context of an analysis of their particular relationship. [25] doing so is also consistent with the demands of authority that the ultimate assessment of contributions should be made without “...giving over-zealous attention to the ascertainment of the parties’ contributions...” (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 524) and the well-established recognition in the authorities (acknowledged specifically by her honour in this case) that the process required of the court by s 79 is the exercise of a wide discretion, not the performance of a mathematical or accounting exercise. [26] the necessarily imprecise “wide discretion” inherent in what is required by the section is made no more precise or coherent by attributing percentage figures to arbitrary time frames or categorisations of contributions within the relationship. indeed, we consider that doing so is contrary to the holistic analysis required by the section and, in the usual course of events, should be avoided.
the consideration of the relevant matters referred to in s.75(2) of the act, pursuant to s.79(4), like the assessment of contributions, is holistic. also, like the assessment of contributions, it is not an accounting exercise.  9] in any event, we do not accept that a trial judge, or indeed an appeals court, is obliged to trawl through a slew of cases cited to them as comparable cases so as to identify a list of factual similarities and differences and then weigh these against the facts in the immediate matter so as to determine whether they are, in fact, “comparable”. such an approach is contrary to authority and an unjustifiable burden on trial judges. [180] finally, for ourselves, we derived no assistance at all from the cases cited to her honour in deciding this appeal. [181] if the point is that, where there is a short marriage, where there are no children and where the parties’ contributions to their assets and to the welfare of the family from the commencement of the relationship to the time of the hearing is equal, any disparity in initial financial contributions is of critical importance in determining the overall contributions of the parties, then such a position is easily arrived at by the application of principle alone.
consideration & disposition
balance sheet
description
ownership
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
1
b street, suburb c
joint
$1,355,000
$1,325,000
2
cba account #...14
a
nominal
$3,095
3
cba account #...09
4
cba account #...55
$988
5
motor vehicle 1
$1,000
6
household contents
7
me savings account #...51
r
$4,655
8
me savings account #...52
9
motor vehicle 2
$5,000
10
motor vehicle 3
$10,000
11
assets subtotal
$1,350,738
liabilities
12
mortgage over suburb c property
$710,087
13
rates arrears
$4,378
14
land tax arrears
$19,592
15
energy company
$969
16
water company
$2,851
17
credit cards
not agreed
$7,857
18
$15,500
19
legal fees owed to o law firm
$6,000
liabilities subtotal
$737,877
$767,234
superannuation
name of fund
type of interest
member
20
super fund 1
defined benefit interest
$222,701
21
super fund 2
accumulation interest
$6,270
22
super fund 3
$120,388
superannuation subtotal
$349,359
total (assets – liabilities)
$617,123
$583,504
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
$966,482
$932,863   the value ascribed to the suburb c property, absent any other evidence, should be in accordance with the only valuation before the court, being that which was obtained by the wife referred to above, namely $1.355 million. of course, if the property is sold at auction, such contest, ultimately, goes away, (b) i have already noted that there is no valuation or other proper evidence regarding the valuations of the respondent’s cars that he seeks to include in the balance sheet. absent such evidence, the values ascribed to them, and notably in circumstances where there was no evidence from the husband, should not be accepted, (c) absent agreement between the parties, which is the case here, there is no legal principle that would warrant the credit card debts being included in the balance sheet. i propose to exclude them, and (d) the evidence of the husband’s litigation guardian confirmed that the legal fees of $6000, which the husband owes to his former lawyers have not been paid. in such circumstances, legal fees that have not been paid cannot be added back into the pool, precisely because they were never taken out in the first place.   i have already noted that there is no valuation or other proper evidence regarding the valuations of the respondent’s cars that he seeks to include in the balance sheet. absent such evidence, the values ascribed to them, and notably in circumstances where there was no evidence from the husband, should not be accepted, (c) absent agreement between the parties, which is the case here, there is no legal principle that would warrant the credit card debts being included in the balance sheet. i propose to exclude them, and (d) the evidence of the husband’s litigation guardian confirmed that the legal fees of $6000, which the husband owes to his former lawyers have not been paid. in such circumstances, legal fees that have not been paid cannot be added back into the pool, precisely because they were never taken out in the first place.   absent agreement between the parties, which is the case here, there is no legal principle that would warrant the credit card debts being included in the balance sheet. i propose to exclude them, and (d) the evidence of the husband’s litigation guardian confirmed that the legal fees of $6000, which the husband owes to his former lawyers have not been paid. in such circumstances, legal fees that have not been paid cannot be added back into the pool, precisely because they were never taken out in the first place.   the evidence of the husband’s litigation guardian confirmed that the legal fees of $6000, which the husband owes to his former lawyers have not been paid. in such circumstances, legal fees that have not been paid cannot be added back into the pool, precisely because they were never taken out in the first place.   at the start of the relationship, the wife had savings of approximately $47,000, (b) the wife’s income at the start of the relationship was $38,000 per year, the husband’s was $98,000 per year. it is more likely than not that at the beginning and during the brief relationship, both parties equally contributed to it financially, both from their incomes (at least when the husband was employed), and as required, from their savings, (c) the wife’s fertility treatment was commenced before the parties met and in turn before they commenced a relationship. at its highest, the husband was a “passive” participant albeit a supportive one for the limited time of the relationship. at its highest, the costs associated with such treatment (the treatment of course being highly sensitive, highly personal, and extremely delicate) could only be considered to be the most miniscule of contributions for the current litigation, (d) the use, and cost, of the wife’s suburb k property, in my view, must be considered “holistically”. by this i mean that it is inaccurate to consider it on the basis of an arithmetical assessment of actual days it was used, and dollar amounts spent, again on a daily basis. the primary benefit to the parties was surely that it was available to them both, as and when required, subject only to what was happening with the renovation and all else regarding the suburb c property. it was at least a significant convenience to them both during the course of their relationship, (e) there is no doubt that the suburb c property was a very significant initial contribution by the husband to the relationship, accepting that the net equity in it, while significant, was limited by the significant mortgage (now agreed to be $710,087). the net equity, according to the wife’s figures in the balance sheet, is $644,913, (f) the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   the wife’s income at the start of the relationship was $38,000 per year, the husband’s was $98,000 per year. it is more likely than not that at the beginning and during the brief relationship, both parties equally contributed to it financially, both from their incomes (at least when the husband was employed), and as required, from their savings, (c) the wife’s fertility treatment was commenced before the parties met and in turn before they commenced a relationship. at its highest, the husband was a “passive” participant albeit a supportive one for the limited time of the relationship. at its highest, the costs associated with such treatment (the treatment of course being highly sensitive, highly personal, and extremely delicate) could only be considered to be the most miniscule of contributions for the current litigation, (d) the use, and cost, of the wife’s suburb k property, in my view, must be considered “holistically”. by this i mean that it is inaccurate to consider it on the basis of an arithmetical assessment of actual days it was used, and dollar amounts spent, again on a daily basis. the primary benefit to the parties was surely that it was available to them both, as and when required, subject only to what was happening with the renovation and all else regarding the suburb c property. it was at least a significant convenience to them both during the course of their relationship, (e) there is no doubt that the suburb c property was a very significant initial contribution by the husband to the relationship, accepting that the net equity in it, while significant, was limited by the significant mortgage (now agreed to be $710,087). the net equity, according to the wife’s figures in the balance sheet, is $644,913, (f) the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   the wife’s fertility treatment was commenced before the parties met and in turn before they commenced a relationship. at its highest, the husband was a “passive” participant albeit a supportive one for the limited time of the relationship. at its highest, the costs associated with such treatment (the treatment of course being highly sensitive, highly personal, and extremely delicate) could only be considered to be the most miniscule of contributions for the current litigation, (d) the use, and cost, of the wife’s suburb k property, in my view, must be considered “holistically”. by this i mean that it is inaccurate to consider it on the basis of an arithmetical assessment of actual days it was used, and dollar amounts spent, again on a daily basis. the primary benefit to the parties was surely that it was available to them both, as and when required, subject only to what was happening with the renovation and all else regarding the suburb c property. it was at least a significant convenience to them both during the course of their relationship, (e) there is no doubt that the suburb c property was a very significant initial contribution by the husband to the relationship, accepting that the net equity in it, while significant, was limited by the significant mortgage (now agreed to be $710,087). the net equity, according to the wife’s figures in the balance sheet, is $644,913, (f) the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   the use, and cost, of the wife’s suburb k property, in my view, must be considered “holistically”. by this i mean that it is inaccurate to consider it on the basis of an arithmetical assessment of actual days it was used, and dollar amounts spent, again on a daily basis. the primary benefit to the parties was surely that it was available to them both, as and when required, subject only to what was happening with the renovation and all else regarding the suburb c property. it was at least a significant convenience to them both during the course of their relationship, (e) there is no doubt that the suburb c property was a very significant initial contribution by the husband to the relationship, accepting that the net equity in it, while significant, was limited by the significant mortgage (now agreed to be $710,087). the net equity, according to the wife’s figures in the balance sheet, is $644,913, (f) the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   there is no doubt that the suburb c property was a very significant initial contribution by the husband to the relationship, accepting that the net equity in it, while significant, was limited by the significant mortgage (now agreed to be $710,087). the net equity, according to the wife’s figures in the balance sheet, is $644,913, (f) the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   the wife’s management of the tenants in the suburb c property for approximately 2 years is a not insignificant contribution. of perhaps slightly greater import was the wife taking on debt with the husband regarding payment to his former wife, and in relation to the husband’s quite significant credit card debt, (g) accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   accepting the force of the wife’s submissions that, because there was no evidence from the husband about it, the wife’s evidence about being the primary “home-maker” should be accepted, in my view, precisely because of the shortness of the relationship and the general lack of detail about this aspect, as with a range of other dimensions, it is difficult to put a significant amount of weight, or to put a more specific value, on this contention other than in the most general terms, (h) the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   the court can do little with the respective contentions about the husband’s vehicles (sold and unsold) as a contribution, or the lack of detail regarding the husband’s significant credit card debt, and the sizeable credit card debt of the wife, and (i) there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   there is no doubt that, for the duration of the relationship, both parties contributed, each in their own ways, to the renovation of the suburb c property.   an order under s.106a of the act regarding the signing of any documents by a registrar of the court, (b) an order that until the sale and distribution of the net proceeds of sale in accordance with these orders, the husband is responsible for all mortgage payments regarding the suburb c property, and (c) in the event that the suburb c property does not sell at auction within 120 days, absent any other agreement in writing between the parties, they may approach a registrar of the court to determine any other process to ensure the sale of the suburb c property. that process may proceed on the basis of a single affidavit from each party of no more than 4 pages that updates the court and two pages of submissions from each party.   an order that until the sale and distribution of the net proceeds of sale in accordance with these orders, the husband is responsible for all mortgage payments regarding the suburb c property, and (c) in the event that the suburb c property does not sell at auction within 120 days, absent any other agreement in writing between the parties, they may approach a registrar of the court to determine any other process to ensure the sale of the suburb c property. that process may proceed on the basis of a single affidavit from each party of no more than 4 pages that updates the court and two pages of submissions from each party.   in the event that the suburb c property does not sell at auction within 120 days, absent any other agreement in writing between the parties, they may approach a registrar of the court to determine any other process to ensure the sale of the suburb c property. that process may proceed on the basis of a single affidavit from each party of no more than 4 pages that updates the court and two pages of submissions from each party.
associate: dated: 30 may 2024
dated: 30 may 2024
[1] t 1 – 7 [2] t 7 – 8 [3] t 8 – 18 [4] t 18[5] t 18 – 21 [6] t 21 – 23 [7] t 23 – 27 [8] t 25[9] t 27[10] t 28[11] t 28 – 30 [12] t 30 – 31 [13] t 31 – 32 [14] t 32 – 34 [15] t 34[16] t 34 – 36 [17] t 36[18] t 37 [19] t 37[20] t 38[21] t 39[22] t 42[23] t 42[24] t 42 – 44 [25] t 44 – 45 [26] t 45 – 49 [27] t 49 – 51 [28] t 51 – 52 [29] t 52 [30] t 52 – 54 [31] t 54 – 58 [32] t 58[33] t 58 – 59 [34] t 60[35] t 60 – 61 [36] t 61 – 62 [37] t 63[38] t 63[39] chapman v chapman [2014] famcafc 91; (2015) 51 fam lr 176.[40] ajo & gro (2005) 33 fam lr 439.[41] fields v smith [2015] famcafc 57; (2015) flc 93-638; (2016) 53 fam lr 1.[42] dickons v dickons (2014) 50 fam lr 244.[43] anson v meek [2017] famcafc 257; (2017) 57 fam lr 23; (2017) flc 93-816.