last updated: 10 march 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
whiteoaks & marton [2021] fedcfamc2f 471
orders
the court orders that:
1. the mother have sole responsibility for the child x born in 2017 (“x”), save that prior to making the sole ultimate decision about any issue she: (a) advise the father in writing of the decision intended to be made, (b) seek the father’s written response and input in relation thereto, (c) consider by reference to the best interests of x any response received from the father prior to make any such decision, and (d) advise the father in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of the ultimate decision made.  advise the father in writing of the decision intended to be made, (b) seek the father’s written response and input in relation thereto, (c) consider by reference to the best interests of x any response received from the father prior to make any such decision, and (d) advise the father in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of the ultimate decision made.
2. x live with the mother
3. the mother be permitted to live with x in town c, victoria.
4. x spend time and communicate with the father as follows: (a) each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, (b) during school term holiday periods: (i) in the term 1 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the term 2 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 4 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:00pm sunday 3 july 2022 to 5:30pm thursday 7 july 2022, such time to coincide with national aboriginal and islander day observance committee (naidoc) week, (iii) in the term 3 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 5 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the first friday of the school holidays to 5:00pm the following wednesday. (iv) commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter for the first half of each of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (v) commencing in 2023 and each year thereafter, noting that naidoc week typically falls in the second half of the term 2 school holidays, x spend time with the father from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday and the parties are to ensure such time coincides with naidoc week, (vi) commencing in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter for the second half of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (vii) at any other times agreed to by the parties in writing. (c) during the long summer holiday period: (i) in the 2021/2022 holidays x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the 2022/2023 holidays for two block periods of five days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement such time commence the weekends x would otherwise be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, (iii) commencing in the 2023/2024 holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended during the long summer holidays, (iv) in the 2023/2024 holidays for one half of the holidays on a week about basis commencing the first week with the father and if x is with the father in the week school resumes he is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes, (v) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the first half of the holidays, and (vi) in the 2025/2026 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the second half of the holidays and x is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes (d) for christmas: (i) in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december, and (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december. (e) for easter: (i) if x is not already spending time with the father pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (f) on father’s day, (i) if father’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, x spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday before father’s day to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) on the father’s birthday: (i) noting that the father’s birthday is during the long summer vacation period, if the father’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(c)(iii), x spend time with the father from 10:00am to 5:00pm. (h) on x’s birthday: (i) if x’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (i) on y’s birthday: (i) if y’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if y’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if y’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (j) during kindergarten/school terms each wednesday and the sunday x is not spending time with the father by phone/video for 30 minutes at times to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication, and (k) when x commences spending time with the father during school holidays for a period of one week or more, the father have one 30 minute phone/video call with x when he is with the mother each week at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication.  each alternate weekend from 5:30pm friday to 5:00pm sunday, (b) during school term holiday periods: (i) in the term 1 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the term 2 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 4 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:00pm sunday 3 july 2022 to 5:30pm thursday 7 july 2022, such time to coincide with national aboriginal and islander day observance committee (naidoc) week, (iii) in the term 3 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 5 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the first friday of the school holidays to 5:00pm the following wednesday. (iv) commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter for the first half of each of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (v) commencing in 2023 and each year thereafter, noting that naidoc week typically falls in the second half of the term 2 school holidays, x spend time with the father from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday and the parties are to ensure such time coincides with naidoc week, (vi) commencing in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter for the second half of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (vii) at any other times agreed to by the parties in writing. (c) during the long summer holiday period: (i) in the 2021/2022 holidays x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the 2022/2023 holidays for two block periods of five days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement such time commence the weekends x would otherwise be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, (iii) commencing in the 2023/2024 holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended during the long summer holidays, (iv) in the 2023/2024 holidays for one half of the holidays on a week about basis commencing the first week with the father and if x is with the father in the week school resumes he is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes, (v) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the first half of the holidays, and (vi) in the 2025/2026 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the second half of the holidays and x is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes (d) for christmas: (i) in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december, and (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december. (e) for easter: (i) if x is not already spending time with the father pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (f) on father’s day, (i) if father’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, x spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday before father’s day to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) on the father’s birthday: (i) noting that the father’s birthday is during the long summer vacation period, if the father’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(c)(iii), x spend time with the father from 10:00am to 5:00pm. (h) on x’s birthday: (i) if x’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (i) on y’s birthday: (i) if y’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if y’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if y’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication. (j) during kindergarten/school terms each wednesday and the sunday x is not spending time with the father by phone/video for 30 minutes at times to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication, and (k) when x commences spending time with the father during school holidays for a period of one week or more, the father have one 30 minute phone/video call with x when he is with the mother each week at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication.  in the term 1 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the term 2 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 4 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:00pm sunday 3 july 2022 to 5:30pm thursday 7 july 2022, such time to coincide with national aboriginal and islander day observance committee (naidoc) week, (iii) in the term 3 2022 school holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended and x spend time with the father for a block of 5 nights as agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the first friday of the school holidays to 5:00pm the following wednesday. (iv) commencing in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter for the first half of each of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (v) commencing in 2023 and each year thereafter, noting that naidoc week typically falls in the second half of the term 2 school holidays, x spend time with the father from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday and the parties are to ensure such time coincides with naidoc week, (vi) commencing in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter for the second half of the term 1 and term 3 holidays at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement from 5:30pm on the middle friday to 5:00pm the following saturday, (vii) at any other times agreed to by the parties in writing.  in the 2021/2022 holidays x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein continue, (ii) in the 2022/2023 holidays for two block periods of five days as agreed between the parties and failing agreement such time commence the weekends x would otherwise be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, (iii) commencing in the 2023/2024 holidays time pursuant to order 4(a) herein be suspended during the long summer holidays, (iv) in the 2023/2024 holidays for one half of the holidays on a week about basis commencing the first week with the father and if x is with the father in the week school resumes he is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes, (v) in the 2024/2025 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the first half of the holidays, and (vi) in the 2025/2026 holidays and each alternate holidays thereafter for the second half of the holidays and x is to be returned to the mother two clear days before school resumes  in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december, and (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december.  if x is not already spending time with the father pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication.   if father’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein, x spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday before father’s day to 5:00pm on father’s day.   noting that the father’s birthday is during the long summer vacation period, if the father’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to order 4(c)(iii), x spend time with the father from 10:00am to 5:00pm.  if x’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication.  if y’s birthday does not already fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the father pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if y’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if y’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the father to initiate the call to the mother’s mobile and the mother to facilitate such communication.
5. x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4 herein be suspended and x spend time with the mother as follows: (a) for christmas: (i) in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december, (b) for easter: (i) if x is not already spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication. (c) on mother’s day: (ii) if mother’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the mother, x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein conclude at 5:00pm on the saturday before mother’s day. (d) on the mother’s birthday: (i) if the mother’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be in her care, the mother have one 30 minute phone/video call with x at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father shall facilitate such communication. (e) x’s birthday: (i) if x’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the mother pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication. (f) when x commences spending time with the father during school holidays for one week or more, the mother have one 30 minute phone/video call with x when he is with the father each wednesday at times to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father shall facilitate such communication.  for christmas: (i) in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december, (b) for easter: (i) if x is not already spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication. (c) on mother’s day: (ii) if mother’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the mother, x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein conclude at 5:00pm on the saturday before mother’s day. (d) on the mother’s birthday: (i) if the mother’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be in her care, the mother have one 30 minute phone/video call with x at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father shall facilitate such communication. (e) x’s birthday: (i) if x’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the mother pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication. (f) when x commences spending time with the father during school holidays for one week or more, the mother have one 30 minute phone/video call with x when he is with the father each wednesday at times to be agreed between the parties and failing agreement at 5:30pm with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father shall facilitate such communication.  in 2021 and each alternate year thereafter from 5:00pm on 24 december to 12:00pm on 26 december, (ii) in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter from 12:00pm on 26 december to 12:00pm on 28 december,  if x is not already spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders on easter sunday for a 30 minute phone/video call at a time to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication. ) if mother’s day does not already fall on the weekend x would ordinarily be spending with the mother, x’s time with the father pursuant to order 4(a) herein conclude at 5:00pm on the saturday before mother’s day.   if the mother’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be in her care, the mother have one 30 minute phone/video call with x at 10:00am with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father shall facilitate such communication.  if x’s birthday does not fall at a time x would ordinarily be spending with the mother pursuant to these orders, for a 30 minute phone/video call at times to be agreed by the parties and failing agreement at 10:00am if x’s birthday falls on a weekend or 5:30pm if x’s birthday falls on a weekday, with the mother to initiate the call to the father’s mobile and the father to facilitate such communication.
6. each parent shall facilitate x communicating with the parent he is not with by phone/video on x’s reasonable request to do so.
7. for the purposes of all time spent pursuant to order 4 herein, changeover is to occur: (a) from the date of these orders for a period of 12 months the father or his agent collect x from the mother’s residence or other agreed location in town c at the commencement of time and the mother or her agent collect x from the father’s residence or other agreed location in city b at the conclusion of time unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, and (b) commencing on 1 december 2022 at an agreed midpoint between the parties’ residences and failing agreement as per order 7(a) herein.  from the date of these orders for a period of 12 months the father or his agent collect x from the mother’s residence or other agreed location in town c at the commencement of time and the mother or her agent collect x from the father’s residence or other agreed location in city b at the conclusion of time unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, and (b) commencing on 1 december 2022 at an agreed midpoint between the parties’ residences and failing agreement as per order 7(a) herein.
8. the father not permit the paternal grandmother ms d to be his agent to attend any changeovers as provided for in order 7 herein.
9. the parties give each other a minimum of 2 hours’ notice if they will not personally be effecting changeover and advise the name of the person who will be attending changeover.
10. should the father not notify the mother of a late arrival at the commencement of his time with x and not be present 30 minutes after changeover time pursuant to these orders x’s time with the father for that visit be forfeited.
11. the parties communicate about issues concerning x through the parenting application “appclose” and such communication is to relate to issues concerning x only and be polite and respectful in nature.
12. the parties and their servants and agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction from abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other or any members of the other’s family to or in the presence or hearing of x and from permitting any other person from doing so.
13. each party shall advise the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by x as soon as practicable following the onset of the illness or occurrence of the injury and shall provide sufficiently detailed information and any necessary authorities to allow the other parent to obtain information directly from any treating medical practitioners.
14. the mother is to authorise x’s school and any relevant extra-curricular activities to provide the father with copies of school notices, information, newsletters, school reports, school photos and any other necessary information about x’s progress and any costs associated with same be met solely by the father.
15. each party be at liberty to attend at x’s school, sporting events or extra-curricular activities for the purpose of any function or activity normally attended by parents.
16. the mother is authorised to provide a copy of these orders to any day-care, kindergarten or school attended by x.
17. the mother be authorised to provide a copy of the family report to all medical professionals working with x.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge benderintroduction
1 this matter relates to the parenting arrangements for the parties’ young three year old son x born in 2017 (“x”).
2 the orders sought by the father include:- the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x, the parties be restrained from relocating x’s residence from within a 50km radius of the city of greater city b, until x turns five he live with the mother and spend time with the father:- during school terms:- in week one from 5.00pm wednesday to 5.00pm thursday, in week two: from 9.00am monday to 9.00am tuesday, and from 5.00pm friday to 9.00am monday during school term holidays from the last day of terms to 5.00pm the following tuesday, and during school summer holidays from 1 january to 7 january upon x turning five he live equally with both parties, living with the father:- in week one from 3.30pm on wednesday to 9.00am on friday, in week two: from 9.00am on monday to 9.00am on wednesday, and from 9.00am on friday to 9.00am on monday for half of school term holidays, and during school summery holidays from 1 january to 16 january
and otherwise with the mother x spend special occasions with both parties, x spend nominated cultural aboriginal days with the paternal family, each parent not spending time with x be permitted to contact x between 8.00am and 8.00pm, the parties communicate by way of the parenting app “appclose”, each party may request with two weeks’ written notice that x attend their family member’s birthday and/or special occasion, and changeover occur at kindergarten/school or otherwise at mcdonald’s on e street, city b and collections/drop off be by the parents only unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
3 the mother is seeking orders that include:- the mother have sole parental responsibility for x, x live with the mother, the mother be permitted to remain living in town c with x, x spend time with the father as follows: for the remainder of 2021 each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday, from 1 january 2022 to 30 june 2022 each alternate weekend from 5.30pm friday to 5.00pm sunday, from 1 july 2022 to 31 december 2022: each alternate weekend from 5.30pm friday to 5.00pm sunday, and each wednesday for 15 minutes by video between 5.00pm and 5.30pm from 2023: each alternate weekend from 5.30pm friday to 5.00pm sunday, each wednesday for 20 to 30 minutes by video between 5.00pm and 5.30pm, and for half of the school term and long summer holidays there be a sharing of special occasions, and changeover be at a mid-point between town c and city b being mcdonald’s on f street, suburb g, collections/drop off be by the parents only unless otherwise agreed by the parties and only one person attend changeover.background
4 the father was born in 1994 and is aged 27 years. he is an apprentice tradesman with two years remaining on his apprenticeship. the father has re-partnered with ms h and they have a baby daughter y born in 2021. the father lives with his new family in a three-bedroom rental property in city b.
5 the mother was born in 1993 and is aged 28 years. the mother is employed on a casual basis as a health care worker with employer j. the mother has not re-partnered. the mother is currently living with x in town c in her parents’ five-bedroom property.
6 the parties commenced a relationship in 2015 and commenced cohabitation in 2016 in city b.
7 the parties separated for the first time in early february 2018 when x was only two months old. it is the mother’s evidence this separation was to “escape from an aggressive environment.”[1] the mother and x returned to her parents’ home in town c.
8 the father immediately commenced proceedings in the city b magistrates’ court seeking parenting orders. on 15 march 2018 magistrate k made interim orders for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father from 5.00pm friday to 5.00pm monday with changeover outside l railway station. when this time did not take place, the father sought an urgent recovery order. on 22 march 2018 the father’s application for a recovery order came before magistrate m who refused the father’s application for the recovery order, transferred all extant applications to the federal circuit court of australia (as it then was) at melbourne and made interim orders for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father in town c each alternate saturday between 2.00pm and 5.00pm with a member of the father’s family to be in substantial attendance.
9 on 14 may 2018 the matter came before the federal circuit court of australia (as it then was). orders were made for a s.11f child dispute conference to take place on 1 june 2018. an interim order was made for x to spend time with the father each saturday in town c for three hours with a member of the father’s family to be in substantial attendance.
10 in the child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 5 june 2018 family consultant n reports under the heading “co-parenting relationship”:- ms marton described mr whiteoaks’ behaviour as controlling which contributed to the breakdown. mr whiteoaks appeared to have only limited insight into this behaviour which presented to be more about mr whiteoaks’ maturity and communication style. when challenged about withholding x from mr whiteoaks she provided two explanations being mr whiteoaks did not ask to see x and that she offered for mr whiteoaks to visit him in town c and ‘it was not my fault that he didn’t come’ raising concerns in relation to ms marton’s ability to remain child focused and put x’s needs above her own. both parties advised they want x to have a relationship with both parents and provided a solid understanding of the benefits to x to have this. the difficulties appear to be in navigating the pathway towards executing a co-parenting relationship. the communication between the parties has improved considerably and they both present as hopeful for the future to cooperatively co-parent, however, it is the writer’s assessment they require independent and unbiased assistance with this.
11 under the headings “issues for the children” and “future directions”, family consultant n made the following comments and recommendations:- since birth, x has experienced considerable change and an inconsistent parenting arrangement. given his age and stage of development, x needs to have frequent and consistent time with his father to assist in developing and consolidating their relationship. however, he also requires a consistent and dependable primary parent which is with his mother. given x’s age and stage of development, frequent time is more suitable for x to spend time with his father. therefore, in a four week cycle: for two weeks the father travel to town c to spend four hours each saturday and sunday with x for one week the mother travel to city b for the father to spend four hours ach saturday and sunday with x one week of no time
this cycle to continue for a period of 6 months and then be reviewed. that the parties attend for an assessment for the parenting orders program through o family centre, p street, suburb q, and to include counselling to assist the parties with their co-parenting relationship.
12 on 20 june 2018 orders were made by consent for x to spend time with the father for three weekends out of four on saturday and sunday for four hours, two of the weekends in the town c/town r/town s region and one weekend in the city b region. the orders also provided for x to spend time with the father on the monday after the “no time” weekend in the town c region. up to 31 august 2018 a member of the father’s family was to be in substantial attendance when x was spending time with the father.
13 in october 2018 the parties reconciled and the mother and x moved back to city b. the proceedings before the court were adjourned to 10 december 2019.
14 the parties separated on a final basis in july 2019.
15 it is the mother’s evidence that after her and the father separated she was pressured by the father and the paternal family to commit to an arrangement against her belief it was in x’s best interests that saw a substantial increase in the time x spent with the father.
16 on 6 december 2019 interim orders were made by consent in chambers which provided for the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility for x, for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father as follows:- in week one: on monday from 3.30pm to 8.00pm, on wednesday from 3.30pm to 8.00pm, and from 5.00pm friday to 10.00am saturday in week two: on monday from 5.30pm to 8.00pm, on wednesday from 5.30pm to 8.00pm, from 5.00pm friday to 5.00pm saturday, and on sunday from 10.00am to 5.00pm the sharing of special occasions
17 on 20 february 2020 the parties came before chief justice alstergren as part of the national call-over. they were referred that day to a registrar for family dispute resolution. on 21 february 2020 interim orders were made by consent which provided for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father as follows:- in week one: from 5.00pm wednesday to the commencement of day-care on thursday, in week two: on monday from 5.30pm to 7.30pm, and from 5.00pm friday to 5.00pm sunday on special occasions
18 in april 2020 the mother and x stayed in town c because of the initial covid-19 lockdown.
19 on 21 april 2020 the father filed a contravention application and application in a case seeking x return to the city b area and live with the father for three weeks as make-up time.
20 on 14 may 2020 the mother and x returned to city b when the covid-19 restrictions eased. on 15 may 2020 judge riley made consent orders which provided, inter alia for “make-up” time between x and the father, and otherwise for the orders made on 21 february 2020 to remain in full force and effect. all extant applications, including the father’s contravention application, were adjourned to 22 june 2020.
21 when the matter came before the court on 22 june 2020, the father discontinued his contravention application. the parenting application was listed for final hearing on 28 july 2021. the spend time arrangements contained in the orders made on 21 february 2020 remained in full force and effect save that if the father had a rostered day off on the thursday in week two when x was to spend time with him from 5.00pm wednesday to the commencement of day-care thursday, then x was to spend time with the father until 5.00pm thursday rather than attend day-care that day.
22 on monday 17 august 2020 there was an incident when x was being returned to the mother after spending time with the father.
23 the father and the paternal grandmother both attended changeover. after taking x from the father, the mother was walking back to her car when, on the mother’s evidence, the paternal grandmother aggressively tried to serve her with an application the paternal grandmother had filed in the victorian civil and administrative tribunal (“vcat”) that related to, as i understand it, a dispute between the paternal grandmother and the mother about a bond the paternal grandmother had paid for the mother and furniture the mother retained when the parties separated. the mother refused to accept service of the application and asked the father and paternal grandmother to contact her lawyers. the father shoved the papers in the mother’s hands whilst he and the paternal grandmother continued to yell at her.
24 it is the mother’s evidence that because of the father and paternal grandmother’s yelling and aggressive behaviour, x became upset and started to cry. the father and paternal grandmother drove away and the mother took x from the car to settle him whilst talking to a woman who had approached her to see if she and x were okay. the father and paternal grandmother returned to the changeover location and parked directly behind the mother’s car where, on the mother’s evidence, both the father and paternal grandmother again started abusing her before again leaving.
25 it is the father’s and paternal grandmother’s evidence that it was the mother who became aggressive and started yelling at them when they tried to serve the vcat papers on her at changeover. they agree they did return to the changeover location after they first left but explain they did so because they were concerned about x as he was “hysterical” when they left.
26 on the day following this altercation the mother attended the city b police station asking for assistance. the police made an application for an intervention order on the mother’s behalf. the mother’s application was finalised on 16 march 2021 when a 12-month intervention order was made for the protection of the mother and x. the father did not attend court and consented to the order without admission.
27 after being served with the mother’s application for an intervention order, the father filed a cross-application for an intervention order against the mother. the father’s application went to a defended hearing at the city b magistrates’ court on 19 august 2021. after hearing evidence from the father, the paternal grandmother and the mother, the father’s application was dismissed.
28 because of the mother and paternal grandmother’s highly conflicted relationship, the mother asked the father not to have the paternal grandmother attend changeover. on 27 november 2020 the father was running late to changeover and asked the paternal grandmother to collect x. the father did not advise the mother that he was running late or that he had arranged for the paternal grandmother to collect x in his stead. as x had been with his maternal grandparents in town c, the maternal grandfather was with the mother for this changeover. when the mother and the maternal grandfather attended changeover, they were met by the paternal grandmother.
29 when the mother and the maternal grandfather saw that the father was not there, the maternal grandfather, who was holding x, returned to his car with x. it is the paternal grandmother’s evidence the maternal grandfather said “do you wanna fight do ya” whilst pointing aggressively at her. it is the mother’s evidence the paternal grandmother started yelling aggressively at her and the maternal grandfather shouting “i’m going to sue you” and following them to their car. the mother and maternal grandfather returned to the mother’s home with x.
30 the mother texted the father when she got home with x and changeover finally occurred at 6.00pm with only the mother and father present.
31 after this incident, the paternal grandmother sought an intervention order against the maternal grandfather. the application was listed on 21 may 2021 and was struck out when the paternal grandmother did not attend court on that day.
32 on 23 november 2020 the father advised the mother by text message that the paternal grandmother would be at changeover as he could not get there on time. the mother sent an answering text to the father advising she did not agree to the paternal grandmother attending changeover. after the father texted the mother to advise her he had arrived, the mother walked into the changeover location. the paternal grandmother and not the father was waiting. the father and his partner were in the car park waiting in the car. when the mother refused to hand x to the paternal grandmother, the mother texted the father asking him where he was. the father then came up to the supermarket entrance where changeover was to occur and x left with the father. it is the mother’s evidence that when the paternal grandmother saw an elderly man comforting the mother after this incident, she turned and shouted loudly whilst pointing a finger at the mother, “she’s a liar”.
33 x attended the t day-care centre in town dd from 2018. towards the end of 2020 the question of where and when x should commence a three year old kindergarten program in 2021 became an issue between the parties.
34 it is the father’s evidence he sent multiple messages to the mother on this issue suggesting kindergartens for x to attend to which the mother did not respond. it is the mother’s evidence that she had discussions with t day-care centre towards the end of 2020 and they recommended x not start their kindergarten program until term 2, 2021 as they believed he was not yet ready to start that program. it is the mother’s evidence that when she told the father this he did not agree and it was then he starting sending her the messages about other kindergartens for x to attend starting in term 1 2021 and that he had enrolled x in one of these kindergartens.
35 the mother’s evidence is she believed the father told x he needed to attend the kindergarten the father had chosen for him and because of this x started to refuse to attend t day-care centre, screaming as they drove into the car park and vomiting at the doors of the centre.
36 because of the level of x’s distress, the mother decided to resign from her position at employer u and assume full-time care of x so that x did not need to attend day-care. she did this on 15 february 2021.
37 following her resignation from employer u, the mother retuned to live with her parents in town c with x. after moving to town c the mother and x travelled to city b to ensure x spent time with the father in compliance with the interim orders. the mother did not tell the father of her move to town c until the family report interviews in may 2021.
38 on 4 june 2021 the father filed an application in a case seeking, inter alia, that the mother be ordered to return x to live in city b and that if the mother chose to remain in town c, x live with the father in city b. this application was listed on 28 july 2021, the date the matter was listed for final hearing.
39 the mother was self-represented at the final hearing. because of the final intervention order made in the mother’s favour on 16 march 2021, s.102na of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) applied. the matter was therefore adjourned to enable the mother to obtain representation under the commonwealth family violence and cross-examination scheme.
40 orders were also made on that day for the parties to do all things necessary to enable x to attend counselling in suburb g. the mother’s evidence is that x has been displaying concerning behaviours for some months and she wanted to link him to counselling but the father did not agree to this.
41 the father’s application for orders for the mother and x to return to city b were not acceded to. an order was made for the interim orders relating to x’s living arrangements to remain in full force and effect save that only the parties were to attend changeover.
42 a notation to those orders reads as follows:- the current orders provide for x to have a meal with the father on each alternate monday from 5.30pm to 8.30pm. given the current distance between the parties’ residences x is travelling five hours on each alternate monday to enable such time to take place. the parties are encouraged to take a child focused approach to this arrangement and to see if an alternate agreement can be reached in relation to this time pending finalisation of this matter.
43 at the final hearing, the court was advised that the parties had been unable to agree to an alternate arrangement for the time x spent with the father each alternate monday. the court was also advised x was not returned to the mother’s care until 5.00pm each thursday in week two even when the father did not have a rostered day off. on those dates x was cared for by the paternal grandmother or the father’s partner.
44 at the conclusion of the final hearing, an order varying the interim orders was made such that x not spend alternate monday evenings with the father and spend time with the father in week two until 5.00pm on thursday without the requirement the father have a rostered day off.
the evidence
the father
45 the father relies on his trial affidavit sworn 29 june 2021. he also relies on the affidavit of the paternal grandmother ms d sworn 29 june 2021. both the father and the paternal grandmother gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
46 it is the father’s evidence that he believes x’s best interests are met if he remains living in city b so that he is able to have the full ongoing involvement of both of his parents, as well as the extended paternal family, in his life.
47 it is the father’s evidence that if the mother and x are permitted to live in town c then the distance between where he lives in city b and where x lives in town c will limit the time x can spend with him to alternate weekends and holidays. it is the father’s evidence that such a reduction in regular time between him and his son will have a very negative impact on what is their current close and loving relationship.
48 it is the father’s belief that the mother does not support x’s relationship with him as she does not value his role in x’s life. he believes the mother’s application to live in town c is to remove him from x’s life.
49 both parties annexed to their trial affidavits their messages on the appclose app used by them to communicate in relation to x.
50 the father was asked what he wanted the court to glean from those messages. the father indicated he wanted the court to see the level of conflict that exists between the parties, that the mother will not negotiate with him, the mother’s failure to agree to make-up time or additional time for x with him and his family and the parties’ inability to reach agreement. the father also wished to highlight the mother’s failure to respond to suggestions or questions put by him which he submits supports his evidence that the mother does not respect his role as x’s father or consider his views when making decisions in x’s best interests.
51 the father states that the communication annexed to his affidavit is an accurate picture of his and the mother’s parenting relationship and shows how they cannot co-parent. it is his evidence that this is despite his efforts to co-parent and it is the mother who prevents this happening “because she is so difficult”.
52 it was suggested to the father that the communication annexed to the parties’ affidavits shows that both his and the mother’s communication is very conflicted, disrespectful and hostile and that he and the mother “just do not get on at all”. the father agrees that that is a fair summary of their communication and their co-parenting relationship generally.
53 the father agrees that the mother’s relationship with his family is poor and that if she were in city b she would not be able to call upon them for help. it is the father’s evidence that the mother has always been spiteful towards his family. by way of example he gave evidence that when the paternal grandmother tried to help the mother with financial advice, as the paternal grandmother works in accounting, the mother would not listen to her.
54 the father agrees that the mother has asked on multiple occasions that the paternal grandmother not be present at changeover because of the tensions between them. he explained that he always has someone with him at changeover, either his now partner, the paternal grandmother or someone else to ensure that he is “protected against the lies that the mother tells about him” and because he was advised by the police to always have someone with him.
55 it is the mother’s evidence that her and the father’s relationship consisted of a vicious cycle of family violence predominantly based on his controlling behaviour, extreme anger, a temper that would escalate quickly, his swearing, abuse and his propensity to throw objects including television remotes and mobile phones, flip over chairs and throw dishes into the sink when upset.
56 the father denies he behaved in the matter described by the mother. he agreed however that he and the mother argued, particularly in the periods leading up to separation.
57 played into evidence was a recording the mother had made of the father screaming and yelling at her in a very angry, loud voice and threatening suicide shortly prior to the parties’ final separation. whilst the father agrees that his behaviour on this occasion was family violence, he observed that because the mother knew she was recording the interaction she was able to deliberately ensure that she remained calm and set him up to react as he did.
58 both parties depose that x has started to exhibit concerning behaviours. these include him becoming angry and aggressive and making comments about things he says he observed or was told whilst in the other parent’s home. in relation to comments that the mother reports x to have made in her home and behaviour x has exhibited including: “my daddy scream at me mummy”, “when asked about my day daddy says say nothing”, “my daddy yell at me very loudly to brush my teeth”, “my nanny says granny is not my family”, and that when x grabbed the maternal grandmother’s throat he explained it by saying “daddy very very mad at ms h – do this”,
the father was adamant that the comments do not reflect any comments or behaviours to which x was exposed in his house. he stated the mother exaggerates and twists things to achieve her own end and inferred that she had inaccurately reported what x had said to her.
59 whilst the father refused to consent to x attending a counsellor when the mother first raised x’s concerning behaviours with him in early 2021, the father now agrees that x is in need of counselling as he is clearly a very distressed and unhappy little boy who is also showing some concerning behaviours when with the father.
60 at the time of the final hearing the father had not spoken to x’s counsellor although he has attempted to do so.
61 the father is highly critical of the mother for not facilitating make-up time between himself and x if x’s time with him has not been able to take place in accordance with the orders. he is very critical when the mother does not accede to his requests for additional time with x outside of that which is allowed under the orders. he is also critical of the mother in that when she was living and working in city b, she placed x in childcare rather than with the father whilst she was working if the father happened to have a day off work. however the father also criticises the mother in that she looked after x when she left work and did not send him to childcare.
62 the father is a v man. it is the father’s evidence that it is very important that x remains connected with his paternal family so that he is involved with his aboriginal culture and traditions which he learns from the father and his extended family. it is the father’s evidence that his family is connected to the w play group and annexes to his trial affidavit a letter from ms z, the playgroup and early years facilitator of the aa aboriginal co-op. in that letter, ms z indicates it is the paternal grandmother rather than the father who brings x to the play group.
63 it is apparent from the father’s evidence that he does not like the mother and believes her to be controlling, manipulative and actively undermining his and his family’s relationship with x.
64 the father was questioned whether he would move to the town c area in the event that the mother and x were permitted live there. it is the father’s evidence that he could not make such a move as his secure employment is in city b and city b is where his current partner and baby daughter, his family, his partner’s family and his friends are based. additionally, the father’s partner is a student health care worker and will be resuming her studies in city b next year when she finishes maternity leave.
65 whilst conceding that the mother would not have the support of her family were she to return to live in city b with x, it is the father’s evidence that he believes she has a strong friendship group in city b who would give her all the support and assistance that she needs.
ms d
66 ms d is the paternal grandmother. she swore an affidavit in support of the father on 29 june 2021. ms d also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
67 ms d was unremittingly negative about the mother and the maternal family in both her affidavit and when giving her vive voce evidence.
68 in ms d’s affidavit she deposes that x has a large extended paternal family of grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins and friends within the city b district with whom he has an extraordinarily strong connection. she describes her family as being “close”, gathering “as often as [they] can” and as being “respectful law-abiding citizens”.[2]
69 ms d describes the maternal family in paragraph 10 of her affidavit as a “small, close-knit family [who] keep to themselves”, that there are four children, the eldest son is “estranged” and their second eldest daughter has “mental disability”. she then states that “unfortunately they have different morals and values to our family and i am aware that they have no respect for, and are willing to break the law”.
70 when asked what she meant by “different morals and values” ms d’s evidence is that the maternal family is “willing to breach the orders and steal property with no remorse or consideration for x”.
71 in her affidavit ms d deposes that when the parties separated, the mother did not have money to buy furniture and appliances and that the paternal family helped her out to ensure that she had everything she needed to care for x. she then deposes that when the mother left city b she did not return “our things” and ms d believes they were placed in storage. she states that she “did not consent to [the mother] doing so or keeping these items” and considered that by her actions the mother had “stolen from us”.[3] the dispute between ms d and the mother in relation to this matter is continuing either in vcat or in the magistrates’ court.
72 ms d finishes this section of her affidavit by stating at paragraph 13 “i hope that x grows to be a respectful law-abiding citizen. something our family will be encouraging.”
73 it is ms d’s evidence that she believes the mother does not see the importance of “our x having rights to both families equally”. she describes the mother as being “hostile” and “abusive” and that because of her behaviour in their home at changeover she and the paternal grandfather advised the parties that they would not allow changeover to continue to take place at their home.
74 it is ms d’s evidence that she has never been abusive towards the mother at changeover or otherwise and that it is the mother who has yelled at and been abusive of ms d.
75 ms d was asked whether in retrospect it had not been a sensible thing to try and serve vcat papers on the mother at changeover. ms d said that they had been trying for over 12 months to get their property back, that vcat had told them they had to serve the papers and that they had not used the mother’s solicitors as they were engaged to represent the mother in relation to parenting matters and not the vcat issue. ms d said that the mother’s reaction to her attempt to serve the documents was not warranted and that they had not expected her to “carry on like that”.
76 when asked why she and the father returned to the scene of the changeover after they left, ms d explained that they did so as they were concerned for x as he had been “hysterical” when they left. ms d conceded that she and the father returning at that time did not assist x.
77 ms d was asked whether she believed that the mother had been the victim of family violence at the hands of the father. ms d’s evidence is that both the mother and the father perpetrated family violence against each other as there are always two sides to arguments in relationships.
78 ms d is “a proud v woman/mother/grandmother and elder”.[4] it is her evidence that it is important to her to pass on to her grandchildren their culture and that she takes x to the aa aboriginal cooperative and w playgroup. ms d agrees that it is either her or a cousin who takes x to these activities and not the father. when asked if she had taken the father to similar activities when he was a child, ms d explained that when the father was born they were not living in city b and he was not involved in these activities as a child.
79 in her vive voce evidence ms d described the mother as “manipulative” and as “a liar”.
80 in her affidavit ms d deposes at paragraph 20 that x has come out with the words “fuck daddy” and has raised his hand with aggression saying “i’m not doing this with you right now ok so quit it”. she deposes “i believe these actions are a direct reflection of imitating his mother as i have seen it with her before”.
81 ms d agrees that the mother made it very clear that she is not comfortable with her attending changeover. ms d explained she continues to attend changeover despite the mother’s request she not do so because of the false allegations the mother is making against the father. she believes the mother’s objection to her attending changeover is without good reason and “she obviously has a problem with me”.
82 when asked whether she thought it would be difficult for the mother to return to city b given the level of animosity between her and the paternal family, ms d responded “we don’t have anything to do with allison.”
the mother
83 the mother relies on her trial affidavit sworn on 21 july 2021. the mother also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
84 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes that x’s best interests will be met if she and x are able to live in town c with her parents in their comfortable five-bedroom home as that will provide x with stability and security and provide her with the emotional, practical and financial support that will enable her to parent x to the best of her ability.
85 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes the parenting arrangements that have been in place for x since separation have not been in his best interests as they have been very disruptive, more than he could manage at his very young age and have exposed him to the parties’ conflict and to the inappropriate behaviour that she believes takes place in the father’s home and via the paternal family.
86 as previously set out in this judgment, it is the mother’s evidence that the parties’ relationship consisted of a vicious cycle, “predominantly based on controlling my social interaction, money, family relationships and work lives”.[5] she deposes that the father has a short temper which would escalate quickly, that he would swear at and abuse her, that he threw objects around the house in fits of rage and that she was subjected to multiple incidents of family violence on an almost daily basis.
87 the mother deposes to occasions during their relationship when the father would angrily storm out of the house and speed away in his car leaving her without her phone or keys and isolating her in the house. she further deposes to the father threatening to kill himself if she should leave him. the mother describes an incident in july 2019 when during an argument the father locked the doors of his car with x inside and drove off in a manic state. shortly thereafter he returned x to the mother and again drove off erratically. sometime later he arrived back at the parties’ home and the mother asked the father to pack some clothes and stay at his parents’ home for a while. in front of x the father yelled at the mother “you know why dads fucking kill themselves? it’s because of fucking women like you.” it was a tape of this confrontation that was tendered into evidence before the court.
88 it is the mother’s evidence that whilst she initially had a good relationship with the paternal grandparents, their relationship gradually unravelled as the paternal grandmother attempted to control her life and the father’s life.
89 it is the mother’s evidence that the paternal grandmother and the father are extremely close and the paternal grandmother exerts enormous control in relation to the father’s life including managing his finances. it is the mother’s evidence that this was a cause of great conflict between herself, the father and the paternal family.
90 post-separation, the altercations that have taken place when the paternal grandmother attends changeover have been well set out in this judgment. the mother deposes that she is “constantly fearful of her intimidating behaviour and her motives behind accompanying [the father] inside of the changeover location. her constant attempts to yell at me and defame me in public causes me a great deal of stress”.[6]
91 it is the mother’s evidence that x’s behaviour has become increasing challenging in the last 12 months. in paragraph 116 of her trial affidavit the mother gives examples of her concerns with x’s behaviour as follows: on 13 december 2020, following a weekend in the father’s care, x was very quiet and said to the mother “my daddy scream at me mummy” and when asked if there were a reason for his dad to be upset with him, he said “i put my combi van wheel in my mouth and my daddy scream in my face”. x with tears in his eyes said “daddy a bit scary mum”, on 17 december 2020, following an overnight with the father, the mother asked x how his day was. in response x’s voice became angry and he said “daddy says ‘say nothing’”, on 25 january 2021, x became very angry and agitated and started punching himself in the leg and hitting the mother. he became hysterical and was screaming at the top of his lungs and when he settled down she asked him where that screaming came from. x replied “my daddy yell at me very very loudly to brush my teeth. ms h scream at my daddy. ms h wanted her keys back to drive away. i wanted to yell at my daddy to stop” and said “i don't like it mummy”, throughout february 2021, x would yell “don't touch me! get off!” and when asked why he didn’t want any hugs from anyone he stated “ms h yell ‘get off me’ and ‘don’t touch me’ to daddy. daddy trying to give ms h a hug” and “ms h give me a big hug but not my daddy. daddy mad”, on 25 february 2021, after spending time with the paternal family, x started to talk about family members, but missed out naming the maternal grandmother. when the maternal grandmother asked x “what about your granny” x replied “my nanny says granny is not in my family”, on 28 february 2021 x grabbed the maternal grandmother by the throat, grunted at her and squeezed tightly. after talking to x about it, he said “daddy very very mad at ms h. do this” and then pantomimed grabbing himself on the throat, after the easter weekend in 2021 x was very aggressive. he was yelling, screaming and throwing toys and clothes around and punching family members. x said the father and the paternal grandfather were pushing one another and yelling at each other, and on 26 april 2021 after time with the father x spoke of how ms h’s mother was “saying naughty words to my nanny”, “nanny was screaming”, “daddy was yelling at ms h” and “my daddy put earmuffs on be because it was too loud. i was very brave mummy”.
92 it is the mother’s evidence the things x is disclosing as taking place in the father’s home are very similar to the violence, anger and controlling behaviour that she experienced when she was in a relationship with the father. for these reasons, she believes that x is being exposed to family violence when in the father’s care and that this is having a significant impact on x’s emotional wellbeing.
93 the mother believes that the family violence to which x is being exposed in the father’s care is one of the major contributors to the very concerning behaviour that is being observed by her. this is why she had been wanting to engage x with a psychologist since the beginning of the year to assist him to work through and better manage his feelings, anger and aggression.
94 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes her proposal that initially sees x spending alternate weekends with the father for one night only and then building up over time to two nights each fortnight and holiday time is in x’s best interests. this will allow x to achieve a sense of security, safety and stability, will reduce some of the current travel that he is undertaking and will enable the ongoing counselling that he is receiving to have full efficacy and allow him to heal.
95 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes her proposal will ensure that x is safe when with his father and guarantee that he will continue to maintain the close and loving relationship that he has with the father and with the extended paternal family.
96 it is the mother’s evidence that she supports x understanding and embracing his aboriginal heritage. in paragraph 121 of her trial affidavit she deposes that she has been referred to a family support worker through bb aboriginal service in town j. she deposes this service provides positive education about aboriginal culture and provides support for victims of family violence. she deposes that “our support worker has researched x’s clan and given us information to acknowledge its history”.
97 the mother agrees with the father that the parties’ communication is exceptionally poor and that they struggle to co-parent. as previously noted in this judgment, she also annexed to her trial affidavit copies of the communications between her and the father via appclose. as noted, those documents evidence very poor communication, the parties’ inability to compromise or listen to each other in relation to their views about x’s care and shows the father using demeaning and aggressive language when the mother does not agree to his request for extra or make-up time.
98 it is the mother’s evidence that the parties cannot communicate because of the level of hostility between them, their lack of trust and their mutual perception that each is trying to control the other.
99 for these reasons the mother argues that it will be impossible for them to share parental responsibility for x as they will not be able to make timely child-focused decisions for him. this is best evidenced by their inability to compromise on a three year old kindergarten for x in 2021 and by the father failing to agree in a timely manner for counselling for x even though he too was observing x’s disturbing behaviours.
ms cc
100 ms cc is a family consultant with the federal circuit and family court of australia. ms cc prepared a family report in this matter dated 28 june 2021. ms cc also gave vive voce evidence at the final hearing.
the family report
101 when discussing the parties’ competing proposals ms cc notes the father has a goal to achieve a 50/50 time arrangement, describing this as being “fair”. ms cc also reports that the father displayed an unwillingness to relocate or move closer to town c reporting that x “belongs” in city b “with his family”.
102 in relation to the mother’s proposal, ms cc confirms the mother seeks sole parental responsibility in response to the conflict between the parties and that she hopes to live permanently in town c as she struggled to remain living in city b due to her family support being in town c and due to the ongoing stress of the current dispute.
103 ms cc confirms that both parties acknowledge that x has been exposed to the parental conflict, particularly during changeover.
104 both parents also raised with ms cc their concerns that there had been a change in x’s behaviour in the recent past. the mother spoke of x returning from time with the father saying “daddy doesn’t want me to go to day-care” and that she observed x to be violent, screaming and throwing items and saying things such as “you make me sick mum”.
105 the father similarly reported x using an aggressive tone and saying things such as “i’m not talking to ms h” as well as having what he described as “a lot of separation issues” at the end of his time spent with the father.
106 the father acknowledged to ms cc that he refused to consent to x attending with a mental health professional for his behaviour but that he now agrees with the mother that it would be of benefit to x in the future.
107 when discussing the parties, ms cc described the mother in paragraph 40 as follows:-
40. ms marton (28 years old) presented as calm, and was able to articulate her concerns clearly without hesitation and appeared to be a consistent historian. she reported being anxious about the current process and at times was tearful. she displayed intense negative emotions towards mr whiteoaks and presented as being hyper-vigilant to the conflict between the parties. ms marton highlighted that although she is supportive of a relationship between x and mr whiteoaks, the acrimony between the parties impacts her ability to support x to spend more time with mr whiteoaks, due to her fear of conflict.
108 the mother reported a continued source of conflict between the parties was the level of involvement from the paternal grandparents and in particular the father’s decision to not attend changeover but rather send the paternal grandmother to pick up x. the mother reported having a poor relationship with the paternal grandmother due to her being verbally abusive towards and yelling at the mother and interfering with her parenting of x.
109 the mother explained to ms cc that she had relocated to town c due to the ongoing and continued difficulties with co-parenting, the change in x’s behaviour and the impact of covid-19. the mother described town c as her home and that living in the city b region just for the father had become unmanageable due to ongoing stress and the lack of physical and emotional support.
110 when discussing the father, ms cc describes him in the following terms:-
49. mr whiteoaks (27 years old) presented to interview with his current partner, newborn infant and the paternal grandparents, and reported being disappointed his parents were not being interviewed. mr whiteoaks was able to clearly articulate his concerns during interview and although he appeared to be a reliable historian, he struggled to remain child focused, instead tirelessly focusing on the dispute between the parties. mr whiteoaks highlighted that while he supports x to live with ms marton, x is part of a “big family”, and therefore he “needs to stay in city b”. 50. throughout interview, mr whiteoaks repeatedly externalised blame to ms marton for the current dispute, for his limited time with x and for the recent change in x’s behaviour. at times mr whiteoaks displayed traits insofar as him being “a better parent” than ms marton, and that ms marton was “jealous” of him because he has “a new family”, referring to his current partner and newborn child.
111 in relation to the father’s view of the mother ms cc sets out the following in paragraph 52:-
52. although mr whiteoaks was unable to identify clear risks for x when in the care of ms marton and reported her to be a “loving mum”, he spoke critically of ms marton throughout interview and persistently redirected the narrative to focus on her perceived deficits in parenting. perusal of the filed documents also highlights a pattern of mr whiteoaks being critical of ms marton as a parent to x, minimising her need to breastfeed him in the early stages of the dispute, minimising her ability to decide about childcare needs or medical issues, and criticising her parenting style over his.
112 ms cc sets out the father’s response to the mother’s allegations that she had been the victim of family violence at the hands of the father in paragraphs 53 and 54:-
53. mr whiteoaks denied being perpetrator of family violence, stating that it is “all lies” and appeared indignant about being perceived this way by others, offering his current partner and newborn daughter as evidence that he is “not a violent person”. nonetheless, he acknowledged that at times his behaviour was “not okay” and that he engaged in verbal conflict with ms marton. he further acknowledged that on one occasion he tried to restrain ms marton from leaving the house, by taking her keys, justifying his behaviour as having “a right to stop her taking my child”. the writer reflected with mr whiteoaks on how his behaviour functioned to control ms marton physically and emotionally, minimising her ability to remove x from the conflict, however, mr whiteoaks appeared to lack insight about how controlling behaviour is a family violence indicator. 54. mr whiteoaks reported ms marton to be a perpetrator of family violence, with her being verbally abusive at changeovers. he explained that although he applied for an interim fvio “for protection” “from her allegations”, he is not fearful of being harmed by ms marton.
113 ms cc discussed with the father the altercation that occurred at changeover when the father and the paternal grandmother attempted to serve the mother with vcat documents. she states in paragraph 55:-
55. ... the writer reflected on mr whiteoaks’ behaviour during this incident and questioned how his actions impacted his parenting and ms marton’s ability to parent in that moment, with mr whiteoaks acknowledging that by choosing to serve documents at changeover he exposed x to the parental conflict. mr whiteoaks displayed limited insight into how his behaviour during this incident, could be viewed as controlling, not prioritising their son’s needs and may be seen as a form of family violence. notably, in the past mr whiteoaks has engaged in consequential thinking and used a process server to avoid direct communication and conflict with ms marton.
114 in relation to the father’s relationship with x ms cc sets out the father’s observations in that regard at paragraph 56:-
56. mr whiteoaks talked about his relationship with x and described the “limited” time with him as “difficult”, due to x “just wanting to be with [him]”. mr whiteoaks detailed to the writer his parenting routine when spending time for x, contrasting his parenting with ms marton’s, appearing to be engage in impression management for the benefit of the family report. mr whiteoaks reported that x’s recent decline in behaviour is a result of not having extra time with mr whiteoaks, rather than a consequence of being exposed to family violence or the parental conflict by the parties.
115 when discussing the father’s aboriginal heritage with the father ms cc sets out his comments in relation to same in paragraph 58:-
58. mr whiteoaks reported having paternal aboriginal heritage and a connection to country “somewhere in the city b area”. he explained that although he has not participated in practising his cultural heritage during his childhood or adulthood, his aboriginal heritage and identity is of importance to him and he wants x to have “better understanding”.
116 ms cc’s observations of x with each of the parties are discussed in her report. she observed a very positive interaction between the mother and x, noting that he greeted the mother with an “enthusiastic embrace” and that she played with him “at his level”, allowing him to “explore the space safely”. ms cc also observed that the mother allowed x to independently play with other children.
117 ms cc observed that when the father entered the room he too was greeted “with hugs and kisses” and the father encouraged x to play “using positive language and a calm tone”.
118 when it came time for the father to leave ms cc describes what then ensued at paragraph 68 as follows:-
68. mr whiteoaks advised x that he was leaving and asked for a hug. he explained to x, “it’s ok, i will see you again soon”. mr whiteoaks referred to x’s new baby sibling, stating “it’s okay you will see her soon too”. x appeared distressed and held mr whiteoaks tight. the writer and playroom staff were required to assist with the transition of mr whiteoaks leaving the room. mr whiteoaks explained to the writer during interview that x is frequently upset at the end of time spent.
119 under the heading ‘evaluations’ ms cc observes the dispute presented to the court to be complex in nature given the duration of the dispute and the very young age of x at the time of the original filing of the father’s application. she notes that the matter involves numerous allegations by the parties including allegations of family violence, of x being exposed to parental conflict and deficits in parenting capacity with the parties labelling each other as being “conflict focused, instead of child focused”.
120 in paragraph 72 ms cc discusses the allegations of family violence that have been made in relation to the father. she states:-
72. ... should the allegations be proven, it would appear that there is a consistent pattern of mr whiteoaks using violence to control ms marton, with it being alleged that he used physical, verbal, emotional and financial abuse. notably, the pattern of violence use appears to increase at times when there is a perceived loss of control over ms marton. for example, increasing after the birth of x and ms marton’s need to be attentive to x’s needs over mr whiteoaks, increasing after separation due to ms marton choosing to be independent and parenting independently, and increasing after an attempt to reconcile failed. although perpetration of family violence was reported by both of the parties, with them presently having competing fvio’s against each other, mr whiteoaks reported his fvio was to “protect him” from allegations, rather than being fearful of actual harm.
121 when discussing the father ms cc states at paragraphs 73 to 75:-
73. when considering the interaction between mr whiteoaks’ feelings, thoughts about being a parent to x and how that impacts his behaviour in making parenting decisions, it appears that he is driven to succeed as a parent and is frustrated by having a lack of control over the parenting due to ms marton being the other parent. as such, mr whiteoaks displayed limited insight into how his own behaviour overshadows his parenting function or how his behaviour impacts ms marton’s parenting function. this was evident when exploring the incident of serving ms marton with vcat documents during changeover, with mr whiteoaks displaying limited insight about how his behaviour exposed x to the parental conflict and caused him to be distressed and fearful. 74. although mr whiteoaks presented as a caring and genuinely loving parent to x, it is clear that he feels minimised in his role as a parent impacts his narrative with x, as observed during interview with mr whiteoaks reinforcing x’s distress about not spending time with him. in addition mr whiteoaks reinforced x’s understanding that he is missing out on time with his new sister and his toys when not at mr whiteoaks home. should this narrative be maintained in the future, there is a propensity for x to form competing views about the two households and have difficulty adapting. it could be inferred that his recent decline in behaviour, is possibly a result of him already having difficulty with adapting, given the reported exposure to his parents conflict. 75. mr whiteoaks presented with a tendency to maintain cognitive distortions about his parenting of x: disqualifying the positives about the time he spends with him, because he views it as being limited, making ‘should’ statements, such as “it should be fair”. mr whiteoaks’ propensity to engage in a thinking pattern which includes cognitive distortions, appears to reinforce a belief that he cannot parent effectively or have a meaningful relationship with x, if he resides in town c with ms marton.
122 when discussing the mother ms cc makes the following observations in paragraph 76 to 78:-
76. when considering the interaction between ms marton’s feelings, thoughts about being a parent to x and how that impacts her behaviour in making parenting decisions, it appears that due to the parenting conflict commencing when x was 11 weeks old, ms marton’s ability to parent without fear of conflict or criticism from mr whiteoaks has been limited. this is evidenced by ms marton’s reportedly lived experience of being a victim of family violence, and being controlled by mr whiteoaks, at a time when she was adapting to parenting. she explained that her ability to focus on x and his basic needs, such as breast feeding successfully, was minimised by mr whiteoaks, in his attempt to spend time with x. it appears that as a consequence of having to continually defend her parenting role, while navigating the conflict with mr whiteoaks, ms marton has been over protective of x and hyper-vigilant about mr whiteoaks’ and the paternal grandparent’s involvement in his life. 77. ms marton acknowledged that her decision to move to town c without telling mr whiteoaks “was not okay” and that there is a likelihood it will impact x’s time with mr whiteoaks. it appears that ms marton’s relocation was opportunistic and driven by her desire to have reduced contact with mr whiteoaks and the city b region. 78. ms marton reported being frustrated by the involvement of the paternal grandparents in the conflict between the parties. this appears to be an issue attached to the breakdown of the relationship with mr whiteoaks, with the paternal grandparents involving themselves in the relationship conflict and supporting mr whiteoaks, even though it was behaviour experienced as family violence. as a result of not being supported by the paternal family when pregnant with x and her reported experience as a victim of family violence perpetrated by mr whiteoaks while living in their home, ms marton appears to have limited ability to support a relationship between the paternal family and x.
123 ms cc’s conclusions in relation to the impact on x of his life experienced to date and his future requirements are set out in paragraphs 79 and 80:-
79. both of the parties highlighted a change in x’s behaviour, as a consequence of being exposed to the parental conflict by the other party. detailed as being aggressive, making statements which appears to mirror the other parties’ narrative and displaying distress when going to childcare, x appears to be struggling with the current parenting conflict. an inability for the parties to agree on x attending with a mental health professional for assessment and treatment, has increased the risk of a decline in behaviour and or ongoing problems. 80. x is of a young and vulnerable age. he needs the adults around him to offer him stability and predictability and an environment free from conflict and family violence if he is to have any chance of meeting vitally important developmental milestones. it is in this context the following recommendations are made. vive voce evidence
124 ms cc was asked whether she agreed with the father’s belief that the mother had moved to town c in order to alienate x from him and minimise x’s involvement in his and his family’s life. ms cc responded:-
that was not my impression at that time. my impression was that the mother was under quite significant... in terms of what was happening for x, and to be able to support herself, her own parenting role, she made that decision to move in the interim, whether or not that’s long term.
125 ms cc had put to her the observations she made in paragraph 78 of her family report where she says about the mother:-
as a result of not being supported by the paternal family when pregnant with x and her reported experience as a victim of family violence perpetrated by mr whiteoaks while living in their home, ms marton appears to have limited ability to support a relationship between the paternal family and x.
126 ms cc was asked by the mother’s counsel:-
if my client is in fact a victim of family violence at the hands of the father, and if the paternal family have themselves not been supportive of her as a victim of family violence and have, indeed, perhaps aggravated that situation for her, would it be surprising that the mother would present as having that limited ability to support that relationship between the child and the paternal family?
ms cc responded:-
it would be unsurprising if, certainly, that was proven that they had perpetuated her experience of family violence.
127 it was then put to ms cc:-
it would be a very normal response for her to feel conflicted about the need to protect the child but also to encourage his relationship in a family that she had a lot of difficulty with, do you agree?
ms cc responded:
i do agree.
128 counsel for the mother noted that both parties make allegations of violence against the other and asked ms cc whether she got a sense from speaking to the father that he perceives himself to be a victim of family violence. ms cc responded:-
in speaking with mr whiteoaks and discussing the issues around family violence, i did not gain a sense that he was the victim of family violence in this matter. and that’s based on my extensive work in working with perpetrators and victims of family violence in the past.
129 ms cc was then asked what the sense she got from the mother was, whether the mother believed herself to be the victim of family violence. ms cc responded:-
yes, definitely, i have a sense that her lived experiences were potentially something that did occur... when you look at the pattern of behaviour and some of the presentations
130 ms cc was asked about the father continuing to pursue his application for an intervention order against the mother arising from the incident at changeover when he and the paternal grandmother attempted to serve the mother with the vcat documents and what impact that would have on the ability of the parties to co-operate going forward. ms cc responded:-
in terms of seeking the conflict to continue through systems of authority, so through court processes, i think that perpetuates the conflict between the parties. so it does appear that they’re very conflict focused as opposed to parent focused in those moments when they’re making further applications such as that one.
131 it was put to ms cc that she had assessed the father as somebody who was “fairly lacking in insight in regard to his behaviour and its effect on the mother”. ms cc agreed.
132 ms cc was asked whether she was of the view that the father was somebody who, when she tried to explore some of the issues with him, “externalised the blame – put the blame on [the mother] for what happened”. ms cc responded:-
this is correct. yes. and this is particularly in the context of discussing an incident that occurred at a changeover with regard to the... documents.
133 it was then put to ms cc that:-
any sensible person would – when asked about that incident, would really have to understand... that [it] really could have been very easily avoided by just not turning up and doing it.
ms cc responded:
very much so. and this was already put to mr whiteoaks during the interview and also why i discussed with him... using a process server in the past and why that didn’t occur in this instance.
134 ms cc agreed with the mother’s counsel when she said that the father had told ms cc that the mother’s allegations of family violence were all lies and that “i’m in another relationship and i have another baby. so... that proves i’m not a violent person.”
135 ms cc had it explained to her by the mother’s counsel that when she was cross-examining the father he repeated his evidence that he is now in another relationship and therefore he is not a violent person. the mother’s counsel had put to the father that given his new relationship is “still in its infancy”, perhaps that is why it is “in a good state”. the father responded that his current partner doesn’t try to “control him or manipulate him”. ms cc was asked whether this comment by the father caused her any concern. ms cc responded that she couldn’t talk to the father’s current relationship because she does not know the partner in that relationship. ms cc then said:-
however, his experience of there not being any control or concern for him, that’s his understanding of her responses rather than his understanding of her experience.
136 ms cc was then asked whether the father’s evidence of why there was no violence in his current relationship was “another example of [the father] externalising blame for his behaviour” or “a way of not taking responsibility for his behaviour by suggesting his reactions are as a result of how other people behave”. ms cc responded that the father “did present with a pattern of externalising blame”.
137 ms cc was asked that if the court finds that the mother has been a victim of family violence in the way that she describes and the father presented to the court as lacking in insight, externalising blame and persistently being critical of the mother and her behaviour, whether the father was a candidate for a men’s behaviour change program. ms cc responded:-
he certainly did present as needing to have some intervention with regard to his responses in intimate relationships or with regard to communicating in – in some of the ways that he has.
138 it was put to ms cc that if the father lives in an environment where his family do not challenge his behaviour or give him any reason to reflect on his behaviour, would that not enable him to continue to do so and not augur well for him to do things differently in the future.
it perpetuates the behaviour.
139 ms cc was asked:-
if her honour makes a finding that [the mother] is a victim of family violence and if she makes a finding that... the mother presented to her in the same way they presented to you... do you think it’s in x’s best interests that he lives with his mother in town c, where [the mother] is away from the conflict and has the support of her family to raise this child?
i think it would be important, in terms of ms marton’s parenting functioning, to have support if it is proven that she is a victim of family violence, and i think it would be important for her to live in an environment where she is not exposed to continual fear and conflict.
140 ms cc was then asked:
and living in city b exposes her to that continual fear and conflict doesn’t it?
it has been her lived experience. yes.
141 ms cc had explained to her the mother’s proposal for the time x spends with the father in the event she is able to live in town c. it was noted the mother’s proposal would be a considerable reduction in the time that x currently spends with the father and could confirm the father’s fears that he is being removed from x’s life. ms cc was asked what she thought of the mother’s proposal. ms cc responded:-
it’s a question of balance, in terms of balancing his relationship. it was clear that x has a relationship with mr whiteoaks, that is, a positive relationship with him, and they were very comfortable with each other... if we’re looking at being future-focused around the needs of x and him not being exposed to the parental conflict anymore and being supported with intervention to be able to feel protected and supported by both of the parties, then that would be one alternative that would probably support that moving forward, but, again, at the impact of less time with mr whiteoaks, and i can’t talk to more about – the long term would be.
142 ms cc was asked:-
given that x has already a good relationship with his dad, formed from having a lot of time with him over the last several years. isn’t it true that that places him in really good stead as he gets older to... withstand a more distant relationship in a sense with his dad.
given that they already have a meaningful relationship, if you wanted to put it in that category, that meaningful relationship will not be eroded over that period of time providing that ms marton continues to support it.
143 it was put to ms cc:-
as x gets older and he can have alternate weekend time and he can have half of the holidays and that can be augmented by time on special occasions and augmented by electronic communication, coupled with his growing age, all of that potentially stands him in incredibly good stead, doesn’t it, for him to maintain a good relationship with his dad and with the paternal family, despite the distance?
providing that the conflict does reduce, again, yes, that would be true.
144 ms cc was then asked:-
a lot of that depends on [the mother’s] parenting and [her] state of mind, and can i suggest to you that if she is feeling safer herself and emotionally supported herself in her parenting, then that puts her in a better place, doesn’t it, to emotionally support x to have that relationship with dad, doesn’t it?
any parent who is in a better supported and stable environment, then their parenting functioning will be improved.
145 ms cc was asked:-
the father i think genuinely harbours a concern or a belief that the mother won’t support x’s relationship with him and that much of what she is doing is motivated by her not supporting that relationship. was that the view you formed of her, that she’s a parent who is not going to or won’t or is actively trying to undermine that relationship?
i did not observe that from ms marton. she did express that she supports mr whiteoaks as a parent for x, and i didn’t – i didn’t observe or hear her say anything that was ..... mean anything different.
146 ms cc had put to her the father’s concerns about the ability of x and his little sister y to develop their sibling relationship. ms cc observed:-
there are many half-siblings that managed to form and maintain meaningful relationships when they’re not living in one house together, and that is the responsibility of the parents to, obviously, ensure that that sibling relationship is a connected and meaningful sibling relationship, and that would be the responsibility of both ms marton and mr whiteoaks for that sibling and any future other half-siblings that may be in x’s life.
147 finally, ms cc was asked about the father’s proposal for a shared care arrangement for x in the event that the mother and x are required to live in city b. it was suggested that the complex and highly conflicted relationship of the parties is contra-indicative of an equal shared parenting arrangement. ms cc responded:-
that would be correct. there is high conflict and i think their ability to maintain a 50/50 shared parenting arrangement would be quite difficult in not exposing x to any of the parental conflict. it would be very difficult for them to have those fixed boundaries.
148 ms cc had put to her as a final question:-
and whilst it’s also in the end a matter for her honour, can i suggest to you that these parents, as you observe them and what you’ve read, would have enormous difficulty, and history shows they’ve had enormous difficulty, in making joint decisions for this child?
correct. yes, that’s correct.
the law
149 in this matter the mother is seeking to be allowed to relocate permanently to town c with the parties’ three year old son x.
150 whilst relocation cases are often discussed as if they form a discreet subset of parenting cases that should somehow be determined differently to other parenting matters, the jurisprudence makes it clear that this is not so and that a relocation matter is to be determined in the same way that all parenting matters are determined, that is, by following the legislative framework prescribed under the family law act 1975(cth) (the “act”) to determine what orders are in the child’s best interest.
151 the full court in taylor v barker [2007] 37 fam flr 461 at 475, held:
when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible: see u v u (2002) 211 clr 238, 191 alr 289, 29 fam lr 74, (2002) flc 93-112, [2002] hca 36 and bolitho v cohen (2005) 33 fam lr 471, (2005) flc 93-224, [2005] famca 458.
152 the act does not address the concept of relocation. however, over time the superior courts have set out a number of principles to assist judges when they are dealing with parenting matters where relocation is in issue. in paragraph [44] of fyfe v kingsley [2020] fcca 1535, judge mcguire (as he then was) summarised those principles as follows: (a) relocation matters are to be determined generally in accordance with part vii of the act and within the context of making the necessary findings relevant to children's best interests with reference to the factors in s.60cc of the act but also within the context of s.65daa considerations of equal time or 'substantial and significant time' and ‘reasonable practicability’,   relocation matters are to be determined generally in accordance with part vii of the act and within the context of making the necessary findings relevant to children's best interests with reference to the factors in s.60cc of the act but also within the context of s.65daa considerations of equal time or 'substantial and significant time' and ‘reasonable practicability’,  the child's best interests remain the paramount but not the sole consideration, (c) neither party bears an onus to establish that the relocation or a continuation of an existing regime will best promote the interests of the child, (d) an applicant for relocation need not show 'compelling reasons' in support of the relocation but must, in my view... give or adduce probative evidence which permits the court, on balance, to find that a parenting order which involves a relocation of a child is in that child's best interest, (e) the child's best interest must be weighed and balanced with the open 'right' of a parent’s freedom of movement but such right must ultimately defer to the child's best interest, (f) the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.”  neither party bears an onus to establish that the relocation or a continuation of an existing regime will best promote the interests of the child, (d) an applicant for relocation need not show 'compelling reasons' in support of the relocation but must, in my view... give or adduce probative evidence which permits the court, on balance, to find that a parenting order which involves a relocation of a child is in that child's best interest, (e) the child's best interest must be weighed and balanced with the open 'right' of a parent’s freedom of movement but such right must ultimately defer to the child's best interest, (f) the court must consider the advantages and disadvantages of each of the parent’s proposals including the proposed relocation and may, if required, formulate proposals itself in the best interests of the child.”
best interests of the child
153 part vii of the act deals with children. section 60b of the act sets out the objects and underlying principles of part vii of the act as follows:
1. the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. 2. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). 3. for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child’s or torres strait islander child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.  children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).  to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and
154 section 60ca of the act provides that:
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
155 to determine what is in the best interests of the child, the court must consider the matters set out in section 60cc(2) and section 60cc(3) of the act. each of the matters contained in those subsections, where relevant to the matter before the court must be considered and assessed in the context of each of the parties’ proposals. the court should then make a decision as to which of the parties proposals or such other arrangements as the court determines given the court is not bound by the parties’ proposals (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, u & u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238), is in the children’s best interests.
section 60cc (2)
156 section 60cc(2) of the act sets out the primary considerations that the court must take into account when determining what is in the child’s best interests. they are as follows:
section 60cc(2)(a) – the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
157 in heath v hemming (no.2) [2011] famca 749, justice kent in paragraph [104] reviewed the authorities relating to parenting cases involving proposed relocation. in subsection (a) of paragraph 104 his honour considered section 60cc(2)(a) and summarised the case law in relation to the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents as follows: (a) s60cc(2)(a) expresses the primary consideration of the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents. similarly, s60cc(3)(b) requires the court to consider the nature of the relationship of the child with, inter alia both parents and the objects and principles expressed in s60b also contain various references to the involvement of both parents in the life of their child.  s60cc(2)(a) expresses the primary consideration of the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents. similarly, s60cc(3)(b) requires the court to consider the nature of the relationship of the child with, inter alia both parents and the objects and principles expressed in s60b also contain various references to the involvement of both parents in the life of their child.
in sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22, (2011) 44 fam lr 439 the full court recently considered what is required by the term “meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a). the full court: (i) approved the interpretation that a “meaningful relationship” is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child (citing mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 per brown j and mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 per the full court), (ii) concluded that the preferred interpretation of “benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a) is that the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents (referred to by the full court as “the prospective approach”). however, the full court noted that s60cc(3)(b) requires a court to explore existing relationships between a child and the child’s parents and other persons and thus, depending upon the factual circumstances, examination of the evidence as to the nature of the child’s relationships at the date of hearing (referred to by the full court as “the present relationship approach”) may also be relevant, for example where a significant relationship had not been established between a child and a parent at the date of trial, (iii) confirmed that the legislation aspires to promote a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship. (citing m v s [2006] famca 1408, (2007) flc 93-313 per dessau j at [38]-[39], godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102 per kay j at [33]-[36] and champness v hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 per the full court at [103]), (iv) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship, clearly, if it is determined that a meaningful relationship with both parents is in the child’s best interests the starting point will be to consider whether such a relationship is already established. if not, whilst all factors must be weighed in the balance, it may be a determinative factor in assessing a proposed relocation. if such a relationship is already established, the consideration will be whether such a relationship can be promoted in the context of the proposed relocation. in either case, factors such as the child’s age and level of maturity (s60cc(3)(g)) may assume particular importance. this may also lead a court to consider some proposal other than that of either party, for example, providing for some period of time before the relocation is permitted to occur during which a “meaningful relationship” with the non-relocating parent may be established or further established or to allow the child to reach an age where it is likely that a meaningful relationship will be maintainable.”   approved the interpretation that a “meaningful relationship” is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child (citing mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 per brown j and mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) flc 93-405 per the full court), (ii) concluded that the preferred interpretation of “benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship” in s60cc(2)(a) is that the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents (referred to by the full court as “the prospective approach”). however, the full court noted that s60cc(3)(b) requires a court to explore existing relationships between a child and the child’s parents and other persons and thus, depending upon the factual circumstances, examination of the evidence as to the nature of the child’s relationships at the date of hearing (referred to by the full court as “the present relationship approach”) may also be relevant, for example where a significant relationship had not been established between a child and a parent at the date of trial, (iii) confirmed that the legislation aspires to promote a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship. (citing m v s [2006] famca 1408, (2007) flc 93-313 per dessau j at [38]-[39], godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102 per kay j at [33]-[36] and champness v hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 per the full court at [103]), (iv) concluded that “meaningful relationship” is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a meaningful relationship,
158 x has a close and loving relationship with both his parents.
159 if the mother and x are permitted to live in town c and orders are made in terms similar to those proposed by the mother then the time that x currently spends with the father would as a matter of necessity be reduced.
160 because of the distance between town c and city b and the father’s own work and family commitments in that area it would not be practical for the father to be actively involved in all aspects of x’s life, particularly once he starts school.
161 it is the evidence of the report writer ms cc that because of the well-established and close relationship that x has already with his father, x and the father will be able to maintain a meaningful relationship if x were to live with his mother in town c and spend time with his father for alternate weekends, half holidays and special occasions as is the mother’s proposal for x’s long-term care. ms cc however put one proviso on this and that is that it would be necessary for the extreme levels of conflict between the parties to dissipate so that x is not exposed to his parents’ current conflicted and highly toxic relationship.
section 60cc(2)(b): the need to protect the child from physical and psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence
162 x is currently being exposed to psychological harm as a result of his exposure to the parties’ highly conflicted relationship. both parents report very concerning behaviour being exhibited by x this year which is very concerning for a little boy who is only three years of age.
163 the mother believes x’s concerning behaviour is caused by him being exposed to family violence in the father’s home.
164 the father explains x’s deteriorating behaviour as being caused by not spending sufficient time with him and because of things that are happening in the mother’s home.
165 these comments by the parties show they lack insight into how it is their behaviour that is the root cause of x’s distress.
166 x’s behavioural issues and emotional distress have not been helped by the delay in him being allowed by the father to access professional assistance. it is a relief that such intervention has now started for x.
167 what is apparent is that it is x’s parents who need to acknowledge and change how they interact and parent their son if x is to have any chance of growing up to be a well-adjusted, happy and emotionally healthy child.
section 60cc(3)
168 section 60cc(3) of the act sets out the additional considerations the court must consider when determining what is in x’s best interests. each of the matters under this section will be considered in turn where applicable to this matter.
section 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
169 given x’s very young age, this subsection is not relevant.
section 60cc(3)(b): the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparents or other relative of the child)
170 x is a much-loved little boy. he has a close and loving relationship with both his parents as well as with his extended paternal and maternal families.
section 60cc(3)(c): the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity: i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (iv) to spend time with the child, and (v) to communicate with the child
171 x’s parents’ inability to communicate effectively and reach agreement in relation to the decisions that need to be made for his long-term welfare is having a severe impact on his emotional and developmental needs.
172 the parties could not agree on how to transition x into three year old kindergarten or what childcare or kindergarten he should attend. as a result x was removed from the childcare centre that he had attended all his life at the beginning of 2021 and has not returned to any form of childcare since. both parties blame the other for this impasse. the reality is that they are both equally responsible for x not currently attending three year old kindergarten.
173 both parties have concerns about the very disturbing behaviours that x is displaying including him being aggressive, angry, distressed and violent. when the mother quite appropriately proposed that x be referred for professional assistance, the father refused to agree to this intervention for many months, delaying the assistance that x so desperately needed and ensuring that the disturbing behaviours continued. no proper explanation has been proffered for the father’s initial refusal for this intervention. it can only be speculated that he did so because the mother had suggested it. most concernedly, the father was unable to recognise his son’s needs and put them ahead of his distrust of the mother.
section 60cc(3)(ca): the extent to which each of the child’s parents have fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation to maintain the child
174 the father pays child support as assessed by the child support agency. it is the mother’s evidence that this is not a large amount of money and has recently reduced to less than $100 per month.
section 60cc(3)(d): the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: ) either of the child’s parents, or (vii) any other child or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
175 if x is permitted to live with his mother in town c, the amount of time that he can reasonably and practically spend with his father must be reduced by necessity because of the distance between city b and town c.
section 60cc(3)(e): the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
176 if x lives in town c there will be practical difficulties in x being able to spend time with the father and the extended paternal family in city b. since the mother unilaterally relocated to town c in february 2021, x has been travelling from town c to city b at least once every week. it is some two and a half hours in the car between town c and city b so he has been required to do an extensive amount of travelling this year.
177 the interim spend time orders that were put in place when the mother moved to town c included x having an evening meal with the father every second monday. despite a notation to the interim orders that were made by the court in july 2021 suggesting that the parties reach a compromise in relation to that time so that x didn’t have to travel five hours to spend two and a half hours with his father, the parties were unable to make a child-focused decision which would have either seen the father forego that time or the mother agree to x spending some additional time during the block period he spends with his father each week. it required the court to vary the order at the end of the final hearing by removing this time for x to be spared that travel. this highlights the parties’ inability to make decisions that are focused on x rather than themselves.
section 60cc(3)(f): the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the child including emotional and intellectual needs
178 the court’s concerns in relation to the parties’ capacities to meet x’s emotional and psychological needs are well set out in this judgment.
179 the altercations that have taken place at changeover are also well documented in this judgment.
180 that the father and the paternal grandmother chose to serve the mother with documents at changeover was not in any way focused on x’s best interests. that they expressed surprise that the mother was distressed by this decision and that it resulted in an extremely volatile and antagonistic exchange in front of x shows a real lack of insight by them.
181 what is perhaps even more concerning is that neither the father nor the paternal grandmother acknowledge that their decision to serve the mother at changeover was not in x’s best interests. they continue to justify this decision on the basis that the mother needed to be served with legal papers. apparently that was more important than protecting their son and grandson from conflict at changeover.
182 the father continues to insist on having the paternal grandmother attend changeover despite the mother asking him not to do so as it causes her enormous distress and leads to x bring exposed to the adult conflict. he justifies her presence on the basis he needs to have a witness to protect him from the mother’s lies. again, this decision is about the father’s needs and not what would be in x’s best interests.
183 that the mother has refused to allow x to leave with the paternal grandmother on those occasions where she has attended in the father’s stead is also concerning. again this is about the mother’s ongoing dispute with the paternal grandmother and not about ensuring changeover for x is without incident or stress.
184 the father understandably wants to spend as much time as he can with his son. however, his insistence on make-up time for any perceived hour or minute that x misses with him that does not accord precisely with the orders that are in place is more about his needs than the need of x to have a level of certainty and stability in his live. much of the father’s evidence is about what he perceives to be “fair” in respect to x’s living arrangements rather than what is necessarily developmentally and emotionally appropriate for x’s age and current developmental needs.
section 60cc(3)(g): the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
185 the parties were in a highly conflicted and unhappy relationship. they were in the process of breaking up when the mother discovered she was pregnant with x and they therefore continued their relationship. they separated within weeks of x’s birth at which time the mother returned with x to her family in town c. some months later the parties attempted to reconcile but that attempt was not successful and they separated on a final basis within months.
186 within days of the parties’ first separation the father instituted the court proceedings that have continued to this day. it is therefore fair to say that these parties have been in continuous conflict for almost the entirety of their relationship, both pre- and post-separation. they have been in conflict for the entirety of x’s life. sadly, x has known nothing but conflict between the people upon whom he is most reliant.
187 the parties’ extended families have also been active participants in this conflict, particularly so the paternal grandmother. she has a very poor relationship with the mother. she has ongoing legal proceedings against the mother arising from disputes relating to financial matters. she was a witness for the father’s his recent defended intervention order application against the mother. she personally brought an application for an intervention order against the maternal grandfather, albeit she did not pursue that application.
section 60cc(3)(h): if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:  the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,
188 x is of aboriginal descent as the paternal grandmother is a v woman.
189 from the evidence it is clear that it is the paternal grandmother who is more actively involved in her culture and she has been the one responsible for ensuring that x is engaged in activities relating to his aboriginal heritage.
190 the mother supports x being engaged in his heritage and has linked in with the bb aboriginal service in town j.
section 60cc(3)(i): the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
191 these parties adore x and are doing their best to be responsible parents. unfortunately, as has been well set out in this judgment, they are currently failing to parent x appropriately because of their extraordinarily conflicted relationship and their inability to move beyond that conflict and work out how to co-parent their son in a child-focused and co-operative way.
section 60cc(3)(j): any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family.section 60cc(3)(k): if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  i) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter
192 the mother currently has an intervention order for the protection of herself and x against the father arising from the incident at the changeover when the father and the paternal grandmother attempted to serve the mother with vcat documents, the details of which are well set out in this judgment.
193 it is the father’s evidence that he consented to this intervention order without admissions on legal advice.
194 the father’s application for an intervention order for his protection against the mother arising from the same incident proceeded to a defended hearing in the magistrates’ court of victoria in august 2021. having heard evidence from both parties and the paternal grandmother on behalf of the father, the magistrate refused to accede to the father’s application.
195 as a transcript of those proceedings was not available to the court, it is unknown whether the magistrate refused to accede to the application on the basis that he preferred the evidence of the mother as to what occurred on that occasion or whether he was not satisfied that the father was fearful of the mother and needed the protection of an intervention order.
196 it is the mother’s evidence that she was subjected to a cycle of violence throughout the relationship with the father which, whilst not physical in nature, was controlling, intimidating and harassing. it is her evidence that the father controlled her social interactions, her finances, her family relationships and her work life. she deposes to the father having a very short temper which would quickly escalate resulting in him swearing at and abusing her and throwing objects around the house in fits of rage. this would become worse if the father was affected by alcohol.
197 the father denies that he was violent towards the mother during the relationship or that he was controlling of her in any way. he concedes that he and the mother argued and there were occasions when in the heat of the argument he said inappropriate things to the mother. it is his evidence however that the mother would also become angry and yell and swear at him. it is his evidence there was nothing in his behaviour that would have made the mother fearful of him.
198 when the recording of his screaming and yelling at the mother on an evening around the time of their final separation was played to him during the final hearing, the father somewhat reluctantly agreed that his behaviour on that occasion was inappropriate and that the mother would have been scared as a result of his outburst.
199 it is the mother’s evidence that the father would remove her keys and phone to prevent her from leaving the house. the father agrees that on one occasion he did remove the mother’s phone and keys but did so to prevent her from leaving late at night with x as “she had a habit of doing so”. when the father was asked why the mother would need to leave the home late in the evening with x, and perhaps this is because she was attempting to escape from his anger and controlling behaviours, the father denied this was the reason but rather it was because the mother “never had an issue with driving with x late at night”.
200 it is the mother’s evidence there was an occasion during the relationship when the father had consumed a great deal of alcohol and behaved so aggressively and erratically that she called his parents late at night to come around for assistance. the father responded to this evidence by alleging that when his parents came around they had to take x off the mother because she was yelling. when asked why the mother had felt the need to call his parents so late at night if he wasn’t behaving inappropriately, the father did not answer.
201 the father alleges that the mother was the perpetrator of family violence both during the relationship and post-separation because of her controlling behaviour and her verbal abuse of him.
202 in her family report, ms cc states in paragraph 54 that the father told her that the mother was a perpetrator of family violence. the father explained that although he applied for an interim intervention order he did so for protection from the mother’s false allegations against him and not because he was fearful of being harmed by the mother.
203 when giving her vive voce evidence, ms cc expressed the view that she did not gain a sense that the father was the victim of family violence. she expressed the view that she had “a sense that [the mother’s] lived experiences were potentially something that did occur when you look at the pattern of behaviour and presentations” in response to a question of whether the mother presented as someone who had been a victim of family violence.
204 it is the mother’s evidence that she has continued to be exposed to controlling and coercive behaviour by the father post-separation. it is her evidence that his ongoing use of court processes, both in this court and through the state courts are a form of control by the father. this is particularly because the father threatens, both verbally and through the parties’ communication app, that he will use the court system to take x from her and get the orders that he seeks be made for his care.
205 i am satisfied that the mother was subjected to family violence during the course of the parties’ relationship. she was subjected to verbal intimidation, anger and threats of suicide in the event that she were to leave him. the mother was unable to remove herself and x to safety when the father was behaving inappropriately as he would take her car keys and phone. i am satisfied that the mother was fearful of the father when he was in a rage and that she felt intimidated and controlled by his behaviour.
206 i am also satisfied that post-separation the parties’ ongoing acrimonious and highly conflicted relationship has left the mother feeling controlled and manipulated by the father. his use of court proceedings both in this court and the state’s magistrates’ court has been continuous since separation and has added to her ongoing feelings of being controlled by him.
207 i also accept that the mother yelled at and argued with the father during their relationship and that there has continued to be ongoing altercations between the parties since separation. on the father’s own evidence he is not fearful of the mother. however he believes he is controlled and manipulated by the mother as she won’t agree to what it is that he wants to have happen in relation to x’s care arrangements.
section 60cc(3)(l): whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
208 that these parties have been embroiled in continuous litigation since their first separation has only exacerbated and ensured the continuation of their highly conflicted, toxic relationship. that x is being badly impacted by his exposure to his parents’ ongoing conflict is being observed by both parents as well as their extended families.
209 in her family report ms cc quite properly notes x to be of a young and vulnerable age and that he needs the adults around him to offer stability and predictability and an environment free of conflict and family violence if he is to have any chance of meeting vitally important developmental milestones.
210 it is therefore vitally important that any orders this court makes see an end to litigation between the parties, not only in this court but, it might it be suggested, in the state system.
section 60cc(3)(m): any other factor or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
211 an ongoing cause of tension and conflict in these parties’ relationship has been the involvement of the extended families and in particular the involvement of the paternal grandmother.
212 as noted in this judgment, the tenor of the paternal grandmother’s evidence in relation to the mother was unremittingly negative and critical and she struggled to find anything positive to say about the mother, her parenting or her family.
213 the paternal grandmother’s insistence on attending changeover in the face of the mother’s specific request that she not do so, her attendance at changeover to serve documents in relation to the ongoing issue of the vcat application relating to bond monies and furniture, her attendance at the state magistrates’ court to give evidence in support of her son’s intervention order application that was ultimately dismissed and her belief that her family is morally superior to that of the mother adds another level of conflict and tension to this matter that does not assist these parties to develop a co-parenting relationship. it is certainly not assisting x.
presumption of equal shared responsibility and the consideration of equal or substantial and significant time
214 section 61da of the act provides that the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. this presumption is rebutted if there are reasonable grounds to believe that either of the child’s parents have engaged in abuse of the child or family violence or where there is evidence that it would not be in the child’s best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for that child.
215 as set out in paragraphs 205 and 206 of this judgment i am satisfied that the mother was a victim of family violence during the course of the relationship and since separation.
216 the mother is seeking an order for sole parental responsibility for x on the basis that the presumption under s.61da of the act is rebutted as a result of the family violence to which she was exposed. she also argues such an order is in x’s best interests because of the parties’ complete inability to communicate and reach agreement as to the important decisions that need to be made for x.
217 the father seeks orders for equal shared parental responsibility. it is submitted on his behalf that if there was family violence during the relationship it was mutual and that “she is six feet tall and can stand up for herself”.
218 the father argues that the mother has been opportunistic and has orchestrated and lied in her evidence about the violence that she says was perpetrated against her. it was submitted on behalf of the father that the audio which the court heard was set up by the mother and the court did not have evidence of what had occurred in the lead up to that interaction or what the mother had done to orchestrate the response that she recorded.
219 it is submitted on behalf of the father that the mother’s application for sole parental responsibility is a further example of the mother seeking to exclude the father from his life.
220 the farther argues an order for sole parental responsibility is not in x’s best interests because he needs both his parents making his important major life decisions.
221 in her family report and when giving her vive voce evidence, ms cc observed the father to externalise blame to the mother for the current dispute, for his perceived limited time with x, for x’s recent concerning behaviours and that if he yelled or became angry with the mother it was because of her controlling and manipulative behaviour for which he was not responsible.
222 ms cc observed the father to have limited insight into how his behaviours impact others, how they could be seen as controlling and how these behaviours did not prioritise his son’s needs.
223 the closing submissions made on behalf of the father summarised in paragraphs 216 and 217 are a perfect reflection of the behaviours described by ms cc, that is, the father externalised blame for his own behaviours and exhibited limited insight into how his behaviour impacts on others.
224 in circumstances where the court has found that the mother was a victim of family violence and where x’s wellbeing has been negatively impacted by the inability of his parents to be able to agree on important matters relating to his wellbeing, sadly exhibited by his not being enrolled in three year old kindergarten this year and the unnecessary delay in him accessing much-needed counselling and therapy, it is apparent that this is a matter in which the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted.
225 therefore an order will be made that the mother, as x’s primary carer, is to have sole parental responsibility for him.
226 this does not mean that the father is excluded from having input into the major decisions that need to be made for x. there will be orders made that the mother is to consult the father in relation to the decisions that need to be made. she will advise the father in writing of the decision that needs to be made, put forward her proposals and seek the father’s response for her consideration. if the parties are unable to agree then the mother will make the final decision.
227 where the parents have equal joint parental responsibility for a child, section 65daa of the act requires the court to consider the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each parent.
228 the full court in the matter of goode & goode [2006] famca 1346 held that even where there is no order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court can and should still consider whether an order for equal time or significant and substantial time is in the child’s best interests.
229 in this matter, in the event that relocation is allowed such that the mother and x live in town c, it is not practical that orders be made for equal time or significant and substantial time because of the geographical distance between town c and city b.
230 in the event that relocation is not allowed, it is the very clear evidence of ms cc that the parties’ highly conflicted relationship is a strong contra-indicator that an equal time arrangement would be in x’s best interests. she strongly recommends that there be orders made for x to live primarily with the mother and spend substantial time with the father.
231 it is also ms cc’s evidence that if relocation is allowed, the proposal of the mother in this matter that x’s time with his father be initially reduced and built up over the next 12 months to enable him to settle, have a safe and secure environment and benefit from the ongoing counselling that he is currently receiving would be an appropriate arrangement for x.
conclusion
232 relocation cases can be amongst the most difficult matters to determine. they can result in a decision which sees a child living a considerable distance from one of their parents and therefore limiting the amount of time that child can spend with their non-resident parent and the level of involvement that the non-resident parent can have in their child’s day to day activities. a refusal to allow a parent to relocate can result in that parent being unhappy, distressed and living where they feel exposed to ongoing conflict and abuse and away from their family and support base.
233 at the centre of this case is the parties’ much-loved three year old son x.
234 these parties were fairly young when they commenced a relationship. it is clear from their evidence that they weren’t particularly compatible and they were in the process of breaking up when x was conceived. they made the decision to try and make their relationship work given they had created a child together. sadly their attempts to continue their relationship were not successful and they separated for the first time very shortly after x was born, on the mother’s evidence because of ongoing incidences of emotional and verbal abuse perpetrated by the father. upon separation the mother returned to her family home in town c as she was seeking the support and security of her family at this time.
235 the father’s response to the parties’ separation was to immediately institute legal proceedings in an endeavour to force the mother to return to city b because of his fear that in returning to her family in town c, the mother was attempting to remove x from his life.
236 in october 2018, some eight months after the parties’ first separation, the mother and x moved back from town c to city b as the parties attempted to reconcile. the parties’ attempt at reconciliation was short-lived and they separated on a final basis in july 2019 when x was less than two years of age.
237 the living arrangements for x that then ensued are well set out in this judgment. it is fair to say that he commenced spending significant and substantial time with his father from a very young age including multiple overnights each fortnight.
238 the parties’ unhappy, highly conflicted and unsatisfactory relationship continued post-separation and they were and are unable to communicate with each other in any co-operative or child focused way.
239 the mother’s evidence in relation to the family violence to which she was exposed during the relationship and the court’s findings that it accepts the mother’s evidence in relation to that violence is set out in this judgment.
240 the evidence in relation to the difficulties that the mother has in her relationship with the extended paternal family, and the paternal grandmother in particular, are also well documented in this judgment.
241 in february 2021 the mother unilaterally moved back to her family home in town c with x. on her evidence she did so for her safety, security and the practical and financial support she received from her family. the mother did not initially tell the father that she had returned to town c. she ensured she complied with the orders for x to spend time with the father by travelling to city b three times a fortnight to ensure that time occurred.
242 the father was formally advised that the mother had moved to live in town c with x during the interviews for the family report in may 2021. he immediately issued proceedings seeking an urgent recovery order in the event the mother did not return to city b. when that application came before the court, the mother was not required to return to city b but the existing time spend arrangements were kept in place.
243 both parties give evidence of a deterioration in x’s behaviour this year with him being argumentative, violent and unsettled.
244 in the mother’s trial affidavit she deposes to very concerning comments being made by x after spending time with his father. these include x being exposed to alleged arguments and physical altercations between the father and his now partner ms h, of the father being scary, of the father yelling at him and of the paternal grandmother making derogatory comments about the maternal family.
245 the father gives evidence of x also behaving aggressively in his presence and of saying things like “fuck daddy”.
246 the mother attributes x’s concerning behaviours to his exposure to family violence in the father’s home. the father attributes x’s behaviours to him being distressed by not spending sufficient time with him and to negative comments to which x is exposed in the mother’s home.
247 both parties give evidence of the conflict to which x is exposed at changeover, each alleging it is the other who has behaved inappropriately, screaming and yelling at the other in front of x, causing him understandable and considerable distress.
248 the father is seeking orders for the mother and x to return to city b and that they be restrained from living anywhere except within 50km of the city of greater city b.
249 the father seeks orders for a graduated increase in the time x spends with him culminating in a shared care arrangement.
250 the father expresses the very strong belief that x should have the equal involvement of both his mother, his father and the extended paternal family and that such an outcome is only “fair”.
251 it is the father’s evidence that he believes that the mother’s is motivated to relocate to town c because she wants to exclude him from x’s life and that if she is permitted to relocate, his relationship with x will be effectively reduced to nothing.
252 the father has re-partnered and he and ms h have a baby daughter y who is six months old. it is the father’s evidence that a relocation to town c would also have a very negative impact on x’s relationship with y as it would be impossible for that relationship to properly develop if they were to live so far apart and x spend the limited time with the paternal family that is being proposed by the mother.
253 it is the father’s evidence that if the mother is permitted to relocate to town c, he and ms h are not in a position to move closer to town c. the father is currently an apprentice carpenter whose employer is based in city b, ms h is a student health care worker who is due to return to her studies in city b in 2022 when she completes her maternity leave. both their extended families and their friends live in the city b area.
254 it is the mother’s evidence that she wishes to relocate to town c in order to have the support, financial security and stability that can be provided by her family in town c.
255 it is the mother’s evidence that if she were to remain in city b she would continue to be subjected to the control, intimidation and manipulation of the father and the extended paternal family.
256 it is the mother’s further evidence she believes that x is being adversely impacted by the family violence she believes he is being exposed to in the father’s home. it is her evidence that the comments that x is making in relation to what is happening in the father’s home is exactly the same kind of family violence to which she was exposed when she lived with the father.
257 it is the mother’s evidence that she believes that it is in x’s best interests that he be permitted to relocate with her to town c where he will have the safety, security and stability of life with her. they will be able to live in her parents’ five bedroom home where they have their own bedrooms. x will be able to continue to engage with his therapist so that he can address the issues that are impacting on his current disturbed behaviours. he can be enrolled in childcare/kindergarten and enjoy extra-curricular activities and return to being a happy and joyous little boy.
258 the mother is a qualified health care worker. she has obtained casual employment as a health care worker with employer j. it is her evidence that if her application to relocate to town c is successful she will be able to commit to settled work hours which will allow her to be available to care for x and at the same time become financially secure. her plan is to save and purchase a home for herself and x in the long term.
259 the mother is adamant that her wish to move to town c is not to remove the father from x’s life. it is the mother’s evidence that she knows x loves his dad, who has a very important role to play in x’s life. it is her evidence she believes her proposed arrangements for x’s time with his father will ensure that x maintains his loving and meaningful relationship with his father but at the same time give him the safety and security of a set base with her and, more importantly, remove him from his constant exposure to the conflict between his parents which is all he has known all his life.
260 in her family report ms cc expresses the view that x would benefit from living primarily with the mother and spending significant time with the father. she sets out two options for x’s living arrangements dependent upon where it is the court determines it is in x’s best interests to reside.
261 when giving her vive voce evidence, ms cc opined that if the court makes a finding that the mother is a victim of family violence and that the father is someone who lacks insight and externalises blame in relation to the impact of his behaviour on others then it would be important for the mother’s parenting functioning that she live in an environment where she is not exposed to continual fear and conflict. ms cc stated that living in city b would expose the mother to that continued fear and conflict.
262 that the mother is a victim of family violence at the hands of the father is a finding that the court has made. that the father externalises the blame for his behaviours, for x’s behaviour and for people’s responses to him is also a finding that has been made in this judgment. that the father lacks insight in relation to how his behaviours impact others, how those behaviours are in fact family violence and how, most importantly, his behaviours impact x is also a finding that has been made in this judgment.
263 perhaps the best example of the father’s capacity to externalise blame and the lack of insight he has to those behaviours is the incident that occurred when he attended changeover with the paternal grandmother knowing she was intending to serve vcat documents on the mother in front of x. he knew the mother had asked him on multiple occasions to not have the paternal grandmother at changeover as she found that confronting and often caused conflict at changeover which was very distressing for x.
264 on the mother’s evidence the father and the paternal grandmother were yelling and screaming abuse at her when she initially refused to accept the documents. on the father’s evidence the mother started yelling when they tried to give her the documents. on either party’s evidence x was witness to the three most important adults in his life yelling and screaming at each other. understandably, he got very upset. rather than going straight home the father and the paternal grandmother then returned to the changeover location where the mother was trying to soothe x. they did so allegedly because they were concerned about how upset x was. the father concedes his and the paternal grandmother’s return did not help x settle.
265 neither the father nor the paternal grandmother concede their decision to serve the mother with court documents at changeover in front of x was inappropriate and not in x’s best interests. they both blame the mother for over-reacting.
266 when discussing this incident in her family report, ms cc makes the following observations:-
mr whiteoaks displayed limited insight into how his behaviour during this incident, could be viewed as controlling, not prioritising their son’s needs and may be seen as a form of family violence.
267 in her family report ms cc notes the allegations of family violence and makes the statement that should the allegations be proven, there appears to be a consistent pattern of the father using violence to control the mother which increases at times when there is a perceived loss of control over the mother.
268 ms cc states that when considering the interaction between the father’s feelings, his thoughts of being a parent to x and how that impacts his behaviour in making parenting decisions, it appears the father is driven to succeed as a parent and is frustrated at having a lack of control over parenting due to the mother being the other parent. she states that as such the father displays limited insight into how his own behaviour overshadows his parenting function or how his behaviour impacts the mother’s parenting function.
269 ms cc notes that whilst the father presents as a caring and genuinely loving parent, it is clear that he feels minimised in his role as a parent and that this impacts his narrative with x. she notes that during observations of the father with x, the father reinforced x’s distress about not spending time with him and reinforced x’s understanding that he is somehow missing out on time with his new sister and new toys because he is not at the father’s home.
270 ms cc says that should the father’s narrative in this form be maintained in the future, there will be a propensity for x to form competing views about his two households and have difficulty adapting. she notes it can be inferred that x’s recent decline in behaviour is possibly the result of him already having this difficulty given his exposure to his parents’ conflict. ms cc concludes both parties highlighted a change in x’s behaviour as a result of being exposed to the parental conflict by the other party. she states that x appears to be struggling with the current parenting conflict. she concluded that:-
x is of a young and vulnerable age. he needs the adults around him to offer him stability and predictability and an environment free from conflict and family violence if he is to have any chance of meeting vitally important developmental milestones.
271 it was in this context that ms cc recommended that x live primarily in the mother’s care.
272 it is a constant theme in the father’s evidence that the importance of his role in x’s life is directly related to the amount of time that x spends with him and that if x were to spend less than equal time with the father, then he would not be as equally important to x as the mother.
273 the evidence before the court does not support this belief of the father. the father is a vital and important figure in x’s life and he will remain so as long as x spends regular and consistent time with him.
274 it is very clear from the evidence before the court that the mother was and is a victim of family violence. it is not in her best interests to remain in city b where the ongoing conflict and interactions with the paternal family must and will continue with a level of frequency that will not see a diminution in that conflict. more relevantly, if the mother and x were to remain in city b, x’s level of exposure to this conflict will not be reduced.
275 for these reasons x’s best interests are met if he and the mother are permitted to reside in town c and orders be made for him to spend regular time with his father.
276 whilst the mother’s proposal is that initially x spend alternate weekends from saturday to sunday with his father, i am not of the view that the time he spends with the father each alternate weekend needs to be reduced to one night only. it is not in x’s best interests he travel two and a half hours on each of the days he spends with his father. he should be able to have an entire day with the father where he wakes up and goes to bed in the father’s home. x has been spending alternate weekends with his father from friday to sunday for a very long time now and it is something with which he is very familiar. i am satisfied that that arrangement should continue.
277 i am of the view that extended holiday time should not start immediately and x should be allowed to settle fully into life in town c including being enrolled in kindergarten and participating in structured extra-curricular activities.
278 i am of the view that holiday time should start in the term 2, 2022 holidays and build up over time in a structured and graduated manner so that x is spending half the school holidays as well as alternate weekends with his father by 2023.
279 it will be important that x is afforded the opportunity to fully explore his aboriginal heritage in city b with the paternal family. it is on his paternal side that he has aboriginal heritage and city b is his country. it will be important that he spends time during the national aborigines and islanders day observance committee (“naidoc”) week with the father and paternal family.
280 x should also be afforded the opportunity to share special occasions with both his parents including christmas, father’s day, easter and where possible birthdays, both his own, his sister’s and his father’s if that is practicable.
281 in relation to changeover it is probable that someone other than the father will need to collect x on a friday if the father is unable to leave work at an hour early enough to collect x from the mother’s home. that person should not be the paternal grandmother.
282 it makes sense that changeover be at a mid-point between the parties’ home but the necessity for punctuality rises its head. for this reason for the first 12 months the father (or his agent) is to collect x from town c at the commencement of time and the mother (or her agent) is to collect x from the father in city b at the conclusion of time. after 12 months changeover is to be at an agreed midpoint. if the parties cannot agree on that midpoint then changeovers should continue as per the changeover arrangements for the next 12 months.
283 as was previously set out in paragraph 225 of this judgment, orders will be made for the mother to have sole parental responsibility for x with the requirement that she consult with the father in relation to any decisions before they are made.
284 i am conscious that the father will be very distressed by this decision and feel that he is being sidelined in the life of his son. nothing could be further from the truth. the father is and will always remain as equally important as the mother in x’s life and he should not measure that importance in terms of the hours or days he spends with x but rather by the loving relationship he shares with him.
285 what x most needs from both his parents is for them to acknowledge that it is their own behaviours and not the behaviour of the other parent that is so adversely affecting x. neither of them are currently shielding x from their conflicted and toxic relationship. if x is to develop into a happy, functioning, delightful young boy meeting all of his milestones then his parents’ conflict must stop. it is incumbent on the parties as x’s parents to recognise their own responsibility to address their behaviours so that x is allowed to love them both, can spend time in each of his parents’ homes without being made to feel that there is something wrong with the other parent and that he has their wholehearted support in the love he has for each of them.
associate: dated: 30 november 2021
[1] paragraph 10, mother’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2021.[2] paragraph 9, ms d’ affidavit sworn 29 june 2021[3] paragraph 12, ms d’ affidavit sworn 29 june 2021[4] paragraph 7, ms d’ affidavit sworn 29 june 2021.[5] paragraph 10, mother’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2021.[6] paragraph 48, mother’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2021