last updated: 21 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wagstaff & wagstaff [2021] fedcfamc2f 507
orders
the court orders that:  x born in 2011 (‘x’), and (b) y born in 2014 (‘y’) (‘the children’).   y born in 2014 (‘y’) (‘the children’).   each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), (b) in the following week, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), (c) half of each of the school term holidays as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holidays unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (d) half of the long summer school holidays as agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the first saturday of january each year unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (e) in the event that the father’s birthday does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 10:00am until 4:00pm on a non-school day and from 3:30pm to 7:30pm on a school day, (f) in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   in the following week, from the conclusion of school on thursday (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day), (c) half of each of the school term holidays as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holidays unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (d) half of the long summer school holidays as agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the first saturday of january each year unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (e) in the event that the father’s birthday does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 10:00am until 4:00pm on a non-school day and from 3:30pm to 7:30pm on a school day, (f) in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   half of each of the school term holidays as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the middle saturday of the term holidays unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (d) half of the long summer school holidays as agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the first saturday of january each year unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (e) in the event that the father’s birthday does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 10:00am until 4:00pm on a non-school day and from 3:30pm to 7:30pm on a school day, (f) in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   half of the long summer school holidays as agreed between the parties in writing, and failing agreement, the father to have the second half in odd years and the first half in even years with changeover to occur at 5:00pm on the first saturday of january each year unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (e) in the event that the father’s birthday does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 10:00am until 4:00pm on a non-school day and from 3:30pm to 7:30pm on a school day, (f) in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   in the event that the father’s birthday does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 10:00am until 4:00pm on a non-school day and from 3:30pm to 7:30pm on a school day, (f) in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   in the event that father’s day does not fall on a day that the father would normally spend time with the children, the children spend time with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, with the mother to have make up time the following weekend, (g) in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   in the event that the children’s birthdays do not fall on days that the father would normally spend time with the children, for a period of not less than four hours on each of the children’s birthdays, at times to be agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement from 3:30pm until 7:30pm if it falls on a school day or from 10:00am to 4:00pm if it falls on a non-school day, and (h) at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   all school changeovers are to occur at the children’s school, and (b) for all non-school changeovers, the father is to collect the children from the mother’s residence at the commencement of time and the mother is to collect the children from the father’s residence at the conclusion of time.   for all non-school changeovers, the father is to collect the children from the mother’s residence at the commencement of time and the mother is to collect the children from the father’s residence at the conclusion of time.   with the mother from 12:00pm on 24 december 2021 until 3:00pm on 25 december 2021 and each alternate year thereafter, (b) with the father from 3:00pm on 25 december 2021 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2021 and each alternate year thereafter, (c) with the father from 12:00pm on 24 december 2022 until 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter.   with the father from 3:00pm on 25 december 2021 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2021 and each alternate year thereafter, (c) with the father from 12:00pm on 24 december 2022 until 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter.   with the father from 12:00pm on 24 december 2022 until 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) with the mother from 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter.   with the mother from 3:00pm on 25 december 2022 until 12:00pm on 26 december 2022 and each alternate year thereafter.   with the father from 5:00pm on anzac day eve until 12:00pm on anzac day in odd numbered years, (b) with the mother from 5:00pm on anzac day eve until 12:00pm anzac day in even numbered years.   with the mother from 5:00pm on anzac day eve until 12:00pm anzac day in even numbered years.   keep the other parent informed at all times of their residential address, contact telephone number and email address and advise the other parent within 24 hours of a change to these details, (b) keep the other parent informed at all times of the names and contact details of any treating medical or other health practitioner who treats the children or either of them and these orders authorise such practitioner/s to provide the other parent with any reasonable information about the children, and (c) inform the other parent, as soon as practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children or either of them.   keep the other parent informed at all times of the names and contact details of any treating medical or other health practitioner who treats the children or either of them and these orders authorise such practitioner/s to provide the other parent with any reasonable information about the children, and (c) inform the other parent, as soon as practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children or either of them.   inform the other parent, as soon as practicable, of any medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children or either of them.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings, to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them or from permitting any other person so to do.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings, to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them or from permitting any other person so to do.   attend parent/teacher interviews separately for the children or either of them, (b) obtain copies of all school reports, school newsletters, school photographs and any other documents that parents are normally provided with, and (c) attend any school organised events, activities or functions to which parents are ordinarily invited including but not limited to concerts, carnivals, fetes, family days   obtain copies of all school reports, school newsletters, school photographs and any other documents that parents are normally provided with, and (c) attend any school organised events, activities or functions to which parents are ordinarily invited including but not limited to concerts, carnivals, fetes, family days   attend any school organised events, activities or functions to which parents are ordinarily invited including but not limited to concerts, carnivals, fetes, family days
and these orders shall act as authority for same.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mercuri:
introduction
background
... the parties’ capacity to find a way to work together in their parenting of the children which minimises the conflict between them to which the children may be exposed, will be key. to that end, the orders propose for both parties to complete a post-separation parenting program to assist with this.
... as noted by the family consultant, the key issues, in considering the children’s best interests, are to minimise the conflict between the parents and demonstrate to the children that the parties are able to make decisions for the children which are child focussed.
the husband has expressed concern that the mother may seek to relocate from the [town a] area. the wife has given evidence that she has no current intention of relocating. in those circumstances, the orders to not expressly contain a limitation on the children’s residence. the orders do, however, provide for the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, which includes decisions about which schools they attend.
mother’s proposal
father’s proposal
independent children’s lawyer’s proposal
evidence
mother’s move from town a to town d
the decision was largely financial and relationship based as i could not finance a household on my own and it was more practical for [mr f] and i to live together so we could share expenses. we were spending a significant amount of time together and our relationship was solid. we decided it was time to move in together.[4]
initially i had hoped it would be possible for [mr f] to rent with me in or around the [town a] area, however, [mr f] operates a family business which could not be relocated. the business ... premises is in [town b]. ... the client base is centred in the [region j] with homes built from [town b] right through to [suburb k] during this time. the business has a factory in [suburb l] and has a network of suppliers and financial ties to the area. it would not be possible to relocate the business.   the convenience of town c to mr f’s business, (b) town b was close to her parents and mr f’s family who could assist with the care of the children, (c) the availability in town b of schooling and a positive community for the children, and (d) the adverse impact on the mother and the children of the continued travel to their school/kindergarten in town a.   town b was close to her parents and mr f’s family who could assist with the care of the children, (c) the availability in town b of schooling and a positive community for the children, and (d) the adverse impact on the mother and the children of the continued travel to their school/kindergarten in town a.   the availability in town b of schooling and a positive community for the children, and (d) the adverse impact on the mother and the children of the continued travel to their school/kindergarten in town a.   the adverse impact on the mother and the children of the continued travel to their school/kindergarten in town a.
i wouldn’t agree with that. i had to make some tough decisions as ... a carer to these children ... i was in such financial stress at that point in time that ... i had less than $20 in my bank account on a daily basis. it’s incredibly stressful to have to worry about how you’re going to put petrol in your car and whether or not you can go down to the supermarket and buy something or when the next pay cycle is going to be and i just couldn’t see any way of sticking it out, so to speak, for the next 10 to 12 years living ... in that kind of state and i don’t see how i could have been an adequate mother to the children in that state.[7]
..that was the option available at the time. that ... made sense ... the short term and then a few months when we, you know, agreed that we wanted to make it permanent then i, you know, sought mediation on ... that point.[8]
... i did spend weekends at [ms wagstaff’s] house in [town a] and on monday morning it would take me sometimes up to and over two hours to get to my place of work because of the traffic.[9]
father’s counsel: ... the way your life is set up now with [ms wagstaff] is that your convenience ... is taking greater precedence over the boy’s convenience. what do you say about that? [mr f]: ... they’re not my words that i would use. i think it’s a great inconvenience to both [x] and [y] and had i known and i think had [ms wagstaff] known upon leaving [town a] in april 2019 had we known that it was going to take such a long time to relocate or ... get to this point in court then perhaps that would have altered our decision-making at the time.[11]
... we’re trying to muddle through a ... messy co-parenting relationship situation and ... i don’t know if i made the right decision. ... i did what i thought was best at that time. school and location, i feel, are one factor of importance to children but, i mean, i want my children to grow up in,... a stable household where ... they’re having a loving ... relationship modelling for them ... in front of them rather than a potential single mother ... financially stressed and ... worried all the time. ... i feel those are valid concerns and ... i feel those concerns are part of ... the role of a parent to ... try and weigh up all ... of these factors and it is tricky.[12]
a temporary measure until we could basically work out whether all of us worked together... in a household environment and then if that was successful, then we would, ... work out where it is that we were going to go and if we could, in fact relocate the children from the [town a] primary school ...[13]
... i had to be honest with him and say well, unfortunately, the house is in a poor condition. we’re trying to do everything we can to fix it to get it ready for sale. mum can’t afford to live here and you guys can ... move in ... with me and we will try to do everything we can to make it a pleasant transition. ... i honestly think he was partially excited ... but he was definitely concerned to leave his friends and ... i promised him that ... we would still take him to come and see his friends and that he will make new friends in the new area and that i moved schools several times when i was his age and i just explained, ... how that affected ... i mean they are lovely boys. ... i want to make it clear that ... i don’t want to hurt them ...[14]
when he picks the kids up the ... happiness in his eyes when the children run to meet him ... he loves his boys. not a shadow of a doubt and ... i think it would be very difficult to be in his position. i know he loves the kids. absolutely. ... i know he takes them on great camping holidays. i know the kids really love that. ... he takes them to [town n]. the kids love going to [town n]. that’s a really positive thing. the kids love animals ... i think that their father facilitates that. ... i don’t know who, whether it was the psychologist ... but i remember them saying and it stuck with me now for some time ... when ... a boy ... is of a certain age ... in their eyes their father can do no wrong and i try as best as i can to limit my views on the father because these kids need to have a ... relationship with their father for the rest of their life and it’s not in anybody’s interests, particularly for the children, for me to diminish their father. ... i’m sorry if i’m not using quite the right words but they have a very strong bond, the children and their father and i have no intention of breaking that bond.[15]
mother’s relationship with mr f  he and the mother have been in a relationship since october 2016 and moved in together in april 2019 when the mother moved to his home in town d, (b) he first met x and y in early 2017 and their relationship has developed since then, (c) he has supported the mother and the children in numerous ways including in trying to make the boys transition from town a to town d as easy as possible, (d) he and the mother are in a committed long term relationship, (e) the children have developed a strong connection to his family and they together with the mother’s family meet regularly at combined family events, (f) he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   he first met x and y in early 2017 and their relationship has developed since then, (c) he has supported the mother and the children in numerous ways including in trying to make the boys transition from town a to town d as easy as possible, (d) he and the mother are in a committed long term relationship, (e) the children have developed a strong connection to his family and they together with the mother’s family meet regularly at combined family events, (f) he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   he has supported the mother and the children in numerous ways including in trying to make the boys transition from town a to town d as easy as possible, (d) he and the mother are in a committed long term relationship, (e) the children have developed a strong connection to his family and they together with the mother’s family meet regularly at combined family events, (f) he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   he and the mother are in a committed long term relationship, (e) the children have developed a strong connection to his family and they together with the mother’s family meet regularly at combined family events, (f) he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   the children have developed a strong connection to his family and they together with the mother’s family meet regularly at combined family events, (f) he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   he has provided financial support to the mother and the children where he can, and (g) he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.   he understands the importance of the children having a meaningful relationship with their father.
mother’s concerns about the father’s parenting
... the wife, both in her affidavit material and during cross examination, consistently painted a picture of her husband as a man who was not contributing financially or otherwise to the family and who was not really involved in, or capable of, looking after the children.
... i am also satisfied that concerns about the state of the [suburb o] property and its suitability for the children have been adequately addressed by the father, in particular in relation to asbestos.   the father continues to harass and intimidate her in their communications, (b) the father has involved the children in the legal proceedings and sought to influence their views about the move to town d, (c) the father lied to the family consultant with a view to influence his views and recommendations.   the father has involved the children in the legal proceedings and sought to influence their views about the move to town d, (c) the father lied to the family consultant with a view to influence his views and recommendations.   the father lied to the family consultant with a view to influence his views and recommendations.   the father is and has been involved in drug cultivation, (b) the father had a history of possession of firearms, (c) the father had illegally connected the former matrimonial home to the street electricity supply, (d) the father’s home is unsafe as evidenced by: (i) an electrocution he suffered on his property, (ii) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony, (e) the father illegally transported x to school on his motorbike and failed to provide appropriate medical care to y following a burn suffered on a camping trip, (f) the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.   the father had a history of possession of firearms, (c) the father had illegally connected the former matrimonial home to the street electricity supply, (d) the father’s home is unsafe as evidenced by: (i) an electrocution he suffered on his property, (ii) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony, (e) the father illegally transported x to school on his motorbike and failed to provide appropriate medical care to y following a burn suffered on a camping trip, (f) the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.   the father had illegally connected the former matrimonial home to the street electricity supply, (d) the father’s home is unsafe as evidenced by: (i) an electrocution he suffered on his property, (ii) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony, (e) the father illegally transported x to school on his motorbike and failed to provide appropriate medical care to y following a burn suffered on a camping trip, (f) the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.   the father’s home is unsafe as evidenced by: (i) an electrocution he suffered on his property, (ii) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony, (e) the father illegally transported x to school on his motorbike and failed to provide appropriate medical care to y following a burn suffered on a camping trip, (f) the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.   an electrocution he suffered on his property, (ii) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony,  ) the continued presence of damaged asbestos at his home, (iii) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony,  i) the absence of a balustrade on his second floor balcony,   the father illegally transported x to school on his motorbike and failed to provide appropriate medical care to y following a burn suffered on a camping trip, (f) the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.   the father has introduced the children to five women since the parties separated in 2016.
allegation of father cultivating marijuana  the house had been illegally connected to the power in the street in a manner which was dangerous and a fire risk,[18] and (a) part of the heating for the house had been diverted as part of the ‘grow room’ set up resulting in inadequate heating in the former family home.[19]   part of the heating for the house had been diverted as part of the ‘grow room’ set up resulting in inadequate heating in the former family home.[19]   a ‘clandestine marijuana grow room hidden beneath the home’, (b) illegal wiring to the said grow room which were unsafe and potentially lethal, (c) diversion of the ducted heating vents from the children’s bedrooms to the ‘grow rooms’, (d) several concealed weapons in the garage, some of which were removed following a break in and before they could be handed to police, (e) nazi symbols drawn on a beer fridge and a meat freezer.[21]   illegal wiring to the said grow room which were unsafe and potentially lethal, (c) diversion of the ducted heating vents from the children’s bedrooms to the ‘grow rooms’, (d) several concealed weapons in the garage, some of which were removed following a break in and before they could be handed to police, (e) nazi symbols drawn on a beer fridge and a meat freezer.[21]   diversion of the ducted heating vents from the children’s bedrooms to the ‘grow rooms’, (d) several concealed weapons in the garage, some of which were removed following a break in and before they could be handed to police, (e) nazi symbols drawn on a beer fridge and a meat freezer.[21]   several concealed weapons in the garage, some of which were removed following a break in and before they could be handed to police, (e) nazi symbols drawn on a beer fridge and a meat freezer.[21]   nazi symbols drawn on a beer fridge and a meat freezer.[21]   the father has not lived in the former family home since separation in 2015, (b) the mother has had control of that house since separation, and (c) there were no marijuana plants or dried marijuana found at the house, and (d) importantly, she reported this issue to the police, that she took photos of the area and showed them to the police, but that the father was not charged with any offences relating to alleged cultivation of marijuana.   the mother has had control of that house since separation, and (c) there were no marijuana plants or dried marijuana found at the house, and (d) importantly, she reported this issue to the police, that she took photos of the area and showed them to the police, but that the father was not charged with any offences relating to alleged cultivation of marijuana.   there were no marijuana plants or dried marijuana found at the house, and (d) importantly, she reported this issue to the police, that she took photos of the area and showed them to the police, but that the father was not charged with any offences relating to alleged cultivation of marijuana.   importantly, she reported this issue to the police, that she took photos of the area and showed them to the police, but that the father was not charged with any offences relating to alleged cultivation of marijuana.
safety of the father’s home
electrocution incident in november 2020
father’s alleged failure to provide appropriate medical attention to y
father taking x to school on his motorbike
mother’s mental health
children’s connection to town a and their school  in the period following separation, x had difficulties settling into school, (b) y has only been at his current school for two years, and (c) for both children, their schooling has been interrupted for the last two years as a result of the covid-19 pandemic during which time, the children have spent significant time engaged in remote learning.   y has only been at his current school for two years, and (c) for both children, their schooling has been interrupted for the last two years as a result of the covid-19 pandemic during which time, the children have spent significant time engaged in remote learning.   for both children, their schooling has been interrupted for the last two years as a result of the covid-19 pandemic during which time, the children have spent significant time engaged in remote learning.
the boys have grown up in and feel a strong connection with the community and they feel safe and secure where they have grown up. they love their school, their sport, their friends and the overall community spirit. my home of 23 years, the school that the boys currently attend ... their connections and involvement in the local sporting teams ... provides the boys with a happy, stable and healthy lifestyle.
these children are social and intelligent and ... they will pick up bonds with other children and ,,, those bonds,,, if they’re permitted then ... there’s every chance those bonds might sit alongside the existing ones they have. they might eventually become ... important. we don’t know.[23]
by being a support to them. ... i’ve been their primary carer ... since they were both born and ... i can’t impress upon you enough ... how strong our ...bond is. ... i’m their mother and i ... will do whatever i need to do for these children and i’m aware that this situation is very difficult for them in particular and i’ve sought counselling for the children for years to help support them, particularly with the tricky family dynamic that we have and i don’t necessarily think that there’s anything wrong with that. it’s par for the course for a lot of children who come from family environments like ours and i haven’t been able to obtain approval for counselling from the children’s father ...[25]
impact of the mother having to return to the town a area
children’s activities
x’s conduct at school
father’s involvement in the children’s schooling
unreasonably prolonging the dispute
family report
there appears no doubt that the parties have the latent capacity to work together in the children’s best interests but based upon their seeming almost mutual contempt and total distrust of one another, it appears that the children’s future best interests will be better served if their future dealings with one another are at a distance and by some form of texting or social media and then only strictly about the children’s everyday welfare.[28]
... the writer could not elicit any clear picture of either party trying to unduly influence the children in his/her favour, but the degree of comment about the alleged disclosures made by the children to each parent makes that writer suspicious about either party’s truth about such matter and their willingness or capacity thus far to understand such a key shared parental responsibility, and then appropriately act to protect the children from their dispute.
i love the outdoors at dad’s place because i love it here, this is where i’ve grown up and it’s just so beautiful and green ... i love it when it gets misty and scary, and walking in the bush ... i don’t want to move again, i never wanted to move to [town d], but mum never asked us what we wanted.[29]
from the writer’s perspective most critical to the ... overall ultimate direction of this dispute should be the children’s strong attachment to their school, to their friends, and everything about where they live, and it is the writer’s view that in everything written or stated by the mother she does not appear to have understood the vital significance of familiarity and support of place and people to the enriched personality and social-emotional development of the two children. indeed for the children to be again compelled by the mother to a further relocation only a few years after the uncertainty of their first relocation and further way (sic) their seeming beloved school and other things could result in the children feeling betrayed and resentful of the mother.   she be permitted to remain living with the children in town d, (b) the children be enrolled in a primary school in town d, and (c) they spend time with their father: (i) on alternate weekends (ii) an additional weekend each alternate month, (iii) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.   the children be enrolled in a primary school in town d, and (c) they spend time with their father: (i) on alternate weekends (ii) an additional weekend each alternate month, (iii) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.   they spend time with their father: (i) on alternate weekends (ii) an additional weekend each alternate month, (iii) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.   on alternate weekends (ii) an additional weekend each alternate month, (iii) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.  ) an additional weekend each alternate month, (iii) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.  i) two weeks in the september school holidays, and (iv) otherwise half of all other school holidays.  ) otherwise half of all other school holidays.
i don’t agree with it. i premised what i have said in the report on the basis that they clearly adore their school and i think that that has caused them a lot of angst. ... i don’t believe it is in the children’s best interests for them to be taken from the world that they love, and to therefore have to start afresh in a new location. now they have been there ... for a certain amount of time, but they have also got the constant buffer of knowing that they’re going to their school, of all the routines, the predictability – everything that goes with good child development is vested in how well kids develop within the context of social relationships and especially the critical area of social relationships as their emotional, psychological and cognitive facilities are developing and flourishing within the school context.[33]
why should they have their current desire to fundamentally have shared care watered down from what they currently have and what they are accustomed to, and the routine and the predictability, to satisfy what the mother thinks is best for them, and therefore what they think is best for them is being less represented. and i don’t think we can underplay how important it is for children to maintain the continuity and predictability of where they have lived. i don’t see any reason why they should have to move if their best interests are taking greater precedence than the interests that in this instance i believe are being demonstrated by the mother.[34]
... the real issue as far as i’m concerned is the information i was given indicated that the children loved where they lived. even at young ages, they can love where they live. whether or not children should be relocated, often children have to relocate. there’s no choice, for different reasons. can children be adaptable? yes, there’s no doubt. ... do they need to relocate? i cannot tell you one way or the other. i’m going on the basis of what i had presented to me and the information was that they did not wish to be at [town d]. they would prefer ... to be at [town a] and to stay at [town a].[35]
submissions
independent children’s lawyer’s submissions
7.8 it is clear in this case that graham j significantly discounted the children’s wishes because he found that they had been heavily influenced by the wife’s ‘negativity’. while that was a matter proper for his honour to pay attention to, the overwhelming conclusions to be reached from the evidence of the counsellor ... are that the children for whatever reason were sad and distressed living away from their mother. 7.9 in every case concerning the best interests of children it is essential that the trial judge remain focussed entirely on the primary directive of the legislation which is ‘what is best for the child the subject matter of the litigation?’. ... if both parents offer reasonable homes for a child with comparable standards of excellent child care, then the child’s level of contentment and happiness in one household as compared with that in the other must become a most significant and almost determinative factor in deciding with which parent the child should live. the court should avoid the spectre of placing or leaving a child in a situation of sadness and continued unhappiness where it is able to do so consistently [while] otherwise meeting the ‘best interests’ criteria.   the mother has prioritised the interests of her relationship with mr f over the best interests of the children, and (b) the mother’s proposal would see the father effectively become a weekend and holiday dad.   the mother’s proposal would see the father effectively become a weekend and holiday dad.
father’s submissions
mother’s submission
there are no special tests that apply (to a relocation case). for instance the mother does not have to establish a compelling reason for wishing to relocate. nor is the enquiry one that is directed to whether or not the mother should be ‘permitted’ to relocate. the best interests of the children remain paramount though not the sole consideration. where the legitimate interests of an adult conflict with the best interests of children, the former must give way.[36]
relocation cases are notoriously difficult. both parties have valid claims of right. the legislation requires the court to require the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration but what is in the best interests of the child is not a matter about which there may be universal agreement. further, as kirby j said in ams v aif at 207-208:
... a statutory instruction to treat the welfare or best interests of the child as the paramount consideration does not oblige a court, making the decision, to ignore the legitimate interests and desires of the parents. if there is conflict between these considerations, priority must be accorded to the child’s welfare and rights. however the latter cannot be viewed in the abstract, separate from the circumstances of the parent with whom the child resides. if it were otherwise, a universal rule would be established whereby the custodial or resident parent (usually the mother) would virtually always be obliged to reside in close proximity to the other parent (usually the father so as to facilitate contact between the latter and the child. there is no such universal rule.
even if the (proposed relocation) results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.   within reason, the primary carer is entitled to choose where they live, (b) whether the child’s relationship with the non-resident parent is able to be maintained in a meaningful way, (c) whether the non-resident parent might be able to move closer to the primary carer.   whether the child’s relationship with the non-resident parent is able to be maintained in a meaningful way, (c) whether the non-resident parent might be able to move closer to the primary carer.   whether the non-resident parent might be able to move closer to the primary carer.   although her reasons for moving do not have to be compelling or convincing, her reasons for moving were indeed compelling. she was in financial distress. whilst the rent paid by mr f and the mother’s mortgage are similar in quantum, that does not address the $200,000 the mother owed her parents, which she was only able to repay after selling the town a property, (b) this is not a case of mr f simply getting what he wants at the expense of the children’s needs. rather, mr f, who came across as a genuine and generous man who has taken on the family’s financial security and who works to provide for the mother and the children, and (c) in any event, the mother’s proposal would not substantially limit the children’s time with the father, resulting in a reduction of 14 days each year.   this is not a case of mr f simply getting what he wants at the expense of the children’s needs. rather, mr f, who came across as a genuine and generous man who has taken on the family’s financial security and who works to provide for the mother and the children, and (c) in any event, the mother’s proposal would not substantially limit the children’s time with the father, resulting in a reduction of 14 days each year.   in any event, the mother’s proposal would not substantially limit the children’s time with the father, resulting in a reduction of 14 days each year.
consideration   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). (3) for the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an aboriginal child's or torres strait islander child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture includes the right: (a) to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture. (4) ...   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and developmental level and the child's views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.
best interests of the child
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child’s best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).
section 60cc(2)(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
section 60cc(2)(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
section 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
section 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
section 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:(i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and(iii) to communicate with the child
section 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
section 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
section 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
section 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
section 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
section 60cc(3)(h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,
section 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
section 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
section 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order,(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made,(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order,(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,(v) any other relevant matter
section 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
section 60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
conclusion
deputy associate: dated: 8 december 2021
dated: 8 december 2021
[1] see wagstaff & wagstaff [2018] fcca 927 (‘2018 judgment’).[2] that hearing also addressed property matters.[3] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 78.[4] mother’s affidavit affirmed on 23 august 2019 and filed on 28 august 2019 at paragraph 26.[5] mother’s affidavit affirmed on 6 august 2021 and filed on 9 august 2021 at paragraph 45.[6] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 105.[7] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 71.[8] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 72.[9] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 96.[10] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 97.[11] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 98.[12] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 72.[13] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 104.[14] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 106.[15] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 108.[16] father’s affidavit sworn and filed on 1 november 2021 at paragraph 16.[17] mother’s affidavit sworn on 6 august 2021 and filed on 9 august 2021 at annexure -2.[18] mother’s affidavit sworn on 6 august 2021 and filed on 9 august 2021 at paragraph 24.[19] affidavit of mr f sworn on 12 august 2021 at paragraph 19.[20] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 84; see also mother’s tender bundle at page 352.[21] affidavit of mr f sworn on 12 august 2021 at paragraph 19; see also court book at pages 298 and 299.[22] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 67.[23] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 68.[24] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 69.[25] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 77.[26] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 101.[27] court transcript dated 17 august 2021 at page 102.[28] family report dated 19 july 2021 at paragraph 37.[29] family report dated 19 july 2021 at paragraph 40.[30] family report dated 19 july 2021 at paragraph 42.[31] family report dated 19 july 2021 at paragraph 45.[32] family report dated 19 july 2021 at paragraph 45.[33] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 55.[34] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 55.[35] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 62.[36] no issue was taken with this statement of principal on appeal denham v newsham [2021] famcafc 141 at paragraph 21.[37] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 79.[38] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 105.[39] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 106.[40] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 106.[41] court transcript dated 23 august 2021 at page 118.