last updated: 10 march 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ladbrook & dodd [2021] fedcfamc2f 532
orders
the court orders that:
parenting orders (1) all previous orders concerning x born in 2016 (“the child”), are discharged. (2) mr dodd (“the father”) have sole parental responsibility for the child subject to order 3 hereof. (3) notwithstanding order (2), the father shall consult with ms ladbrook (“the mother”) in relation to decisions concerning the child’s long-term care, welfare and development and seek to reach agreement with him. should the father and mother fail to agree and subject to any subsequent court order, the father’s decision in relation to such issue/s will apply, and the filing of a subsequent application by the mother seeking judicial determination of the issue/s shall not prevent the father from in the first instance making a decision pursuant to this order. (4) until 25 december 2021 the child live with the father, and spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from 11am until 3pm on sunday 12 december 2021, (b) from 11am on saturday 18 december 2021 until at 3pm sunday 19 december 2021, and (c) from 6pm on friday 24 december 2021 until 2pm on saturday 25 december 2021. (5) from 26 december 2021 until 1 february 2022 the child live with the father, and spend time with the mother as follows: (a) from 11 am on sunday 2 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 4 january 2022, (b) from 11 am on sunday 16 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 18 january 2022, and (c) from 11 am on sunday 30 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 1 february 2022. (6) commencing on tuesday 1 february 2022 until 1 july 2022, the child live with the father and otherwise spend time with and live with the mother as follows: (a) in week 1, from 3.00pm friday 11 february 2022 until 3pm sunday 13 february 2022 and every alternate weekend thereafter, and (b) in week 2, between 3.00pm and 6pm on wednesdays, and every alternate week thereafter. (7) commencing on friday 1 july 2022 until february 2023, the child live with the father and otherwise spend time with and live with the mother as follows: (a) in week 1, from 3.00pm fridays until commencement of school on mondays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter, and (b) in week 2, between 3.00pm on wednesdays until commencement of school on thursdays, or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter. (8) commencing on february 2023 and fortnightly thereafter, the child live with the father and otherwise spend time with and live with the mother as follows: (a) in week 1, from 3.00pm fridays until commencement of school on tuesdays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter, and (b) in week 2, from 3.00pm on wednesday until commencement of school on thursdays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter. (9) until 28 february 2023, it is a condition of the child spending time with and living with the mother that she sleeps overnight at the maternal grandmother’s home, unless agreed otherwise by the father in writing. (10) changeover is to occur at the conclusion and start of school and at the child’s school whenever it occurs on a school day and otherwise will occur at a location to be agreed between the parties in writing. (11) the child spend time with each parent on special occasions as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement as follows: (a) mother’s day: if the child is not otherwise in the mother’s care, with the mother from 5.00pm the night before mother’s day to 3.00pm mother’s day, (b) father’s day: if the child is not otherwise in the father’s care, with the father from 5.00pm the night before father’s day to 3.00pm on father’s day, (c) in odd numbered years for christmas, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day and with the father from 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day. (d) in even numbered years for christmas, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day and with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day. (e) the child’s birthday: with the parent who does not otherwise have care of her that day from 3.00pm until 5.00pm, (f) easter: with the father from the conclusion of school on thursday until 5.00pm on easter saturday and with the mother from 5.00pm on easter saturday until 5.00pm tuesday. (12) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x born in 2016, the mother ms ladbrook is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol or any illicit drugs or substances while the child is spending time or living with the mother. (13) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x born in 2016, whilst the child is living with or in the care of the mother ms ladbrook, the mother is restrained by injunction for the personal protection of the child, from permitting the child to be in the presence of any person who is affected by alcohol such that they are over a blood alcohol concentration (bac) level of 0.05 grams of alcohol per 100ml of blood or under the influence of illicit drugs, and the mother must immediately remove the child from the presence of persons so influenced. (14) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x born in 2016, whilst the child is living with or in the care of the mother ms ladbrook, the mother is restrained by injunction from permitting the child to be in the presence of mr b during the period for which there is any family violence order in place against him for the protection of the mother, and the mother is to cause the child to be immediately removed should mr b make himself present. (15) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x born in 2016, the mother ms ladbrook is restrained by injunction from denigrating or speaking negatively about the father, his extended family or his partner within the child’s hearing, or allowing the child to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. (16) the mother is to engage in regular psychological treatment with ms h or another suitably qualified clinical psychologist and follow the psychologist’s treatments and recommendations, to facilitate such treatment the mother may provide to the treating psychologist a copy of the report of dr c. (17) the mother and father must keep the other informed of their preferred mobile and email contact information and residential address. (18) the mother and father will do all things necessary to ensure both are each named on the child’s: (a) school or extra-curricular enrolments and a direction is provided to the children’s school that both parents are primary contacts for the child and that each parent is to receive school notifications, including in the event a child is unwell, and (b) medical, health and allied health service contact and/or consent authority. (19) the mother and father are each entitled to both attend any and all school events and extra-curricular activities and sporting events involving the child, that parents normally attend including but not limited to: (a) parent teacher interviews, (b) school sporting events, and (c) non-school extra-curricular events. (20) the mother and father are to each inform the other as soon as practicable of any hospitalisation, significant injury or health problem suffered by the child and details of any treatment received or medication prescribed by the child whilst under their respective care. (21) the mother and father are to communicate with each other by using a communication app agreed by them and in default of agreement the our family wizard app, and the cost of such app is to be shared equally by the parties with: (a) the father paying the initial annual subscription, (b) the mother the next annual subscription, and (c) alternatively paying the annual subscription renewal thereafter. (22) within 6 weeks of the date of these orders, the mother and father are to enrol in the parenting separately course through d counsellors and must provide a copy of confirmation of their enrolments and evidence of completion of the course to the other party by email. (23) these orders act as an authority for the parents to request and obtain any educational or medical information, record or file relating to the child that each are lawfully entitled to obtain. each may provide a copy of the orders to the child’s school and treating medical practitioner. (24) subject to legal aid funding, the appointment of the icl is to continue for 12 months.   from 11am until 3pm on sunday 12 december 2021, (b) from 11am on saturday 18 december 2021 until at 3pm sunday 19 december 2021, and (c) from 6pm on friday 24 december 2021 until 2pm on saturday 25 december 2021.   from 11 am on sunday 2 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 4 january 2022, (b) from 11 am on sunday 16 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 18 january 2022, and (c) from 11 am on sunday 30 january 2022 until 11am on tuesday 1 february 2022.   in week 1, from 3.00pm friday 11 february 2022 until 3pm sunday 13 february 2022 and every alternate weekend thereafter, and (b) in week 2, between 3.00pm and 6pm on wednesdays, and every alternate week thereafter.  in week 1, from 3.00pm fridays until commencement of school on mondays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter, and (b) in week 2, between 3.00pm on wednesdays until commencement of school on thursdays, or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter.  in week 1, from 3.00pm fridays until commencement of school on tuesdays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter, and (b) in week 2, from 3.00pm on wednesday until commencement of school on thursdays or 9am on a non-school day, and every alternate week thereafter.  mother’s day: if the child is not otherwise in the mother’s care, with the mother from 5.00pm the night before mother’s day to 3.00pm mother’s day, (b) father’s day: if the child is not otherwise in the father’s care, with the father from 5.00pm the night before father’s day to 3.00pm on father’s day, (c) in odd numbered years for christmas, with the mother from 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day and with the father from 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day. (d) in even numbered years for christmas, with the father from 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day and with the mother from 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day. (e) the child’s birthday: with the parent who does not otherwise have care of her that day from 3.00pm until 5.00pm, (f) easter: with the father from the conclusion of school on thursday until 5.00pm on easter saturday and with the mother from 5.00pm on easter saturday until 5.00pm tuesday.  school or extra-curricular enrolments and a direction is provided to the children’s school that both parents are primary contacts for the child and that each parent is to receive school notifications, including in the event a child is unwell, and (b) medical, health and allied health service contact and/or consent authority.  parent teacher interviews, (b) school sporting events, and (c) non-school extra-curricular events.   the father paying the initial annual subscription, (b) the mother the next annual subscription, and (c) alternatively paying the annual subscription renewal thereafter.
the court declares that:  it is in the best interests of the child x born in 2016 to be known as x ladbrook-dodd.
the court orders that:  each of the mother and father henceforth exclusively use ladbrook-dodd as the surname of the said child, and not cause or permit any other person to use any names other than x ladbrook-dodd as her name. (27) the father is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages to change the name of the child previously registered as x dodd to x ladbrook-dodd, and the said registrar do register the said child’s name as x ladbrook-dodd. (28) the father do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be required to give effect to these orders. (29) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x ladbrook-dodd born in 2016, the mother mr dodd is restrained by injunction, from referring to the child by any name other than x ladbrook-dodd.
the court directs that:
the court orders that: (30) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 and for the personal protection of the child x ladbrook-dodd born in 2016, the mother ms ladbrook and father mr dodd are restrained by injunction from discussing with the child or any other person in the child’s presence or hearing the identity of her biological father until the following conditions are met: (a) the mother and the father attend family dispute resolution to reach agreement about when and by whom the child should be informed about her biological father, and (b) such family dispute resolution is not to occur before the child attains 12 years of age.  the mother and the father attend family dispute resolution to reach agreement about when and by whom the child should be informed about her biological father, and (b) such family dispute resolution is not to occur before the child attains 12 years of age.
and the court notes that:
property orders  the maternal grandmother ms e be paid the sum of $20,000 from the funds held in trust at butler mcintyre butler and such payment be in full and final satisfaction of the father’s indebtedness to her. (32) the father retain and be solely entitled to the motor vehicle 1, the motor vehicle 2 and any balance funds in his bank f account. (33) the balance funds after the payment referred to in order 30 and allowance for the $12,000 value of the assets retained by the father pursuant to order 31, be divided to achieve a 47% apportionment of the net non-superannuation assets to the mother and the balance to the father. (34) any interest accrued on the funds held in the trust account at butler mcintyre butler, be divided and paid 47% to the mother and 53% to the father. (35) that the solicitor for the father forthwith seek procedural fairness from super fund g in the following terms: (a) in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (cth), whenever a splitable payment becomes payable in respect of the father’s interest (member number: accumulation sprn ...) in the super fund g superannuation fund (“the superannuation fund”), the mother is entitled to be paid an amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law superannuation regulation 2001 (cth), using the base amount of $36,672.40 and there be a corresponding reduction in the entitlement of the person to whom the splitable payment would have been made but for these orders, (b) that having been accorded procedural fairness in relation to the making of this order, this paragraph binds the trustee of the superannuation fund, and (c) the operative time for this paragraph is four (4) business days after the date of service of an original certified copy of the orders on the trustee of the superannuation fund. (36) the father is hereby restrained from accessing or drawing down on his/her superannuation entitlements pending a superannuation split with the mother pursuant to order 34 herein. (37) each party shall do all acts and things reasonably required by the other including the signing or execution of all necessary documents to give effect to these orders within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a written request to do so.   in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (cth), whenever a splitable payment becomes payable in respect of the father’s interest (member number: accumulation sprn ...) in the super fund g superannuation fund (“the superannuation fund”), the mother is entitled to be paid an amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law superannuation regulation 2001 (cth), using the base amount of $36,672.40 and there be a corresponding reduction in the entitlement of the person to whom the splitable payment would have been made but for these orders, (b) that having been accorded procedural fairness in relation to the making of this order, this paragraph binds the trustee of the superannuation fund, and (c) the operative time for this paragraph is four (4) business days after the date of service of an original certified copy of the orders on the trustee of the superannuation fund.
reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
introduction
1 these proceedings concern x ladbrook born in 2016 (“the child”). ms ladbrook (“the mother”) commenced the proceedings in september 2018. the respondent to the proceedings is mr dodd (“the father”), who was in a relationship with the mother for several years. the parties disagree about the date their relationship commenced. it was agreed that the father is not the biological father of the child, but has been her primary carer since february 2018.
2 the mother is now 30 years old. she has a younger child, j born in 2021 (the “younger child”), who lives primarily in her care. the younger child’s father is mr b.
3 the father is now 34 years old. he is involved with the care of his disabled adult brother, and has been more involved since the passing of his mother. he shares this responsibility with his sister.
4 at the time of the hearing, which took place over the course of five days in september and october 2021, both parties were represented by counsel. an independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) had been appointed for the child and ms watson appeared as counsel for the icl.
brief outline
5 the mother sought parenting orders in her initiating application filed 6 september 2018. the father opposed the orders sought by the mother and by his response, filed 30 october 2018, sought both parenting and property orders.
6 in may 2015, the parties purchased a property at k street, town l in tasmania (“the property”) and they lived together in the home before and after the child was born until february 2018. the parties agreed that from may 2015 until at least june 2017 they were in a de facto relationship.
7 the course of these proceedings have been quite prolonged and the mother's time with the child has been relatively limited and largely supervised. as is apparent from the case outlines and evidence of each party, there is controversy about the reasons for the mother only spending limited time with the child.
8 the parties each sought orders for equal shared parental responsibility for the child. it was common ground that the father was not the biological father of the child, but had been named as the father on the child's birth certificate. post separation, the mother had changed the child’s surname on the birth certificate by making application to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages.[1]
orders sought
the mother
9 in her case outline filed 17 september 2021, the mother sought that: the parents have shared parental responsibility for the child, the child live with the father and spend time with the mother progressing to live equally with the parties until school term 4 in 2024, there be specific arrangements for special occasions.
10 she also sought extensive injunctive orders about denigration, substance consumption, exposing the child to family violence, or discussing the child’s parentage with her without agreement.
11 as to property, the mother sought a division of the proceeds of sale of the property of 55 per cent in her favour, orders for retention of personal property and savings by the parties, and an equalisation of superannuation between the parties.
the father
12 the father filed a case outline on 16 september 2021, in which he sought that: the child’s name revert to the one which was registered at the time of her birth, and the mother be restrained from changing it, the mother be restrained from discussing the child’s paternity within the hearing of the child without the father’s consent, the child live with him and spend time with the mother each alternate weekend from friday to sunday and each alternate thursday night, and there be specific arrangements for special occasions.
13 as to property, the father sought a division of the proceeds of sale of the property of 80 per cent in his favour.
the independent children’s lawyer
14 the icl contended in her case outline filed 17 september 2021 that the father should have sole parental responsibility in relation to the child and that the child should live with him. no specific contentions were made in relation to the amount of time the child should spend with the mother or the child’s surname.
the parties’ evidence - parenting
15 the mother relied upon her amended initiating application filed 28 may 2021 and a number of affidavits, being: affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021, affidavit of ms m filed 12 august 2020, affidavit of ms n filed 12 august 2020, affidavit of the mother filed 14 september 2021, and affidavit of her mother ms e (“the maternal grandmother”) filed 12 august 2020 and 17 september 2021.
16 all of these affidavits were read in evidence unopposed and each of the mother’s witnesses were subjected to cross-examination.
17 during the course of the proceedings, the parties had participated in interviews for the preparation of a family report authored by court child expert ms o[2] (“the family reporter”) and a psychiatric court expert report (“the single expert report”).[3] the mother relied on neither of these the reports, but cross-examined the authors of them. the reports were tendered in evidence by the father, who relied upon the respective opinions.
18 as part of the mother's case, her counsel tendered a letter dated 18 september 2021 from ms h, a clinical psychologist, referring to the treatment the mother had initiated for her mental health.[4] the letter represents that the mother commenced seeing ms h on 5 february 2021 and had seen her monthly since then. the mother gave evidence that she would continue to regularly see ms h.
19 the mother gave evidence that after receipt of the single expert report, she had engaged with the expert’s recommendations and also attended p counsellors for counselling and continued to do so. she stated under cross-examination that this attendance was for support relating to family violence and not for drug issues.
20 the mother was cross-examined in great detail by counsel for the father. the salient aspects of her evidence under cross examination were as follows: (a) that she had told the father during the pregnancy that he was not the biological father of the child and that mr q (“the biological father”) was the biological father, (b) that the father had insisted that he be named as the child's father on the birth certificate and that she felt pressured and controlled, so agreed, (c) that after the child’s birth, the father took some time off work for a period of two months and assisted somewhat in caring for the child, but she was the main carer, (d) that the parties separated in june 2017, but continued to reside under the one roof until february 2018, (e) that following the incidents occurring on hobart cup day in 2018, the father left the property, went to live at his mother's house and withheld the child from the mother. the mother says that the father refused to allow her to spend any time with the child. she frequently referred to the father having “kidnapped” the child, (f) that although the parties had agreed for the mother to regularly spend time with the child at the hobart children’s contact centre, this did not eventuate after april 2018 as there was a dispute between the mother and the staff at the centre, (g) that between april 2018 and february 2019, the mother had no or exceptionally limited time with the child, (h) after interim orders were made on 8 february 2019, the mother commenced spending supervised time with the child at r centre two times a week for approximately three hours, (i) that she formed a relationship with mr b in january 2019, to whom she later had her youngest child, born in 2020, (j) that she separated from mr b in july 2020 following an incident resulting in a police family violence order being made for her protection, (k) that she continued only having supervised time with the child throughout the course of these proceedings despite complying with every requirement made of her and undertaking drug testing. she said that despite this, the father had refused to permit her to have increased time overnight, and (l) that the father had unreasonably refused to comply with orders made on 30 november 2020 for her to have increased time overnight with the child, and there was no legitimate basis for the father refusing.  that she had told the father during the pregnancy that he was not the biological father of the child and that mr q (“the biological father”) was the biological father, (b) that the father had insisted that he be named as the child's father on the birth certificate and that she felt pressured and controlled, so agreed, (c) that after the child’s birth, the father took some time off work for a period of two months and assisted somewhat in caring for the child, but she was the main carer, (d) that the parties separated in june 2017, but continued to reside under the one roof until february 2018, (e) that following the incidents occurring on hobart cup day in 2018, the father left the property, went to live at his mother's house and withheld the child from the mother. the mother says that the father refused to allow her to spend any time with the child. she frequently referred to the father having “kidnapped” the child, (f) that although the parties had agreed for the mother to regularly spend time with the child at the hobart children’s contact centre, this did not eventuate after april 2018 as there was a dispute between the mother and the staff at the centre, (g) that between april 2018 and february 2019, the mother had no or exceptionally limited time with the child, (h) after interim orders were made on 8 february 2019, the mother commenced spending supervised time with the child at r centre two times a week for approximately three hours, (i) that she formed a relationship with mr b in january 2019, to whom she later had her youngest child, born in 2020, (j) that she separated from mr b in july 2020 following an incident resulting in a police family violence order being made for her protection, (k) that she continued only having supervised time with the child throughout the course of these proceedings despite complying with every requirement made of her and undertaking drug testing. she said that despite this, the father had refused to permit her to have increased time overnight, and (l) that the father had unreasonably refused to comply with orders made on 30 november 2020 for her to have increased time overnight with the child, and there was no legitimate basis for the father refusing.
21 cross examination of the mother also heavily focused on the contents of various medical records that had been considered to by dr c (“the single expert”) and were the subject of opinions he had expressed in his report dated 17 september 2020.
22 the mother denied that she continued to use cannabis and stated that she had ceased using it for the last two years, giving up when she was pregnant with the younger child.
23 the mother agreed in general terms with the much of the history set out in the single expert report, but often qualified things, exaggerated or made statements excusing or diminishing what were likely to be interpreted as egregious.[5] she said she had been “young and silly” and “made poor choices” when asked about becoming pregnant at age 14.[6] she also agreed that the child had not been planned with the biological father and that she had not used contraception, but was happy to become pregnant on both occasions.
24 she agreed that her relationship with the biological father was “fleeting” and when she was in a relationship with the father. regarding mr b, father to the younger child, she agreed that the pregnancy was not planned and that there had been difficulties early in her relationship with him. however, she denied that he had been violent towards her and said that her relationship with him now was improved, adding that mr b “had a role in [the younger child]'s life and upbringing”.
25 the mother agreed that she was a regular user of cannabis during her relationship with the father, usually before bedtime. but she disputed that she used it to the extent reported at paragraph 13 of the single expert report. particularly, she disputed that she had told the single expert that she had previously been reliant on cannabis.
26 it was put to her that she spent $100 per day on cannabis for the 10 year period, but she denied this. she stated that it may have been $100 and rarely $150 per week at the end of the relationship, but not for all of the 10 years, and that she only used when she could afford it. she denied that the father had problems with her continuing to use of cannabis throughout the pregnancy and after the child's birth.
27 referring to $100 to $250 worth of cannabis reported at paragraph 82 of the single expert report, the mother stated that “the wording was all wrong and it's all over the place”.
28 it was put to her that she had not been truthful when she told the single expert that she had ceased using cannabis 18 months prior to her interview with him. she stated she would have been truthful and that she had not touched any cannabis since she became pregnant with her younger child.
29 the mother agreed that when she went out drinking she would at times take drugs other than cannabis, usually tablets, and did not necessarily know what they were. she denied that she used amphetamines, stating that she thought they came in needles rather than tablets.
30 the mother admitted that she had tested positive for amphetamine use shortly before the father took the child into his care in february 2018, but she maintained that she could not remember what she had taken.
31 counsel for the father cross-examined the mother about alleged excess alcohol use, suggesting she regularly drank to excess. the mother denied this, stating that she would only go out once or twice per year and that it was not her “thing” to go out and drink. despite this evidence, she agreed that she had gone out and had a big day and night on the occasion of the hobart cup in 2018. she stated that she had only done this “a couple of times in her life."
32 when cross-examined about paragraph 78 of the single expert report, the mother claimed that the history recorded concerning her use of mdma and drinking alcohol was incorrect. she stated that she did binge drink three or four times a year, but did not use mdma. when it was put to her that she regularly consumed 20 drinks during weekends at the time referred to in the single expert report, the mother disputed this. however, she also said “i don't keep count, a maximum of 20, it’s not important to me. it's not my life".
33 the mother said she used cannabis during her pregnancy with the child. she stated that she used 15 cones per day early in the pregnancy and reduced to 5 cones. regarding smoking cigarettes, she agreed that she was using 15 to 20 cigarettes per week. the mother then said that she smoked 10 cigarettes per day by the time the child was born.
34 when asked about paragraph 81 of the single expert’s report, the mother stated that her mental health had markedly improved: “i've come a long way in the last three years." then referring to her poor mental health “it was all down to [the father]'s treatment and his behaviour”.
35 asked about the entry for 5 august 2019 in the perinatal mental health records of the s hospital, the mother stated that the note “recently ceased cannabis”, was a reference to her having ceased cannabis “a couple of months prior”. counsel put to her that meant may 2019, two months into the pregnancy with the younger child. the mother replied that recently ceased meant “months ago”.
36 when she was pressed about being dependent on cannabis, she denied this and said that she only attended p counsellors to “prove a point”. when asked what point, she stated she took the advice of the single expert to attend the service not because she needed assistance with drug use, but to prove a point that she was the subject of family violence. this evidence was bizarre.
37 when asked about her explanation for using cannabis before she met the father, she said that she had only “experimented” with cannabis as a teenager.
38 the mother agreed that she had infidelities with three people during her relationship with the father, adding that she had been honest with the father and had “tried to fix it”. however, she then sought to attribute blame to the father, saying she had not intended to intentionally hurt the father, but she had been “sleeping on the couch for years”. the implication being that this occurred because the father was not intimate with her.
39 she agreed that the biological father was a “deadbeat”, and notwithstanding that she had unprotected sex with him. she stated that she did not know the biological father well enough at the time and that it had taken her a while to realise. she maintained that the father of the younger child was a good father.
40 the mother denied that she had a falling out with her mother in the lead up to 2018 due to a decline in her mental health.
41 regarding her mental health, the mother agreed she had self-harmed by cutting once or twice.
42 the mother denied that she misled the father about him being the father of the child. she stated that she had told him straight away that the baby was not his.
43 as to the extent of the father’s care of the child during the relationship, she denied his evidence and said that she did all the childcare right from the start. the mother also denied that the maternal grandmother was called upon to assist her care for the child when the father returned to work.
44 the mother’s evidence under cross-examination about events surrounding the hobart cup in 2018 was as follows: the mother had had a big day and night drinking a lot of alcohol and later she also consumed drugs, the precise nature and amount of which she did not know, this culminated in her sharing a cab with a person by the name of mr t, whom she claims she did not know previously and had met that night. the explanation for the cab-sharing was that this would save the cost of additional cab fares as both were going in the same direction to return to their respective homes, mr t ultimately did not continue to his home, but insisted on entering the mother’s home, and then refused to leave the property when asked, mr t and the mother talked and consumed cannabis while at the mother’s home when the child was present, eventually mr t had to be forcibly removed by police the following day, after the maternal grandmother had failed to persuade him to leave, and at the time police attended the property, the mother was said by them to be under the influence and tested positive for amphetamines.
45 the evidence of ms n, who was out with the mother and returned to her home in a different cab, broadly corroborated the mother's account of what occurred in the period of time between when they went out clubbing and when the police were called to remove mr t.
46 ms n was cross-examined about the frequency of going out, drinking alcohol and using drugs with the mother. her evidence was that this occurred on birthdays and special occasions. i observe that this is clearly more than “a couple of times in my life” as stated by the mother.[7]
47 ms m’s evidence provided little assistance to the court in determining what parenting orders should be made. i accept her evidence that she has observed some positive aspects of the mother’s capacity to care for children and her desire to parent. but, it is apparent from cross examination that ms m’s opinion or assessment is strongly influenced by her loyalty and friendship with the mother. she seemed to dismiss the seriousness of the mother’s mental health vulnerability and the risk of harm to the child which it presents. overall, her evidence was influenced by what the mother had subjectively shared with her, rather than personal knowledge and all relevant information.
48 the maternal grandmother also gave evidence about her involvement in being asked to assist in removing mr t.
49 a feature of the mother’s case about the father wrongly retaining the child in his care was that he suffered significant mental health difficulties, putting the child at risk of harm. under cross-examination, the mother maintained allegations that she had made about the father as reported to the single expert and recorded at paragraph 73 of the single expert report. she said that the father had been psychotic, adding “it was the whole time."
50 counsel for the father directly put to the mother that there were numerous inconsistencies in her histories and the stories that she had given. she did not agree, adding what people put down is not her fault or her issue and that she had been clear. it was put to her that her recollection of events were not accurate, and she responded “only a couple of times”.
51 the mother was asked about paragraph 98 of the single expert’s report, which states:
... the fact that the father is not biologically the child’s father does not appear to be an issue, he has been a primary attachment figure and a strong bond exists. no concerns have been raised about the mother’s capacity with respect to the care of her younger child from a subsequent relationship and a background in childcare means that she does have relevant skills and experience when it comes to the care of the child, the main issue moving forward will be the extent to which she is emotionally available and whether or not the negative attitudes she holds towards the father will affect her relationship with the child.
52 the mother said “i can see others’ opinions, but i do not agree. it's quite obvious. i hold a negative view towards [the father]. it's not okay what he has done.”
53 the mother denied that she: had ever known that she had been diagnosed with a borderline personality disorder, had been untruthful about drug use and the extent of it, could not take responsibility for her actions, would put the child at risk of physical or emotional harm, stating that she considered that she had coped well all things considered, and had a cannabis use disorder with dependence. the mother replied that she did not have a problem with substances and added “i'm not a psychiatrist, but i'm very experienced in it”.
54 the mother gave evidence that she was not taking any medications for psychiatric health at present. when asked about the accusations she had made against the father regarding threats to kill himself and the child, she claimed that they were “not accusations but fact”, adding she would not make those remarks in the presence of the child.
55 the mother was also cross-examined about the family report dated 3 march 2020. she agreed that she had not had any contact with the child between february 2018 and the september 2018. she said this was due to difficulties at the hobart children’s contact centre, and she wasn't going to use the centre “unless the visits were video and voice recorded".
56 when asked about changing the child's birth certificate, the mother responded “it's my right, she was always supposed to be my name, i corrected what shouldn't have happened.”
57 the mother gave evidence about the circumstances in which supervised time with the child at save the children had ceased. the effect of that evidence was that the service had declined to provide the ongoing supervision because they had falsely accused her of saying things about the father that were not true. she stated that she was the victim and referred to the report annexed to her affidavit and referred to at paragraph 62.[8] she claimed that there had been a misunderstanding and that the staff at save the children were putting words into her mouth. despite this, she made the remark that the father had “put me in the position and he knew it was fraud".
58 when suggested that it was inappropriate to make the remarks noted in the report, particularly in front of the child, the mother stated “why ask me, if it's inappropriate for me to answer if the child is present". the mother remarked that the wording of the report by save the children had been misrepresented “to save their own bottom". counsel suggested again that the mother was unable to take responsibility for her our own behaviours and statements. she denied this and added that was not so, and that she “would not be taking responsibility for others”.
59 the mother was asked about showing a photo of the biological father to the child in february 2021, telling her that the father was not her father. the mother denied this but agreed she had done so previously.
60 there was evidence under cross-examination about various attempts to enrol the child at a school. without setting out that evidence in full, the respective evidence of the parties and that of the maternal grandmother shows that the communications about this decision making and the parties’ capacity to agree was not particularly effective. there seem to have been multiple misunderstandings or failure to act in co-operation. it took months and various attempts at three different schools, before the child was eventually enrolled at u school.
61 the mother was asked about paragraph 33 of her trial affidavit.[9] in particular, she was questioned as to whether she saw that it as destructive for others to have it portrayed to them that the primary carer of the child was a kidnapper, the mother stated “no, because it is true”.
62 it was directly put to the mother that she had made false claims about father. she denied this, stating “i swore an oath and i'm a christian." it was put to the mother that the problem in the relationship was not that the father had been abusive to her, but rather that he had problems with and there were disputes about her use of drugs and infidelity. the mother replied “yes”, inconsistently with the answer given previously and referred to [26].
63 counsel for the icl cross-examined the mother briefly but very helpfully, given the issues in dispute in the parenting proceedings. she questioned the mother about the statements in the save the children report. the mother agreed that she told the service that the father: would harm himself and the child if the child left his care, has been diagnosed with bipolar and takes medication for it, has a criminal record, is using the child to control the mother, and pressured the mother in to listing him as the father on the child’s birth certificate. she said that she reported these concerns to a number of services around the same time, and her concern was what the father would do to the child to “get to” her. she said that she told her close friends about the father’s threats and reported it to child safety services in july 2018.
64 when questioned by counsel for the icl about the incident at separation in february 2018, the mother denied that the father was acting protectively by removing the child from the house. her claim was that the child was not supposed to be at the house on that day, and that he had put the child in the situation in order to justify her removal.
65 the mother stated that she has not taken any steps to restore communication with the father as she is the victim of a crime, and she clarified that the crime was the father’s perpetration of mental abuse and the father withholding the child from her. counsel for the icl asked whether she could see herself co-parenting with the father, and she said that she could not.
66 the mother said that she would tell the child about her paternity when she was older. when the icl asked if the father would be involved in that conversation, the mother’s response was “no, i hope not.” she conceded that she has a negative view of the father which is unlikely to change.
67 the mother’s evidence was that she has never been diagnosed with bpd, although both ms h and dr v considered it. counsel for the icl put to the mother that an antenatal report completed by dr w on 13 july 2016 stated that the mother “displayed some cluster b and c personality traits”. in reply the mother stated “that’s anxiety, people read me wrong, what i come across as isn’t what i’m like, it’s anxiety.” she accepted that she has cluster b traits, which counsel for the icl put to her are those associated with anxiety, but not that she has cluster c traits, which counsel for the icl put to her are those associated with bpd.
68 she said that she would undertake dialectical behaviour therapy (dbt) with dr v if she offers it, but was equivocal as to whether she would undertake it elsewhere.
69 the icl briefly cross-examined the mother about her previous evidence regarding when she cut down her use of cigarettes. she conceded that she had a discussion with a health professional about using nicotine patches when she was approximately 20 weeks pregnant, but stated that it was a general conversation rather than advice to cease smoking.
70 the father relied on his affidavits filed 2 march and 30 august 2021 and they were taken as read. in addition, he called his sister, ms y and ms z who had been a workplace colleague and friend of the mother. their affidavits were also read, being: affidavit of ms z filed 10 august 2021, and affidavit of ms y filed 30 august 2021.
71 under cross-examination, the father gave evidence that he was no longer employed by employer aa as he had resigned following restructuring and being required to perform different work. he said that he was interested in construction design work and would be pursuing study and qualifications in that area.
72 his evidence was that if he completed his tafe course full-time he would be looking for work after three years but longer if he completed it part-time. he did not think he could care for the child, study and also work.
73 the father explained the circumstances in which he jumped from a bridge spontaneously during a period of poor mental health. the period of poor mental health coincided with charges relating to computer fraud, to which he pleaded guilty. he was 19 years of age at the time, sought psychological treatment and slowly after a period recovered.
74 regarding the mother’s difficulties with literacy, it was put to the father that he would “take over”, implying that he was controlling. the father stated that he would try to explain things over and over and it became frustrating, so ultimately he did take over. he agreed that it was possible that the way he communicated with the mother added to her stress.
75 when asked about the period between february and september 2018 when the mother had not seen the child, the father stated that having tried to implement supervised time at the hobart children’s contact centre, and that he felt that the mother had abandoned the child. he was asked why he did not engineer a way to facilitate time between the child and the mother. the father replied that the mother had willingly withdrawn from an arrangement and he did not know what the process ought to be so sought advice from lawyers.
76 the father conceded that in september he was aware of the reasons the mother did not want to use the hobart children’s contact centre and was making alternative proposals, so it ought to have been clear that she was not abandoning the child. the father stated that originally the key issue was paternity and that it was not until the following year that the mother sought to pursue time with the child. he stated that he thought that there was a possibility he was the father and that he did not know for certain until the dna test was done.
77 he was asked why he did not offer to make the child available to spend time with the mother once she commenced proceedings. he replied that his solicitor did not suggest this. it was put to the father that it was incumbent on him to facilitate time between the child and the mother and he replied that he did not think it was his responsibility solely and that it required the mother to cooperate also.
78 he was asked why he had not organised time with the maternal grandmother after she had filed an undertaking to supervise the mother’s time with the child. the father stated that he had offered it around christmas time in 2018 but then because what had happened that day, it did not continue. he clarified that he had received information from the mother’s father and brother that the mother was under the influence of alcohol at the time.
79 the father agreed that after the appointment of the icl and family report interviews in 2019, he had not agreed to unsupervised time. however, he said that it was because the mother had not demonstrated she was not using cannabis or other drugs. it was suggested to the father that it had not been made clear that he required evidence that the mother was no longer using drugs. he disagreed with this, stating that it had not been explained to him that paying for the cost of drug testing was a problem for the mother, but when it was, he offered to pay.
80 the father said that he was aware from icl conferences that the mother was addressing her mental health, seeing ms v and regularly attending p counsellors. he stated that he could not recall the specifics and that the icl conferences were conducted as shuttle conferences. it was his understanding that the counselling the mother was having did not establish that she was not using drugs.
81 when asked about another icl conference in december 2019, the father agreed that he had at that point agreed to the mother’s time with the child being supervised by the maternal grandmother.
82 it was put to the father that the mother was a “good mother”, but he disagreed.
83 when asked why the father had not agreed to additional time progressing between the child and the mother, he stated that receiving information took a long time and that it had taken three years to get the drug test done. when the father was shown the drug test result document, he noted that it was dated 18 september 2020 and then conceded that he was mistaken, it had not been three years.
84 counsel put to the father that his focus on receiving a negative drug test was overly severe. he did not agree, stating that he believed it was in the child’s interest to be sure that the mother was not using drugs.
85 the father acknowledged that it was not until november 2020 that he had agreed to the mother having overnight time with the child, but he denied that he had drawn it out. he was asked why he had not engineered a way for the mother to have more time with the child. he replied that it was because he was not confident that she would be able to care for the child appropriately.
86 under cross-examination the father denied that he had deliberately limited the mother’s time with the child for years and that he continued to do so at the time of the hearing. he maintained that although there was evidence from the drug test that the mother had not been using cannabis, there had been nothing provided since the single expert’s report addressing the mother’s mental health and the concerns raised as to her capacity to care for the child, for example what her capacity to cope with stress was. the father agreed that he had relied on his solicitor to guide him about agreeing to the mother’s time with the child.
87 the father denied that he would threaten harm to the child or himself when the parties argued or that he was monitoring the mother’s phone activity. it was suggested that when he was emotional he would say things that he regretted, but he disagreed adding that the things he had said to the mother may have hurt.
88 the father was cross-examined about communication and interactions to enrol the child in primary school. it is sufficient to say that the evidence illustrated that the parties were not able to work easily and cooperatively. the maternal grandmother was also involved and there may well have been incomplete communication and misunderstanding.
89 the father agreed that there was poor communication and it would be helpful for the parties to use a communication app. he also conceded that it was possible that had he been more focused on the child the “rigmarole” about school enrolment would not have happened.
90 the father was also asked about requests for additional time between the mother and the child on mother’s day and easter. he said that he had agreed to time on mother’s day, but that the lawyers had failure to communicate that. he agreed that in hindsight he ought to have communicated with the maternal grandmother. similarly he agreed to this regarding easter.
91 the father was further cross-examined about opposition to progressing the mother’s time by reference to the period after december 2020. the father’s evidence in effect was that the icl at the time, mr fitzgerald, was liaising and communicating with both parties and he understood that there needed to be information provided from the mother’s treating psychologist. the net effect of the father’s evidence was that he continued to have genuine doubts about whether it was safe for the child to be in the care of the mother unsupervised.
92 i asked the father to explain what he had been requiring in order to agree that the mother’s time should increase and not be supervised. he stated that “evidence that the mother was drug free, that she had a mental health care plan and that he could be certain that the child was in an emotionally safe place and would not be neglected or witness anything that the mother may suffer.”
93 the father was cross-examined by the counsel for the icl. he said that he was informed by the mother’s sister-in-law that she had seen a draft application to change the child’s name and to remove him from the child’s birth certificate. his concern is that the child will now not feel included in his family and that he will have difficulty being legally recognised as her father. when asked by me if his concerns would be addressed by the child having a hyphenated surname, he said he would “accept” this but his preference is to “put it back how it was”.
94 regarding his affidavit evidence that the mother smoked cannabis while pregnant with the child, counsel for the icl asked the father what, if anything, he did about this. he replied that he had conversations with the mother, but that the mother held a fixed belief that if she ceased her use of cannabis it would harm the child. he was not aware if the mother had based her opinion on medical advice. he conceded that, despite his objections to her drug consumption, he provided her money with which she may have purchased drugs.
95 the father was questioned by counsel for the icl about the events on the morning following the hobart cup in 2018. his evidence was essentially that when he awoke at 9:30am and left the house with the child he was unaware that mr t was present. it was only when he returned later in the day that he discovered what had transpired.
96 the father agreed with the recommendations of the single expert that the child ought to live with him and spend some increased time with the mother. he accepted that he originally proposed equal shared care, but had changed his opinion after he learned the extent of the mother’s mental health issues. counsel for the icl queried how spending only three nights in the mother’s care rather than seven nights would protect the child from those issues, and he stated that more time in the mother’s care increased the risk of exposure to the mother’s detrimental behaviour. also, it would put stress on the mother over a longer period of time and increase the chance of the having a “breakdown”.
ms y
97 the evidence of ms y was subject to objection by counsel for the mother. after hearing submissions i ruled that most of ms y’s affidavit filed 30 august 2021 should be received in evidence, but disallowed paragraph 10.
98 ms y is the father’s sister. in summary, ms y’s evidence indicated that she assisted the father caring for the child at times and had a close relationship with her. her evidence corroborated the father’s concerns about the mother’s capacity to care for the child and not harm his relationship with her.
ms z
99 ms z is the father’s sister, and her evidence was intended to be corroborative of the father’s evidence that the mother misused cannabis, alcohol and other drugs, both before and after the child’s birth. i gained the impression from hearing her evidence that ms z overstated the extent of her knowledge about these topics. nevertheless, i accept that, at times, ms z was aware that the mother used cannabis. i also accept that she discussed with the mother her concerns for the child because the mother continued to use cannabis during her pregnancy.
the family reporter
100 the reports of the family reporter dated 7 may 2019 and 4 march 2020 were received in evidence and she was made available for cross-examination. her evidence given in cross-examination by counsel for the mother was very brief. she largely maintained that the child should remain in the primary care of the father. she did agree that she would have expected time with the mother to have progressed after late 2020 to two nights per fortnight, with conditions. she agreed with the mother’s counsel that having a negative hair follicle test in december 2020, continued engagement with p counsellors, and a mental health care plan such that she sees a psychologist, supported the mother’s claim for additional time. the family reporter stated those matters would be “reassuring” but she still would not be “confident” in the mother having substantial time.
101 the family reporter stated that because there had not been a recent assessment she could not make recommendations about the mother’s time with the child, adding that there would need to be more confidence in practical co-parenting. she also agreed with the proposition that if there was evidence that the father had been unduly obstructive, which would be consistent with the mother’s allegation that he had been controlling.
102 counsel for the mother enquired whether the family reporter would have any concerns with an arrangement where the mother had five nights per fortnight with the child, then progressing to six nights and in term four of 2022 moving to equal time. she stated that if the objective was to move towards equal time and the mother did not have limitations, including that the mother’s dynamics were able to support the father in his role that may be satisfactory. however, in her view the court would need to be positively satisfied that the parties can effectively co-parent.
103 when asked about informing the child about her parentage, the family reporter stated that the most important thing was to plan how the child was told and that the parents need to have a shared narrative. she also considered that the child should be older when told, more like high school age. she also indicated that it was a balance between leaving it a bit longer so that she is able to comprehend and leaving it too long, raising the possibility that she will be told by others.
104 when cross-examined by counsel for the father, the family reporter agreed that it would be a real concern if the child was shown photographs of her biological father, particularly if he is not to have a role in her life. she suggested the messaging, if it continued, would raise real concerns.
105 the family reporter also agreed that, based on information she had considered, there were concerns for the child in the mother’s care, the father had acted protectively and that had been a reasonable foundation for his attitude to the mother’s time with the child.
106 when asked by counsel for the icl for recommendations if it was found that the mother maintained fixed and negative attitudes towards the father, the family reporter stated that she recommended more limited time with the mother. she explained that less time exposed to the mother’s views would minimise the harm to the child.
107 the family reporter was also asked whether there could be any alleviating measures, if consistent with the single expert’s views, the parties did not have effective co-parenting. the family reporter suggested use of community mediation, therapeutic supports, a communication app, being thoughtful of upcoming decisions and being proactive, utilising parallel parenting arrangements. the latter meaning that each parent be responsible for day-to-day matters while the child is in their care without interference from the other parent.
the single expert
108 the single expert’s report was received in evidence and he was available for cross-examination. following cross-examination by all counsel, his evidence remained largely consistent with the contents of his report. he did agree however that: in making a diagnosis of bpd, the person does not necessarily have all the typical traits, in a cross-sectional assessment it is better to comment on traits that have either been seen over time or there is collateral information about those traits over time, clinical management does not alter depending on whether there are traits or a formal diagnosis of bpd, it is not surprising if a person diagnosed with bpd is not told that they have the diagnosis, dialectical behaviour therapy is a particular type of cognitive behavioural therapy, usually delivered in a group. it is not provided by all psychologists, but he believes it is available at the cc clinic and region dd mental health team, if the cost of dialectical behaviour treatment is a barrier, the best compromise is a psychologist who uses components of the therapy, when stressed, persons are less open to treatment and able to accept negative aspects of self, a person with bpd traits does not necessarily experience those forever, it is not surprising that a person does not accept the diagnosis of bpd and it takes some time. it is usual to have several presentations for treatment due to crisis before the condition is accepted, if the mother has ceased using marijuana entirely you would expect more stability in mood, less impulsivity and poor judgment which is associated with intoxication, any form of therapy can be helpful, and the treating psychologist is in the best position to determine the required duration of treatment, but this depends on the practitioner’s experience and the development of insight by the mother, and it is possible that the reference to using $100 per day cannabis was recorded mistakenly for per week and the mistake carried on.
109 when cross-examined by counsel for the father, the single expert stated that acceptance of the diagnosis is not as important as recognising there are problems and accepting the need to have therapy. he also agreed that the adverse and not likely true statements the mother had made about the father, will affect the child’s relationship with him if expressed publicly. he also agreed with the views of the family reporter about the potential harm to the child.
110 when asked about the mother’s evidence under cross-examination that she denied being dependent on cannabis despite admitting daily use for years, the single expert expressed the opinion that in that case a person would be more likely to resume cannabis use.
111 regarding the treatment the mother had engaged in since 2021, the single expert stated that the duration of the treatment was relatively short and the risk of regression remains. also, that if the motivation for having the treatment is external, not internal, that adds to the risk of regression but sometimes what is an external motivator becomes an internal one.
112 when asked by counsel for the icl about ameliorating factors if the mother persisted in having fixed and negative views of the father, the single expert stated that it was important for the child to spend more significant time with the father.
the parties’ evidence – property
113 each party had filed a case outline for the trial which included at part d the assets, liabilities and superannuation claimed to be relevant for the proceedings pursuant to section 79 of the act. a comparison of part d of each case outline discloses broad agreement about the relevant items and their values. in written closing submissions, the mother stated that the only disagreement in respect of the pool is whether the maternal grandmother is owed a debt.
114 the father notes in his case outline that the value for his superannuation at the time of separation was $62,911.00, but that he estimates that its value at the time of filing proceedings was $93,000. this contention was not subjected to cross-examination or put in issue in any way. accordingly, i propose to adopt the figure of $93,000 for the purposes of the determination as it is the value closest to the date of trial, which is that ordinarily relevant.[10]
115 noting the matters at [113] and [114], the relevant assets and liabilities for consideration are:
description
ownership
agreed value
sale proceeds of the property
joint
$290,693.08
motor vehicle 1
father
e$5,000.00
motor vehicle 2
e$6,000.00
bank f account
e$1,000.00
5
loan to the maternal grandmother*
mother
e$35,292,16*
6
super fund g
e$93,000.00
7
super fund ee
$931.00
116 the issues identifiable from the case outlines and the parties closing submissions were: whether the mother was indebted to the maternal grandmother in the sum of $35,292.16, how the father’s entitlement pursuant to his late mother’s estate was to be treated. a copy of the father’s late mother’s will was received in evidence.[11] it evidences that the father has an indefinite right to live in the property at ff street, suburb gg (“the ff street, suburb gg property”) at his sole and complete discretion, the respective contributions, indirect and direct by the parties, and what if any adjustments there should be for the factors outlined in section 75(2) of the act.
117 in evidence in chief, the mother confirmed that the financial statement filed 22 march 2021 was true and correct and it was received in evidence.
118 relating to the alleged indebtedness to the maternal grandmother, it was put to the mother that there was no reason why the maternal grandmother and others would have spent in the vicinity of $50,000,[12] on supporting her since separation. the mother maintained that she needed assistance with water, power, phone bills, repairs to the property and rates. it was drawn to her attention that she had not identified the debt to her mother in the financial statement filed in march 2019, she agreed, but denied that was because she did not owe the money.
119 the mother gave very confusing evidence about the existence of a written loan agreement, and i made an order for her to produce it. no such written agreement has in fact been produced in her case. this is explained by the evidence given by the maternal grandmother, who said there was no written agreement for the loan, but rather that she had over time paid numerous expenses for her daughter to assist and that they had verbally agreed that she would be repaid once these proceedings were resolved.
120 when asked about living arrangements during the period she had known the father, the mother stated that she lived with the maternal grandmother between 2008 and 2012, but that she had basically lived with the father from 2012 until 2018. she then qualified this by stating they stayed more at his house before moving to the property.
121 the mother denied that she lived at the maternal grandmother’s home between april 2013 and may 2015. it was directly put to her that she and the father were only living together running their own home for three and a half years. she denied this.
122 the mother’s evidence was that during the period she had known the father, her income was significantly less than his. she agreed that her earnings were probably in the region of the $20,000 gross per year at most. she agreed that the father had paid the mortgage because she had had a lot of health issues and her income was very low at the time that they lived together at the property.
123 the mother agreed that she had continued living at the property alone after the father left with the child in february 2018, qualifying this by adding that she had some animals (two rats and a rabbit) in 2019.
124 after a period not working, the mother stated that she then worked two days a week earning around $350 a week from towards the end of 2018 and into 2019. she agreed that she was also on centrelink at various times post separation and that her total income was probably around $600 per week combined between earnings and centrelink. she stated that this did not seem much and the maternal grandmother helped her financially.
125 the mother stated that she did not receive child support from mr b. when it was drawn to her attention that there was a reference to $200 per week child support in her financial statement filed 22 march 2021, she denied that she had given her solicitors instructions to include it, or that she was aware that it was included when she signed it.
126 there was cross examination about a loan said to be owed to mr hh. this issue will not be addressed as counsel for the mother indicated in closing submissions that the debt was not pursued as a liability for the purposes of property adjustment proceedings.
127 the father’s financial statement filed 2 march 2021 was confirmed by him to be true and it was received in evidence.
128 his evidence relating to his contributions and his earnings contained in his affidavits were not challenged.
129 there was no evidence about the value of the ff street, suburb gg property, but the father agreed that its sale would be after he moved out. a copy of the father’s late mother’s will was received in evidence[13]. by clause 3 of that document, there is a direction to the trustees (the father and his sister ms y) that the ff street, suburb gg property is to be sold, but not until the father moves out at his sole discretion. upon sale, the net proceeds are to be paid to mr jj and ms y.
130 notably, pursuant to the will, the father does not have an interest in the estate except as to what appear to be small components of the residue and a right to live in the property referred to above.
131 under cross-examination, the father said he intended to move out of the ff street, suburb gg property when he could, but no specific timeframe was given. he added it might be in the next couple of years, depending on the housing market.
132 the father agreed that a rates notice issued for the property after separation and was not paid by him, but by the maternal grandmother.
relevant law and principles
parenting
133 in parenting proceedings, the paramountcy principle applies and the court is required to make orders that are in the best interests of the child/children.[14] express direction is provided in section 60b(1) of the act that this object is to be achieved by ensuring that the child has the benefit of both of their parents having meaningful involvement in their life, to the maximum extent consistent with the child’s best interest. the court is to inform itself of the child’s best interests by the considerations in section 60cc(2) and (3) of the act.
134 section 60cc(2) requires the court to make orders that are conducive to a child having a meaningful relationship with both parents, but not if this would detract from necessary protection of the child from physical or psychological harm or exposure to abuse, neglect or family violence. the assessment required also involves consideration of the many considerations in section 60cc(3) as relevant to the circumstances of any given case, but there is no ranking of importance or order of consideration of the relevant considerations.[15]
135 the evaluation of risk of harm required by subparagraphs (a) and (b) of section 60cc(2) is a challenging one to be undertaken on the basis of findings of fact about the nature and degree of risk of harm to the child and the likelihood of it eventuating.[16]
136 in addition to the foregoing, the court is also to apply a rebuttable presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility.[17] this presumption accords with the objective referred to in section 60b(1) of the act. the meaning of parental responsibility is expressly but not exhaustively provided for in the act.[18]
137 except in the case of consent orders, if the court is satisfied that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies and is not rebutted it must first consider if the child spending equal time with each parent would be in their best interest and if practicable, make such an order.[19]
138 if not persuaded to make an equal spend time with order, the court must then consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests and if so and it is reasonably practicable, an order for substantial and significant time should be made. the meaning of the phrase substantial and significant time is provided for in subsection 65daa(3).
139 in mrr & gr [2010] hca 4, the high court provided guidance in relation to how the provisions in section 65daa are to be applied and i have had regard to that authority.[20] i am also mindful of the required decision making pathway established in goode & goode [2006] famca1346. all the considerations in section 60cc are to inform what is in the best interests of a child, which is relevant to making an order for equal shared parental responsibility if the presumption in section 61da(1) does not apply by virtue of section 61da(2), or making orders about equal or significant time when the presumption has been rebutted.
property
140 the relevant statutory provisions and legal principles which govern proceedings for property adjustment under the act are not contentious and are well-established.
141 the ultimate objective and task of the court is to make a determination if it should make orders adjusting property interests on the basis of what is just and equitable. considerable guidance has been given by various authorities, but for present purposes it is sufficient to note the useful summary provided by judge reithmuller in wagstaff and wagstaff [2018] fcca 927 from paragraphs 118 to 137, referring to stanford and stanford [2012] hca 52 and in marriage of hickey [2003] famca 395, 30 fam lr 355.
142 in adopting the approach referred to in stanford and stanford, i find that the parties were in a relationship from about september 2007 until they separated in february 2018. each party seeks orders to adjust their joint and respective interests in property and i am satisfied that it is in all the circumstances just and equitable to make orders pursuant to section 79 of the act.
143 it is also necessary to take the well-known four step approach explained in the marriage of hickey and summarised in wagstaff.
evaluation of evidence and findings - parenting
144 accepting the un-contradicted views of the single expert, i am satisfied that the mother suffers a borderline personality disorder (“bpd”) and has done so for many years.
145 i also accept the evidence of the single expert that the traits of the bpd in the mother involve unstable mood, suicidal ideation at times when under stress, unstable relationships, a tendency to externalise blame, low mood, anxiety and misuse of multiple substances.
146 the evidence demonstrates likely misuse of alcohol, cannabis, mdma and sometimes other amphetamines over many years. while no specific findings can be made about the true extent of the mother’s misuse, there is sufficient evidence before the court for me to infer that at times the mother seriously misused these substances and not infrequently she used them in unhealthy and likely physically or emotionally harmful ways.
147 i find that admitted daily use of cannabis for 10 years likely constitutes dependency on cannabis. i also draw the inference about dependency on cannabis based on the history of cannabis use the mother has given to various medical personnel and as recorded in the medical records considered by the single expert. to the extent that the mother disputed that she spent $100 per day, it is immaterial to my finding. the admitted daily use of cannabis, during the relationship with the father and after it, excluding some months during her two pregnancies, leads to me draw the inference also, together with her admission that she often spent $100 a week on cannabis.
148 although the mother’s evidence is that she no longer uses cannabis at all, i find that very difficult to accept, in view of the evidence of the single expert referred to at [109] above. i find that she has likely reduced her use, but is at risk of increasing its consumption due to bpd traits and her denial of past dependency.
149 it follows from the above that the mother’s parenting capacity will at times be adversely affected (by either cannabis use or bpd traits or both), putting the child at risk of harm if she is in her care without supports and protective provisions for the child. the nature of the risk of harm is well explained in the single expert’s report at page 19 as follows:
the mother’s condition may at times impact her parenting capacity and potentially put the child at risk, individuals with borderline personality disorder are vulnerable to stress and can decompensate when overwhelmed. if insufficient support was available to the mother in such a scenario, she might struggle to fulfil the child’s emotional needs and psychological neglect is possible. there are no risk factors for the mother causing physical harm to towards the child. whilst the mother is abstinent at present, her long history of substance use is a risk factor. should she resume substance use, this may impact up her judgement and result in the child being in situations where they are at risk, for example, from intoxicated associates of the mother. this sort of scenario that precipitated the final separation could potentially put the child at risk.
150 the evidence of the mother, ms n and the maternal grandmother on any assessment demonstrates an extreme lack of judgment on the part of the mother about the events around the 2018 hobart cup, especially in connection to mr t being at her home and use of amphetamines. lack of judgment of this nature when the child is in her care has serious potential for grave consequences for the child.
151 the evidence suggests, and i infer from the concessions made under cross examination by ms n, that the mother and mr t continued to consume cannabis and possibly other drugs at the home while the child was present and the father was asleep in the early hours of the morning. while the child was not harmed on this occasion, the situation acutely demonstrates the mother’s vulnerabilities and the impacts of that on parenting capacity, to which the single expert refers in his evidence.
152 while the mother portrayed the february 2018 events as isolated, based on the history recorded in the medical records to which the single expert had regard, she had had a number of events in her life where conduct around use of alcohol, drugs and relationships or stressful situations have put the mother herself at risk of harm. for example, being so intoxicated on a night out at the hobart waterfront that she could not recall what had happened and that she was concerned that she had been sexually assaulted.[21] it can easily be envisaged that the mother’s traits will continue to present a risk of physical or emotional harm to the child as opined by the single expert.
153 i also find that the mother’s abuse of alcohol and sometimes drugs on “big nights” occurred probably more often than she has portrayed, in view of ms m’s evidence and the contents of medical records.
154 like the single expert, i accept that there is some evidence of abstinence from excess use of drugs or alcohol in the last two years or so, but the very nature of the disorder as explained by the single expert establishes that periodically in times of stress or when the person does not fully take advantage of necessary supports, there is significant risk of exposure to physical or emotional harm to the mother and in turn the child if she were present or in her care.
155 it is notable that the mother has sporadically engaged with dr v and only arranged referral to ms h in late 2020.[22] prior to then, there was no regular treatment from a psychologist or psychiatrist. the mother gave evidence that she had regularly engaged with p counsellors for counselling, but documents before the court suggest otherwise. for example, exhibit a5(d) refers to the mother reengaging with p counsellors and i infer from this that she had ceased attending regularly at some prior time.
156 without the spotlight of these proceedings and the expectations that there would be a hearing, i find that the mother is unlikely to readily, willingly and constantly engage in psychological treatment. i have grave concerns about her receiving necessary treatment, based on her past history of sporadic engagement at times of crisis, the lack of acceptance that she suffers bpd, and denial that she has experienced cannabis dependency.
157 based on her evidence under cross-examination and in response to my question about engagement in treatment, it is clear to me and i find that she only engaged with a psychologist because her lawyers had advised her of the need to do so after the single expert provided his report. that is, she did not engage in such treatment because she genuinely considered or accepts that she needs help and treatment.
158 the findings and reasons at [154] and [155] are also informed by all the views of the single expert set out at [108] and [111].
159 i also accept the views of the single expert that the mother’s negative attitudes of the father present either a direct or indirect risk of emotional harm to the child. his opinion was:[23]
the mother’s very negative attitudes towards the father could directly or indirectly cause emotional harm to the child. if she were to, for example, make comments that he was not the child’s father, this could be confusing and stressful for the child. whilst it can be reasonable to inform a child regarding their parentage, it needs to be done at a developmentally appropriate time and in an appropriate way. the mother’s current attitudes towards the father and her tendency to externalise blame is unlikely to foster a positive relationship between the child and father should the father’s access to the child be limited. the mother’s attitudes are also likely to get in the way of a positive co-parenting relationship.
160 the above views were not contradicted and indeed the mother’s evidence amply demonstrated the negative, false and fixed attitude.[24] there was simply no evidence that the father had threatened harm to the child or suicide. instead they appear to be false statements based on the mother’s misguided and erroneous beliefs. indeed, the mother’s witnesses, ms m, ms n and the maternal grandmother did not believe it to be true that the father had made the claimed threats or would harm the child.
161 the mother’s frequent statements that the father kidnapped the child and maintenance of that view in evidence demonstrates that she still does not recognise or appreciate that the father removed the child in february 2018 due to legitimate concerns for the child’s wellbeing and safety.
162 the mother’s evidence also leads me to conclude that she does not genuinely accept the father’s role as a father figure for the child. her evidence was on the one hand that she accepted he had cared for the child well since 2018, but diminished this in many remarks made, such as referring to the father as “not family” or having “kidnapped” the child, and changing the child’s surname to her own.
163 regardless of the specifics around the failed supervision of time between the child and mother at hobart children’s contact centre and save the children, i find that the mother was unable or unwilling to co-operate and communicate as required with supervisors to ensure the time occurred. this is likely a product of her vulnerabilities and traits to which the single expert opined, and in turn present real and material risk of physical or psychological harm to the child.
164 the father’s reasons for not enabling the mother and child to spend time together unsupervised, even after orders were made on an interim basis, were said by him to relate to ongoing concern about drug use and lack of evidence that needed psychological treatment was being received and proving useful.
165 i find that by early 2021, the mother had demonstrated that she was not then abusing cannabis.[25] however, i consider the father was justified in seeking to be satisfied about the mother having necessary psychological improvement based on the single expert and the family reporter’s views.
166 the parties provided conflicting accounts about why the mother’s time did not proceed to unsupervised in around march 2021 and onwards. in his evidence the father referred to icl conferences convened after the exchange of correspondence in february 2021 between the parties’ solicitors.[26] i accept that there were likely discussions involving mr fitzgerald, who was the icl at the time. indeed, the court record shows that an order was made by his honour judge dunkley on 26 march 2021 that the parties were to attend an icl conference before 1 april 2021.
167 the correspondence in february 2021,[27] makes it clear that mr fitzgerald had proposed that conditions attach to the continuation and progression of the mother’s time with the child. the mother agreed to some of those conditions, but not all. what transpired at the icl conference could not be the subject of evidence before me unless both parties agreed, and they did not.
168 i infer from the evidence given by the father under cross-examination, which i accept and which was not challenged, that he was relying on mr fitzgerald to obtain some information or report about the mother’s effective engagement and benefit from psychological treatment which was never forthcoming. the inference is also consistent with what is stated in the letter from the mother’s solicitors of 26 february 2021, which refers to the mother not yet having had psychological treatment with ms h and was to have her first appointment in april 2021.[28] i note that the contents of this letter contradicts the letter from ms h, which states there was a telehealth consultation with the mother on 5 february 2021.[29] this raises concern about the reliability of the information about what treatment the mother has in fact undertaken.
169 i am not prepared to find that the father was obstructive of the child’s time with the mother progressing to unsupervised time between march 2021 and the trial, contrary to the suggestion by counsel for the mother. he perhaps could have been more proactive, but was being guided by his lawyer and the icl.
170 it was uncontroversial that each party had a meaningful relationship with the child. in the mother’s case, in spite of her having spent limited time with the child since february 2018. looming large in the father’s case was the requirement in section 60cc(2)(b) of the act to consider the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm and from being exposed to neglect, abuse or family violence.
171 of the many considerations to which the court must have regard in section 60cc(3) of the act, the following were those material to the parenting orders in this case and i make the following findings:
section 60 cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
172 it was not particularly disputed that each party had a strong, loving and caring relationship with the child. similarly, each party called unchallenged evidence about positive relationships with their extended family. in the mother’s case this was the maternal grandmother and the younger child, but also the maternal grandfather and maternal uncle.
173 in the father’s case, the child has a strong relationship with the paternal aunt ms z, who has assisted in caring for the child when the father worked, and also the paternal uncle who lives in the same house as the father and the child.
174 the father has been the primary daily carer for the child since february 2018. it is probable that because the father worked in the first two years of the child’s life, aside from the parental leave following the child’s birth, that the mother provided more of the daily care for the child during this early period of life.
section 60 cc (3)(c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,
175 i do not accept that the mother took every opportunity to spend time with and communicate with the child for the reasons given at [163] above. despite this, i find that at least in the last 12-18 months, she has made more consistent effort to do so.
176 the father has facilitated time between the mother and the child, but this has been reactive rather than proactive facilitation. i accept he has had reasonable cause to be reluctant and cautious in agreeing to progress the length of time and whether it is unsupervised.
177 there has been lack in motivation to find solutions that promote the mother’s time without exposing the child to risk of the harmful effects of the mother’s psychiatric condition, bpd. this is not surprising, given the mother’s attitude to him and the risk it presents to his bond with the child and emotional harm to her.
178 the father has not had an obstructive attitude to promoting time between the child and the mother for the reasons at [164] to [169] above. i also note that when satisfied that the mother has had support and supervision from the maternal grandmother, he agreed to additional time.[30]
section 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,
179 neither party is seeking a major initial change in the primary care arrangements for the child. despite this, the gradual increase in time proposed by the mother is likely to cause some instability and period of adjustment for the child. there is very little, if any, evidence about whether the child will adjust satisfactorily to the increased time proposed by the mother.
180 reduction in time spent in the father’s care logically translates to increase in risk of harm to the child because of the mother’s vulnerabilities and fact of more time creating more opportunities for risk to materialise, especially if there is no supervision.[31] despite this, the single expert’s evidence under cross-examination suggests that the risk of harm to the child may be somewhat ameliorated if the mother regularly engages in necessary supports and treatment.
181 there is little evidence that the mother will promote and maintain positive outcomes regarding the child’s relationship with the father if she spends more time with the child, because of the strong, firm and fixed views she has about him.[32]
section 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of:(i) each of the child's parents, and(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs,
182 the evidence before the court demonstrates that the father has provided reliable and good care for the child. the mother does not dispute this, but has been critical of the failure to involve her more in the child’s care and decision making about long term issues.
183 i find that the mother was primarily caring for the child until february 2018, although she was assisted by the father and possibly the maternal grandmother.[33] despite the issues raised by the father about the mother’s mental health and drug use, there is no evidence that she caused the child physical harm. as the mother works as a child care worker and has attained a level of qualification in the field, this suggests that in the formal setting of a child care centre, she is equipped to provide adequate care for children. she also provides care for her younger child.
184 i cannot ignore the expert opinion in this case and so find that the mother may well have periods where her capacity to care for the child is compromised to a degree, particularly if stressed or anxious or if she makes poor choices around use of alcohol and drugs.
185 each party has recognised potential issues for the child requiring specialist health or allied health input and have said they will pursue recommended treatment or support as needed. each party has engaged with the child’s school.
aboriginal – right to enjoy culture and tradition
186 the biological father of the child is aboriginal and so the child is aboriginal, however she is not recorded as aboriginal on any documentation and does not have cultural ties to her aboriginality.[34] no particular emphasis was placed on this consideration by either party and there is no basis to conclude that the father would not encourage the child’s association with aboriginal culture and tradition.
attitudes to parenthood
187 it is demonstrated by the father’s actions in february 2018 and since that he has a responsible, loving, committed and positive attitude to parenthood and being a father. he wanted a child and agreed to be named as the child’s father on her birth certificate when she was born. on the mother account, this was even after being told that he was not her biological father.
188 the mother has professed her strong desire to have a child and she became pregnant with each of her children without planning or being sure of commitment to a stable relationship. the mother’s evidence portrayed a personal desire to have a child by any means, somewhat detached from the responsibilities, stresses and demands of parenthood. despite this, there is no evidence that the mother does not fulfil the responsibilities of parenthood in relation to the younger child.
189 the history of crisis events in the medical records in evidence demonstrate that in the past, despite wanting to be a parent, the mother also engaged in activities more consistent with being single and free of responsibilities to a child on occasions. i note however the opinion of the single expert opinion, relating maturing with age and the capacity with this for bpd traits to settle.
section 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,
190 on the mother’s case this is presented as a relevant consideration, but i do not accept it to be so. there is simply no evidence that the father perpetrated family violence, other than the claims by the mother that the father acted in a controlling and coercive manner.[35] under cross-examination, she said that the father had controlled her by not allowing her to manage budget issues and handling various financial affairs. however, she also gave evidence that she struggled with reading and writing and attributed difficulties with filed documents to her lawyers.
191 the father fairly conceded that he became frustrated and at times took over.[36] i do not accept the mother’s evidence about the father exercising coercion or control, despite his concession that he may have communicated in a manner stressful to the mother. rather, her perceptions of that stress as coercion and control is likely due to traits recognised to be associated with bpd.
192 there was only brief reference in the father’s case outline to family violence being a factor. the existence of the police family violence order protecting the mother from mr b, in my view, makes it a relevant consideration as the mother’s evidence made it plain that she continues to associate with mr b.[37]
193 the mother’s continued association with mr b and the risk of volatility and conflict between them in the future cannot be ignored, particularly given the mother’s bpd. i find that she may fail to act protectively of the child when she is in her care should incidents of family violence arise with mr b.
194 in view of the findings at paragraph [190] and [191], section 60cg of the act is to be considered, and the court’s orders will include appropriate restraints.
section 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,
195 i do not understand the basis of the mother’s contention that a 50:50 shared care arrangement by the time the child attains eight years will likely reduce the prospect of future proceedings.
196 this submission implies that the mother will bring further proceedings in the future unless the court’s orders eventually provide for a 50:50 shared care arrangement. during the lengthy trial of these proceedings the court has fully investigated and considered all issues relevant to the child’s best interests and made findings after testing the evidence. it has made final parenting orders consistent with its findings and the ultimate issue of what is in the best interests of the child. accordingly, while the mother cannot be prevented from making a further application in the future, the rice and asplund threshold principles will necessarily apply.
determination – parenting matters
parental responsibility
197 despite the extreme criticisms that the mother made of the father and the concerns of the father about the mother, each sought orders for equal shared parental responsibility. this in my view diminished the weight or reliability of the extent of their respective concerns somewhat. it is notable that counsel for the icl did not support an order for equal shared parental responsibility.
198 the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies in this case as i have rejected the contention that the father has perpetrated family violence.
199 the icl submitted in closing that the presumption had been rebutted because it was, first, not in the child’s best interests as: (a) the parties had not been in direct communication for an extended period of time concerning the welfare of the child, and (b) neither party had provided a solution or remedy to address the apparent lack of cooperative parenting and communication. counsel for the icl submitted that an example was the process relating to the child’s enrolment at school. she described the evidence as illustrating a protracted and conflictual process, with each denying the other’s evidence as to why there had been disagreement and difficulty.   the parties had not been in direct communication for an extended period of time concerning the welfare of the child, and (b) neither party had provided a solution or remedy to address the apparent lack of cooperative parenting and communication. counsel for the icl submitted that an example was the process relating to the child’s enrolment at school. she described the evidence as illustrating a protracted and conflictual process, with each denying the other’s evidence as to why there had been disagreement and difficulty.
200 second, counsel for the icl submitted that equal shared parental responsibility was not the child’s best interests due to the mother’s fixed and negative views of the father, which she still held at the time of hearing. this, she said, illustrated limited possibility of a businesslike co-parenting alliance. typical of the lack of capacity to reach agreement was the mother’s view that the father did not have a right to be involved in informing the child of her biological parentage.
201 i accept the submission by the icl and agree that the presumption is rebutted in this case. my reasoning is consistent with the succinct submission made by counsel for the icl and supported by the findings i have made on the evidence.
202 in addition, the court’s parental responsibility order must be consistent with the best interests of the child. in view of the findings concerning sections 60 cc(2) and (3) of the act, i consider it in the best interests of the child for the father to have sole parental responsibility.
203 nonetheless, the father should consult with the mother about major long-term issues concerning the child before a decision is taken and acted upon. the mother’s view based on the favourable s 60cc(3) findings are of relevance, but to ensure consistent, reliable and responsible decision-making, the father should make the ultimate decision about major and long-term issues.
the child’s name
204 there are various authorities addressing the court’s power to make orders about a child’s name and the applicable legal principles. it is not necessary to recite all the authorities as the parties were largely in agreement about the applicable law. they disagreed about the result that should follow in this case, based on the law.
205 section 64b of the act provides for the type of parenting orders that can be made, including those relating to parental responsibility. in turn, section 64b(3) provides inclusively for the nature of orders about parental responsibility. in particular, section 64b(3)(d) refers to orders about:
... (d) the child’s name, ...
206 there has been judicial attention given to whether orders about a child’s name concern the allocation of parental responsibility or are otherwise orders in the nature of an injunctive order for the personal protection of a child. in rankin [2017] famcafc 29, (2017) flc 93-766 at 50 the fcfca noted:
‘boland j opined at [51] that the orders sought “could be regarded as a parenting order dealing with one aspect of the allocation of parental responsibility rather than a mandatory injunction under s 68b”, but her honour did not express a concluded view, given that the matter was not argued before her. her honour also did not make any reference to s 64b(2)(i).’
207 as the full court concluded on the appeal, the distinction noted by boland j is immaterial as regardless of the section which gives the court power, the paramount consideration is the best interests of the child to be determined by reference to all considerations in section 60cc.
208 it will be apparent from the terms in which the orders are expressed whether the court’s order engages power to grant injunctions or powers about parental responsibility. for example, if the child is to be known by a name they already have, then an injunctive order is more likely to be appropriate, but if the name of the child is to be changed, then an specific order empowered by section 64b(3)(d) will be required. in some cases, such as this one, both types of orders may be necessary.
209 in summary, the following considerations were identified as relevant to the court’s determination: [38] welfare of the child as the paramount consideration. short and long-term effects of a change. any embarrassment to the child. any confusion of identity. effect a change in name would or may have for a parent,
and ultimately the issue is governed by what promotes the welfare of the child.
210 additional factors have also been identified:[39] advantages both short and long term in a change. contact father has had with the child. degree of identification with the father and mother. degree of identification with any new child.
211 in my view it is in the best interests of the child that the father’s parental role be promoted, given the conduct and attitude of the mother to date, particularly her negative fixed and inflexible view about the father. i do not have confidence in the mother’s willingness and capacity to avoid the child being confused about her relationship with the father and her own identity regardless of her biological parentage. the evidence strongly demonstrates a considerable risk of emotional harm to the child due to the mother’s attitude and conduct.
212 although a further change in the child’s name is not ideal, she is at an age where a final change can be established and consolidated without apparent detriment. there is no evidence before the court to the contrary.
213 as the father has a significant parental role and will have sole parental responsibility, his name should be incorporated in the child’s name. a hyphenated surname permits both parents’ surnames to be used and entrenches the child’s association with both parents who will be involved in her care and are responsible for her welfare. the hyphenated surname will also enable the child to identify with her half- sister and the father’s extended family.
214 on the basis of the reasoning above, there will be an order that the surname of the child be changed to “ladbrook-dodd” and that for the personal protection of the child the mother is restrained by injunction pursuant to section 68b, from changing the child’s surname after it has been amended to ladbrook-dodd on the register of births deaths and marriages.
live and spend time arrangements
215 consistent with the legal principles set out above and because i have concluded that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted in this case, i need not first consider the parties spending equal time with the child. nonetheless, orders concerning the parents’ respective time with the child must be governed by the overriding paramountcy principle.
216 if the vulnerabilities attaching to the mother’s parenting capacity are adequately addressed, the degree and likelihood of risks of the child being exposed to abuse, neglect or psychological harm in her care are likely to be at tolerable levels. in my view it is also important for the child to have some experience of daily life with her half-sibling and the broader maternal extended family. this will assist in providing a sense of security and awareness of belonging in the child as she develops. this is particularly important, given that the mother has had limited participation in the child’s life since february 2018. my views have been particularly informed by the views of the family reporter at paragraphs 81 to 87 of the family report of 4 march 2020. however, i am very mindful of the evidence of the family reporter referred to at [102] to [107].
217 the mother should be afforded the opportunity to spend more time with the child than she has in the past, upon her consistently maintaining and accepting therapeutic supports for the bpd from which she suffers. while the mother continues to reside with the maternal grandmother, there is opportunity for informal and voluntary supervision of her time with the child. there will be capacity to call on assistance and receive it relatively quickly, so the prospect of the child being exposed to harm are likely to be within acceptable levels.
218 if and when the mother establishes her own home independently, in view of the vulnerabilities attested to by the single expert, the child will be exposed to greater risk of harm when in the mother’s care. little clarity was provided in relation to the long-term living arrangements for the mother and her younger child.
219 i do not accept that the mother’s time with the child as provided for in the interim orders would limit the likelihood of future proceedings between the parties. the mother has pursued these proceedings in the face of a number of barriers, including unsupportive opinions from the family reporter and the single expert. the mother presented as determined to ensure that she secured significant time with the child.
220 the progressive approach to enlargement of the mother’s time with the child according to the orders sought in her case outline is based on a premise that there will not be any setbacks or emergence of actual harm to the child due to the mother’s vulnerabilities from bpd or otherwise.[40] it is also premised on avoidance of harm on the assumption that the mother will not convey her negative attitudes of the father to the child.
221 even if the mother is genuinely committed to receiving therapeutic support and treatment on an ongoing basis, her conduct to date does not reflect good capacity to carry through with that genuine commitment. in particular, i rely on the findings and reasoning above in paragraphs [155] and [162].
222 i consider that the best interests of the child will be served by her living primarily with the father but progressing to spending up to a maximum of five nights per fortnight with the mother.
223 additional reasoning for arriving at the conclusion above is that based on findings i have made, that there is a high risk that the child will be exposed to emotional harm due to the mother continuing to deny the significance of the father’s role in the child’s life, by making denigrating statements or providing false information, all likely to undermine his relationship with the child. counsel for the mother acknowledged in closing submissions that the father had a meaningful role in the child’s life, but this was not consistent with or reflected in the mother’s evidence about her attitude of the father.
224 there is no justification in this case for making injunctive or restraint-like orders concerning the father. orders of such nature are appropriate in relation to the mother in view of the findings i have made. the necessary injunctions and restraints need to be directed to the mother’s denigration of the father, her use of alcohol and drugs and allowing the child to be in the presence of mr b if he engages in family violence.
225 as the mother’s time with the child will increase pursuant to the court orders, there should also be orders aimed at improving effective communications between the parties. evidence was given about the use of a communication app and that seems an appropriate means of addressing some of the difficulties in this case.
findings and determination - property matters
226 there is no dispute in this case as to the existence of a de facto relationship between the parties or the court’ s jurisdiction pursuant to part viiia of the act. the mother claimed the relationship lasted for about six years and the father claimed it was a relationship of three and a half years. the difference is exceptionally difficult to resolve on the evidence as little focus was given to the specific years between 2012 and 2015 by reference to the relevant considerations in s4ab of the act.
227 despite the observations at [226] the evidence allows me to infer and i find that most non-superannuation assets identified by the parties in their respective asset pools were either acquired or increased in value during the three and a half years when the father concedes the parties were in a de facto relationship. in contrast, i infer that the superannuation of the father accrued for a much longer period than the duration of the relationship. for that reason there is justification in a two pool approach.[41]
228 the evidence establishes, because it was not contradicted in cross-examination, that the father brought in a vehicle and savings of about $18,000 at the commencement of the relationship. although the evidence does not identify an equivalent contribution at the commencement of the relationship by the mother, this is a relatively modest disparity in the overall evaluation contributions and what is just and equitable.
229 the mother conceded that the father made greater financial contributions during the relationship as he was in continuous full-time employment, earned a good wage and her income was limited. the mother likely made very limited financial contributions due to her health and lower earnings generally.
230 the parties jointly acquired the single most valuable asset of the relationship, being the property, in around 2015. the father’s evidence, which was not challenged under cross-examination, was that he contributed $15,000 in savings to the purchase of the land on which the home was then built and that the parties jointly borrowed the funds to build the home.
231 contrary to that submitted by counsel for the mother, there is no objective evidence that the mother contributed to the deposit for purchase of the land. the father says the mother did not contribute to the deposit for the land.[42]
232 once the property was built, the mother’s evidence is that she paid to furnish it, but there is no indication as to what sum she contributed in this way.[43] in cross-examination of the father, he was not asked about this contribution claimed by the mother. given the admitted disparity in earnings between the parties, i find that the value of such contribution was not likely to be particularly significant in value, if it was made.
233 the mother made indirect contributions to the property by work undertaken by the paternal grandfather. this evidence in the mother’s affidavit was not refuted by the father or put in cross-examination.
234 the child was primarily cared for by the mother in the first two years of life and i accept that her parenting contributions were somewhat greater in this period. however, this is balanced out by the father’s primary parenting contributions since february 2018 to date.
235 the mother’s future earning capacity will be less than that of the father. although he is not presently working, his opportunity to do so and earn a greater income than the mother is superior once the child is attending full-time school. he gave evidence that he is retraining and has demonstrated consistent past mid-level earnings. he has considerable experience and skills in the workforce which will be readily transferable.
236 the mother has limited skills and experience and is employed in an industry where wages are generally known to be relatively low. her future needs will be greater, including having to provide a home as the child will be spending time with her and she needs to engage in psychological treatment.
237 the father is in good health and does not have particular medical needs, and is unlikely to experience interrupted earning capacity. he is also fortuitous in that the paternal grandmother has, by way of her will, provided him with secure accommodation at no cost for the foreseeable future.
238 the father has made post-separation contributions by reducing debt and this was not disputed.[44] the mother has used superannuation money, but it has not been clearly accounted for as being for the benefit of the parties or the child.[45]
239 the property was sold during the course of the proceedings. the maternal grandmother provided evidence that she secured a discounted agent’s commission on sale.[46] this probably constitutes a very small indirect financial contribution by the mother in the overall scheme of considerations.
240 the parties have benefited from a rise in values of property generally in southern tasmania. the net equity following sale of the property mainly exists because of that rather than because of identifiable contributions made by either party, although the father’s deposit facilitated the purchase.
241 taking into account all the above various and at times countervailing considerations, provisionally, i consider that adjustment of the non-superannuation pool should to be 58 per cent to the father and 42 per cent to the mother. this assessment also acknowledges that: (a) there was no dispute that earlier in their relationship the parties stayed at their respective parents’ properties, so the parties were unlikely to have made any notable financial or non-financial contributions to a joint household or acquisition of assets, and (b) that it is irrelevant to the weight to be given to the father’s parenting contributions that he is not the child’s biological father.[47]  there was no dispute that earlier in their relationship the parties stayed at their respective parents’ properties, so the parties were unlikely to have made any notable financial or non-financial contributions to a joint household or acquisition of assets, and (b) that it is irrelevant to the weight to be given to the father’s parenting contributions that he is not the child’s biological father.[47]
242 however, after allowing for relevant considerations in section 75(2) of the act,[48] particularly the mother’s future needs, given my reasons and findings at [235] – [236], there should be some additional adjustment in favour of the mother.
243 the mother sought a 6 per cent additional adjustment, but noting the father is not presently employed and will have the greater share of care of the child in the future, i consider that the further adjustment should be 5 per cent to the mother. the effect being that the net non-superannuation property pool should be adjusted to achieve a 53 per cent to the father and 47 per cent to the mother.
244 in arriving at the conclusion at [243], i have made a no specific allowance for repayment of the mortgage and outgoings relating to the property after the father stopped paying those post separation, as there is a claim that the maternal grandmother made the payments by way of loan. the payments by the maternal grandmother and whether it should be treated as a loan are addressed below.
245 the mother’s superannuation balance was said to have diminished since separation due to a redraw of $20,000, $11,000 of which was paid to the maternal grandmother in part repayment of a loan.
246 the state of the evidence raises real concern about how the mother expended the superannuation funds she redrew. as the mother was only supporting herself and either living in the property or with her mother, it is difficult to conceive how the mother could have required a total of $56,592 over the relevant period, even accepting that some of this sum may have been applied to the mortgage and other outgoings relating the property.[49] little time and attention was given to this aspect of the mother’s case and her evidence about the purpose of the spending is largely mere generalised assertion.
247 the evidence given by the maternal grandmother about money lent to the mother was largely maintained under cross-examination, but i have difficulty accepting it in its entirety. it was also demonstrated by her evidence that she was accustomed to providing financial and other assistance to the mother (and her other children) in various ways. it seems implausible that she reached agreement about legally requiring repayment in each and every instance.
248 the amount of $35,292.16 claimed to be a debt owed to the maternal grandmother is not clearly accounted for despite the attachments to her affidavit. the maternal grandmother’s affidavit filed 17 september 2021 attaches some invoices and evidence of some payments for corresponding invoices from her bank account. in other respects evidence substantiating the existence of sums claimed to be indebted is scant, estimated or simply assertion.
249 despite her own evidence describing some estimated sums, the maternal grandmother was not willing to concede that the figure being claimed as a debt could be less. further, the maternal grandmother gave evidence that she did not utilise electronic banking, yet the bank statements annexed to her affidavit contains transactions of that nature. there is simply no clarity about how the sum claimed of $35,292.16 is arrived at.
250 the mother carried the onus of proof in establishing indebtedness to the maternal grandmother in the sum claimed.[50] the state of the evidence about this claim simply fails to meet the required standard of proof.
251 ultimately, i am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that i should treat the entire sum of $35,292.16 as a liability which is genuine debt due to the maternal grandmother, especially given the exchange between counsel for the father and the maternal grandmother as follows:
and so, how much are you asking [the mother] to repay you? i may ask her for the whole ..... i may ask her for half. i haven’t made my decision. and that’s my point, really. so in the end, the extent to which your financial assistance to [the mother] is a gift or a loan is very much at your discretion? correct.
252 the maternal grandmother’s affidavit also refers to the cost of improvements to her home, estimates of daily living costs and legal fees as debt owed to her.[51] i do not accept that these sums are liabilities to be taken into account as between the parties.
253 as the father did not expressly dispute that some payments were made towards the mortgage, rates and water after he ceased paying those,[52] i consider a figure of $20,000 should be treated as debt to the maternal grandmother. this sum roughly equates to the value of rates arrears the father conceded when cross-examined that he did not pay and the sums identified to be mortgage repayments on the maternal grandmother’s bank statements annexed to her affidavit. i do not make any allowance for the sum of $11,000 said to have been repaid to the grandmother from the mother’s superannuation redraw, as i am simply not satisfied that this was for relevant legal debt due to the maternal grandmother.
254 based on the foregoing reasons and findings, the net non-superannuation asset pool is as follows -
255 the net assets after repayment of the $20,000 to the maternal grandmother are to be divided according to the percentages at [243] being 47% to the mother and 53% to the father. i note that the net sale proceeds from the property have been held in a solicitors trust account and may have accrued interest. the interest if any should also be apportioned and paid according to the same percentages.
256 in relation to the superannuation pool, the father was already working and accruing superannuation when the parties formed their relationship. i infer on the evidence that it also continued to accrue after separation until he ceased employment.
257 the mother did not contribute either directly or indirectly to the father’s superannuation pre- and post-separation and in my view the adjustment of the parties’ superannuation should reflect this. in this context, the discrepancy about the length of de facto relationship has some bearing, but the evidence does not permit this to be resolved satisfactorily, although i generally prefer the evidence of the father who made reasonable concessions and did not exaggerate or conflate.
258 i propose to make an order that there be an adjustment of the superannuation interests of the parties to achieve a split of 60:40 in the father’s favour for the foregoing reasons. this will require a splitting order in favour of the mother. rounding the superannuation values as identified by the parties during the proceedings, a 40% splitting order translates to the sum of $35,000 rounded arrived at as follows:
259 before making final orders in the proceedings, the parties will be invited to make oral submissions about the court’s proposed orders to give effect to this judgment.
associate: t sherwood dated: 10 december 2021 ladbrook & dodd [2021] fedcfamc2f 532
addendum
1 on 10 december 2021 i handed down my reasons for judgment in this matter, but noting that there was ambiguity about the parties’ submissions about property matters and if there ought to be a one or two pool approach, i gave leave for the parties to make submission about that issue and also my proposed draft orders providing for a superannuation split in favour of the mother.
2 i also indicated that i was of the preliminary view that the appointment of the icl should continue for a period into the future due to determination of the issues in this case and consequent orders. particularly, those relating to the gradual increase of the child’s time with the mother subject to conditions, the child’s name change and arrangements for commencement of school.
3 the icl only made submissions about a proposed order for her continued appointment. i accept all the submissions made in writing and dated 13 december 2021. balancing the competing considerations identified in the submissions which assist in informing the desirable length of continued appointment in the future, i will make an order for continued appointment for 12 months. this timeframe ought to be sufficient time to permit the icl to: (a) inform the child of the orders made and ensure that it is done appropriately. (b) oversee the processes involved in the child settling into school and facilitation of the change of the child’s surname pursuant to order 27, and (c) permit information to be gained about the mother’s progress with psychological treatment, the effectiveness of which is critical to the successful enlargement of the mother’s time with the child.  inform the child of the orders made and ensure that it is done appropriately. (b) oversee the processes involved in the child settling into school and facilitation of the change of the child’s surname pursuant to order 27, and (c) permit information to be gained about the mother’s progress with psychological treatment, the effectiveness of which is critical to the successful enlargement of the mother’s time with the child.
4 although leave was not given initially to the parties to make submissions about proposed order 9, i accept that the mother ought to be permitted to do so. the other parties should also be afforded opportunity to reply and have done so. i have had regard to the written submissions on behalf of the mother dated 14 december 2021 and 17 december 2021.
5 the written submissions made by the mother regarding order 9 make it plain that the mother and her legal advisers have interpreted order 9 to amount to an order requiring the maternal grandmother to supervise the mother’s time with the child. it does not. the terms of the order itself by their plain words do not require the maternal grandmother to be present or supervising the mother’s time.
6 the order is a parenting order which provides for a stable overnight accommodation and sleeping arrangement for the child. the order relates to the reasoning at [218] of the reasons for judgment. i am satisfied that the living conditions at the maternal grandmother’s residence are adequate for the child’s reasonable needs, particularly for sleeping at night. i have specified the requirement in draft order 9 as i envisaged the possibility that: (a) the child may want to attend sleep-overs with friends or relatives, and (b) in due course, the mother may establish a home independently or with mr b or another person.  the child may want to attend sleep-overs with friends or relatives, and (b) in due course, the mother may establish a home independently or with mr b or another person.
7 in the case of the former, i would not expect the father to oppose the child sleeping at a friend’s or relative’s home. in the case of the mother establishing her own home either alone or with others, in my view it is quite likely there will be additional/different stresses and in turn risks of harm of the kind identified by dr c, based on the totality of the evidence.
8 i did not envisage that the father would unreasonably withhold consent if the mother had a suitable home, sleeping arrangements and did not have persons likely to expose the child to risk of physical or emotional harm, either directly or indirectly by witnessing conflict or family violence. in hindsight, the purpose of order 9 can still be achieved by limiting the period for which the order operates to a length of time when there can be more confidence about the mother’s coping strategies after she has had a regular and consistent course of treatment by a psychologist.
9 accordingly, i will express draft order 9 such that the condition only operates until the end of february 2023.
associate: dated: 20 december 2021
[1] affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at [35] and [36].[2] dated 3 march 2020.[3] report of dr c filed 23 september 2021.[4] exhibit a-1.[5] see, for example, paragraphs [23]-[39], [43] and [48] of these reasons.[6] this pregnancy was subject to termination.[7] at [31] of these reasons.[8] affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at annexure e. [9] affidavit of the mother filed 14 september 2021.[10] ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) flc 93-218 at p79,619[11] exhibit a-5.[12] being a reference to indebtedness referenced in the case outline of the mother filed 17 september 2021 and the affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at [173]; affidavit of the mother filed 14 september 2021 at [43].[13] exhibit a-5.[14] section 60ca of the act[15] aldridge &keaton [2009] famcafc 229; (2009) flc 93-421; slater & light [2011] famcafc 1[16] dieter & dieter [2011] famcafc 82 and marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101.[17] section 61da(1) - 61da(4).[18] sections 61b and 65dac.[19] section 65daa.[20] especially at [9], [12], [13] and [14].[21] exhibit a-3 at tab 4.[22] exhibit a1.[23] single expert report at page 19.[24] for example, the mother’s evidence under cross examination that the father had ‘kidnapped’ the child and that he was ‘psychotic’ during the parties’ relationship.[25] as evidenced by the clear hair follicle test results annexed to the affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at annexure b.[26] exhibit a-4.[27] exhibit a5[28] exhibit a-5(d).[29] exhibit a-1.[30] affidavit of the father filed 2 march 2021 at [24].[31] see [112] of these reasons.[32] see [52] and [62] of these reasons.[33] see [20(c)] and [43] of these reasons.[34] affidavit of the mother filed 26 march 2021 at [96] and [97].[35] affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at [116]-[118].[36] evidence at [73] above.[37] at [26] and [34].[38] chapman and palmer [1978] famca 86; (1978) flc 90-510.[39] beach and stemmler (1979) flc 90-692.[40] eg possible exposure to witnessing family violence due to mr b; or events of alcohol and drug abuse.[41] c & c [2005] famca 429; (2005) flc 93-220; w & w [2005] famca 430; bulow and bulow [2019] famcafc 3.[42]affidavit of the father filed 2 march 2021 at [50].[43]affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at [189].[44]affidavit of the father filed 2 march 2021 at [58].[45] affidavit of the mother filed 22 march 2021 at [173].[46]affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 17 september 2021 at [25].[47] in the marriage of robb [1994] famca 136; (1994) 18 fam lr 489 at 500.[48] required by s.79(4)(e) of the act.[49] being the total of the sum claimed to be debt to ms e and the superannuation redraw of $20,000.[50] section 140of the evidence act 1995 (cth). [51] affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 17 september 2021 at [12] to [14].[52] [54] of affidavit of father filed 7 august 2020