last updated: 3 march 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
finala & finala [2021] fedcfamc2f 607
orders
the court orders that:
1. that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for their child x born in 2012 (“x”).
2. that x live with her mother.
3. that x spend time with her father as follows: (a) during school term time each alternate week from the end of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school attendance day) on thursday until start of school (or 9.00 am if not a school attendance day) on the following tuesday, the first such occasion to commence on the thursday first after school recommences following a school holiday that started in an even numbered year and on the thursday second after school recommences following a school holiday that started in an odd numbered year, (b) for half of the school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half of the holidays that occur in an even numbered year and the second half of the holidays that occur in an odd numbered year, and for the purposes of this order those school holidays commence at the time that x breaks up from school attendance for the term and end at the time that x recommences school attendance for the new term, (c) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 for the first half of such school holidays that commence in an even numbered year and for the second half of such school holidays that commence in an odd numbered year, and for the purposes of this order those school holidays commence at 5.30 pm on 26 december and conclude when x recommences school attendance for the new school year and x’s alternate week time with her father pursuant to order 3(a) will cease at the breakup of school for x at the end of term 4, (d) from 10.00 am on 25 december until 5.30 pm on 26 december each year, (e) at the end of each odd numbered year from 12.00 noon on 31 december until 12.00 noon on 1 january of the new year, (f) from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm on fathers day, (g) on the father’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm if on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6.00 pm if on a school day, (h) from the conclusion of school (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday in even-numbered years, (i) on x’s birthday if x will not otherwise be in her father’s care at all on that day for two hours if a school day and for four hours if a non-school day, (j) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing from time to time.  during school term time each alternate week from the end of school (or 3.00 pm if not a school attendance day) on thursday until start of school (or 9.00 am if not a school attendance day) on the following tuesday, the first such occasion to commence on the thursday first after school recommences following a school holiday that started in an even numbered year and on the thursday second after school recommences following a school holiday that started in an odd numbered year, (b) for half of the school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, being the first half of the holidays that occur in an even numbered year and the second half of the holidays that occur in an odd numbered year, and for the purposes of this order those school holidays commence at the time that x breaks up from school attendance for the term and end at the time that x recommences school attendance for the new term, (c) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 for the first half of such school holidays that commence in an even numbered year and for the second half of such school holidays that commence in an odd numbered year, and for the purposes of this order those school holidays commence at 5.30 pm on 26 december and conclude when x recommences school attendance for the new school year and x’s alternate week time with her father pursuant to order 3(a) will cease at the breakup of school for x at the end of term 4, (d) from 10.00 am on 25 december until 5.30 pm on 26 december each year, (e) at the end of each odd numbered year from 12.00 noon on 31 december until 12.00 noon on 1 january of the new year, (f) from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm on fathers day, (g) on the father’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm if on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6.00 pm if on a school day, (h) from the conclusion of school (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday in even-numbered years, (i) on x’s birthday if x will not otherwise be in her father’s care at all on that day for two hours if a school day and for four hours if a non-school day, (j) at such other times as may be agreed between the parents in writing from time to time.
4. that notwithstanding any other order, x will be in her mother’s care as follows: (a) from 9.30 am on 23 december until 10.00 am on 25 december each year, (b) at the end of each even numbered year from 12.00 noon on 31 december until 12.00 noon on 1 january of the new year, (c) from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm on mothers day, (d) on the mother’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm if on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6.00 pm if on a school day, (e) from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday in odd-numbered years, (f) on x’s birthday if x will not otherwise be in her mother’s care at all on that day for two hours if a school day and for four hours if a non-school day,  from 9.30 am on 23 december until 10.00 am on 25 december each year, (b) at the end of each even numbered year from 12.00 noon on 31 december until 12.00 noon on 1 january of the new year, (c) from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm on mothers day, (d) on the mother’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5.00 pm if on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6.00 pm if on a school day, (e) from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday in odd-numbered years, (f) on x’s birthday if x will not otherwise be in her mother’s care at all on that day for two hours if a school day and for four hours if a non-school day,
5. that any changeovers that do not occur at x’s school shall occur at the suburb b mcdonalds family restaurant at corner c street, suburb b nsw.
6. that each parent notify the other, as soon as possible, in the event of any serious injury or serious illness suffered by the child whilst with that parent.
7. that the parents shall notify each other as soon as reasonably practicable of any medical issue involving the child whilst in their respective care wherein the child is required to attend upon a hospital or medical practice with that notification to include details of the illness, injury, treating doctor, prognosis and treatment, if known. should the child be prescribed medication, it is the responsibility of that parent to obtain such medication, which is to be provided to the other parent at changeover.
8. that each party shall cooperate with the other party in signing all documents necessary to renew, replace or extend x’s passport or to enable x to travel internationally, including but not limited to visa applications, and the parties shall each pay half the fees associated with renewing or replacing x’s passport and the father shall pay the costs to the mother within 7 days of receiving a request for payment.
9. that the child’s passport be held by the applicant mother.
10. that should x travel with her father overseas, the mother is to release x’s passport to the father at least 14 days prior to travel and the father is to return x’s passport to the mother at the next changeover following their return from overseas.
11. that the parents shall each be permitted to take x out of australia for holidays and for other short periods of time, provided that the following has occurred: (a) the party wishing to travel overseas ("the removing party") shall give not less than twenty-eight (28) days written notice to the other party of his or her intention to travel overseas with the x the notice shall include details of the proposed travel including but not limited to anticipated departure and arrival dates and details of the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, (b) the removing party shall provide to the other parent in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the departure date, an accurate itinerary including but not limited to, the departure and return dates, the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which x will arrive and depart each country and a telephone number and address at which the parent and x can be contacted in each country, (c) the removing party shall not less than 48 hours prior to departure provide the other party with a copy of the x's return air ticket, and (i) the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions." (d) that neither party shall reside with x outside of the commonwealth of australia without the consent of both parties or orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.  the party wishing to travel overseas ("the removing party") shall give not less than twenty-eight (28) days written notice to the other party of his or her intention to travel overseas with the x the notice shall include details of the proposed travel including but not limited to anticipated departure and arrival dates and details of the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, (b) the removing party shall provide to the other parent in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the departure date, an accurate itinerary including but not limited to, the departure and return dates, the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which x will arrive and depart each country and a telephone number and address at which the parent and x can be contacted in each country, (c) the removing party shall not less than 48 hours prior to departure provide the other party with a copy of the x's return air ticket, and (i) the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions." (d) that neither party shall reside with x outside of the commonwealth of australia without the consent of both parties or orders made by the federal circuit and family court of australia.  the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions."
12. that the mother and father have liberal telephone contact with x between the hours of 6.00pm and 8.00pm during periods of time that x is in the other parent’s care.
13. that at any time whilst x is in the respective care of either parent, immediately upon x requesting to telephone the other parent, the parent who has the care of x shall forthwith arrange for her to have access to a telephone and assist the her in telephoning the other parent and each party shall give x privacy on the telephone and shall not linger in the same room.
14. that both parties are permitted to enrol x into any weekend sporting and/or extra curricular activity in coordination with the other so as to avoid overlap and shall advise the other party, with at least one month's notice of the activity.
15. that each party shall ensure that x attends her scheduled extra-curricular activities.
16. each party will have liberty to attend all of x's extra-curricular, sporting and school-related activities and the parents are to interact on such occasions only by exchanging polite greetings and each is not otherwise to impose his or her immediate presence on the other parent.
17. that each party notify the other, not more than 24 hours after any change to their contact telephone numbers and/or their email address.
18. that both parties are to speak to and treat the other party in a respectful manner at all times, in particular in the presence or hearing of x, both parties are restrained by injunction from making any comments that are aggressive, sexual or threatening in nature towards the other party.
19. that both parties are to do all things to ensure that: (a) they use appropriate, age appropriate, parental locks on all electronic devices including, but not limited to, television, internet and applications, (b) the child receives appropriate adult and parental supervision, and (c) the child does not view or listen to any television or media that is not age appropriate.  they use appropriate, age appropriate, parental locks on all electronic devices including, but not limited to, television, internet and applications, (b) the child receives appropriate adult and parental supervision, and (c) the child does not view or listen to any television or media that is not age appropriate.
20. that the parties shall respect each other's personal boundaries at changeovers and ensure a swift and efficient changeover to occur between the parties or when both parties are participating in any school or extra-curricular activities. for that purpose, the parties shall, (a) not communicate with each other at the changeover unless to discuss an emergency or to greet each other at the commencement, (b) not discuss parenting matters in the presence of x, (c) not loiter around at the changeover or unnecessarily prolong the changeover, (d) respect and stay within 1.5 metres of the other, (e) not to follow each other around and/or including to not follow the other parent to their motor vehicle, (f) not have any physical contact with the other, (g) not enter the other party's motor vehicle.  not communicate with each other at the changeover unless to discuss an emergency or to greet each other at the commencement, (b) not discuss parenting matters in the presence of x, (c) not loiter around at the changeover or unnecessarily prolong the changeover, (d) respect and stay within 1.5 metres of the other, (e) not to follow each other around and/or including to not follow the other parent to their motor vehicle, (f) not have any physical contact with the other, (g) not enter the other party's motor vehicle.
21. that the parties do all things and sign all documents necessary to enroll x at d street, suburb e for the next school term available for x to be enrolled in.
22. that the court make an order under section 79 of the family law act 1975 (cth) as follows : (a) that the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g in nsw being held upon trust for the parties jointly by watkins tapsell solicitors be divided equally between the parties inclusive of interest, if any, accrued thereon. (b) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property and financial assets currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order, including, but not limited to, his commonwealth bank account ...48, his axi trader fx trading account, the motor vehicle 1, the sole trader business conducted by him as company h, his gold and silver bullion, the moneys received by him as interim distributions of the net proceeds of sale of the f street, suburb g property and the household contents in his possession. (c) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property and financial assets currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order, including, but not limited to, her credit union accounts in her sole name, the motor vehicle 2, her account held jointly with her partner with national australia bank limited, the household contents in her possession and her entitlement to benefits as a member of the super fund j superannuation fund.  that the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g in nsw being held upon trust for the parties jointly by watkins tapsell solicitors be divided equally between the parties inclusive of interest, if any, accrued thereon. (b) that the husband is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the wife of all items of real property, personal property and financial assets currently in his power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order, including, but not limited to, his commonwealth bank account ...48, his axi trader fx trading account, the motor vehicle 1, the sole trader business conducted by him as company h, his gold and silver bullion, the moneys received by him as interim distributions of the net proceeds of sale of the f street, suburb g property and the household contents in his possession. (c) that the wife is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the husband of all items of real property, personal property and financial assets currently in her power, possession or control other than as specifically dealt with elsewhere in this order, including, but not limited to, her credit union accounts in her sole name, the motor vehicle 2, her account held jointly with her partner with national australia bank limited, the household contents in her possession and her entitlement to benefits as a member of the super fund j superannuation fund.
23. that in the event that either party refuses or neglects to comply with any part of order 22 in relation to the execution of any deed, instrument or document then pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) the court appoints and authorises the registrars of the federal circuit and family court of australia to execute such deed, instrument or document in the name of the party who so refuses or neglects and further appoints those registrars to do all acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed, instrument or document.
24. that the father pay half of the costs of the independent child’s lawyer in the sum of $6336 such sum to be paid by the father to the legal aid commission of new south wales within 7 days of receipt by the father of his share of the moneys dealt with in order 22(a).
25. that the mother pay half of the costs of the independent child’s lawyer in the sum of $6336 such sum to be paid by the mother to the legal aid commission of new south wales within 7 days of receipt by the mother of her share of the moneys dealt with in order 22(a).
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
1 x, born in 2012, known as x, loves both of her parents. x is most acutely aware that her parents dislike each other intensely.
2 when x was asked by dr k, during interviews for the preparation of a family report, “what would you wish for if you could wave a magic wand?”, x answered that she would want her parents “to get back together”. x went on to tell dr k that her parents are not friends because they do not speak to each other and she described how she tries to get her parents to converse when they come into contact, but she feels sad because she does not think they are going to do that.
3 x’s parents are not going to get back together and they are not going to be friends, but in the nine years remaining of x’s minority and the many years thereafter when her life develops through its great events, it will be an immense boon and benefit to x if her parents can, at least, converse. if not face to face, as that may be a step or more beyond what x’s mother is able to tolerate for the reasons she asserts in her evidence, at least voice to voice or through the written word.
4 x’s parents were unable to agree on final parenting arrangements or on final property settlement arrangements and accordingly those issues went to a final hearing over six days during 2020 and these are the reasons for the final orders that result.
5 the applicant wife and mother is ms finala (formerly known as finala) (herein ‘the mother’ or ‘the wife’) and the respondent and father is mr finala (herein ‘the father’ or ‘the husband’).
6 duncan holmes, solicitor, was appointed as independent child’s lawyer (‘icl’) to represent the interests of x in the proceedings by an order made under section 68l of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) on 28 august 2018.
7 at final hearing, ms lawson of counsel appeared for the mother. ms christie of senior counsel appeared for the father. mr holmes appeared on his own behalf as icl.
8 the parents began their cohabitation in 2009, were married in 2011, and separated on 16 august 2015 when x was three years of age. at the time of separation, the mother moved, with x, away from the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g and the father remained in occupation of that home until its sale in january 2018.
9 the parties were divorced on 18 july 2017, the order becoming final on 19 august 2017.
10 the father has not re-partnered. the mother has re-partnered with mr l and they have a daughter, m, born in 2019. at the time of the final hearing in 2020 the mother was again pregnant with her second child to mr l. mr l does not have any other children.
11 at the time the final hearing concluded on 16 december 2020 x was eight years and six months of age. she is now nine years and six months of age and that delay is to be regretted and i apologise for that delay to x, to the parents, to mr holmes and to the legal representatives for the parties.
the material relied upon
12 the mother relied upon the following materials: (1) case outline document dated 30 april 2020, prepared by her counsel, ms lawson, and marked exhibit a1, (2) minute of orders sought on behalf of the applicant wife dated 16 december 2020, (3) amended initiating application filed 14 november 2019, (4) notice of risk filed 8 may 2018, (5) affidavit of ms finala (formerly finala) affirmed 28 april 2020 and filed that day together with documents exhibited at tabs 1 to 24 as referred to in the affidavit, (6) affidavit of ms finala (formerly finala) affirmed 30 october 2020 and filed 4 november 2020, (7) affidavit of mr l affirmed 20 april 2020 and filed 21 april 2020, and (8) financial statement of ms finala dated 23 april 2020.  case outline document dated 30 april 2020, prepared by her counsel, ms lawson, and marked exhibit a1, (2) minute of orders sought on behalf of the applicant wife dated 16 december 2020, (3) amended initiating application filed 14 november 2019, (4) notice of risk filed 8 may 2018, (5) affidavit of ms finala (formerly finala) affirmed 28 april 2020 and filed that day together with documents exhibited at tabs 1 to 24 as referred to in the affidavit, (6) affidavit of ms finala (formerly finala) affirmed 30 october 2020 and filed 4 november 2020, (7) affidavit of mr l affirmed 20 april 2020 and filed 21 april 2020, and (8) financial statement of ms finala dated 23 april 2020.
13 both affidavits of the mother, her financial statement and the affidavit of mr l were adopted by electronic signature in accordance with the covid-19 practice direction current at that time,[1] and were adopted as evidence in chief in oral evidence during the hearing.
14 the mother also relied upon the following documents admitted into evidence as exhibits: (1) exhibit a2 – the mother’s credit union account statements for the period 17 july 2014 to 16 july 2017, (2) exhibit a3 – the mother’s certificate of participation in the circle of security parenting course dated 21 july 2020, (3) exhibit a4 – two photographs contained in a screenshot of a text message conversation both showing a limb, being referred to in exhibit 2 of the mother’s affidavit filed 28 april 2020, (4) exhibit a5 – the mother’s certificate of completion of “mothers matter” dated 1 july 2013, (5) exhibit a6 – the husband’s costs notice from his solicitors, watkins tapsell, dated 3 november 2020 and the mother’s costs notice from her solicitors, solari & stock lawyers, dated 30 october 2020, and (6) exhibit a7 – an agreed balance sheet dated 5 november 2020.  exhibit a2 – the mother’s credit union account statements for the period 17 july 2014 to 16 july 2017, (2) exhibit a3 – the mother’s certificate of participation in the circle of security parenting course dated 21 july 2020, (3) exhibit a4 – two photographs contained in a screenshot of a text message conversation both showing a limb, being referred to in exhibit 2 of the mother’s affidavit filed 28 april 2020, (4) exhibit a5 – the mother’s certificate of completion of “mothers matter” dated 1 july 2013, (5) exhibit a6 – the husband’s costs notice from his solicitors, watkins tapsell, dated 3 november 2020 and the mother’s costs notice from her solicitors, solari & stock lawyers, dated 30 october 2020, and (6) exhibit a7 – an agreed balance sheet dated 5 november 2020.
15 the father relied upon the following materials: (1) case outline document prepared by his senior counsel, ms christie, and filed 27 april 2020 and marked exhibit r1, (2) the father’s proposed minute of order (‘respondent’s proposed minute of order’), (3) amended response to initiating application filed 29 november 2019, (4) affidavit of mr finala affirmed 15 april 2020 together with an accompanying ‘tender book” containing the documents marked 1 to 13 in that affidavit, (5) affidavit of mr finala affirmed 5 may 2020 and filed in court, and (6) financial statement of mr finala sworn or affirmed 15 april 2020 and filed 17 april 2020.  case outline document prepared by his senior counsel, ms christie, and filed 27 april 2020 and marked exhibit r1, (2) the father’s proposed minute of order (‘respondent’s proposed minute of order’), (3) amended response to initiating application filed 29 november 2019, (4) affidavit of mr finala affirmed 15 april 2020 together with an accompanying ‘tender book” containing the documents marked 1 to 13 in that affidavit, (5) affidavit of mr finala affirmed 5 may 2020 and filed in court, and (6) financial statement of mr finala sworn or affirmed 15 april 2020 and filed 17 april 2020.
16 the father also relied upon the following documents admitted into evidence as exhibits: (1) exhibit r2 – statements 103 and 104 for the commonwealth bank business transaction account in the name of “the proprietor company h” for the period 2 april 2015 to 1 october 2015, (2) exhibit r3 – letter dated 18 september 2015 from watkins tapsell solicitors to solari & stock lawyers, (3) exhibit r4 – two statements for a commonwealth bank awards credit card in the name of the father covering the period 19 june 2015 to 17 august 2015, (4) exhibit r5 – 11 colour photographs of, variously, the mother, the father and x, (5) exhibit r6 – photograph of an airline sick bag with writing and stickers and signed “x”, (6) exhibit r7 – photograph of the reverse of an airline sick bag with writing and stickers and bearing a trademark “zz”, (7) exhibit r8 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 25 july 2018, prepared by family consultant, mr hh, in relation to interviews with the parents on 19 july 2018, (8) exhibit r9 – 22 pages of screenshot pictures of text messages between the father and the mother, (9) exhibit r10 – affidavit of the mother affirmed 1 march 2019 and filed that day but only in relation to paragraphs 56 to 63 therein, (10) exhibit r11 – response to an application in a case filed, for the mother, on 8 may 2018, (11) exhibit r12 – “proof of evidence of mr finala – two pages, paragraphs 1 to 26, (12) exhibit r13 – statements 124 and 125 for commonwealth bank premium business cheque account in the name “the proprietor, company h” for the period 1 may 2020 to 31 october 2020, (13) exhibit r14 – transaction listing for commonwealth bank premium cheque account in the name of mr finala, trading as company h, for the period 1 to 23 october 2020, (14) exhibit r15 – n pty ltd, account history for mr finala for the period 1 november 2019 to 2 september 2020, (15) exhibit r16 – o school, suburb p student progress report 2020 semester 1 for x finala (two pages), (16) exhibit r17 – cars student reading strategy analysis report created 29 february 2020 for x finala, (17) exhibit r18 – cba term deposit final statement dated 11 may 2020 for a term deposit in the name of mr finala, (18) exhibit r19 – pages 6 of 8 and 7 of 8 from new south wales police cops entries for 16 february 2016, 4 september 2015, 5 september 2015, 27 september 2014 and 15 march 2014, (19) exhibit r20 – statement 104 for commonwealth bank business transaction account in the name “the proprietor, company h” for the period 2 july to 1 october 2015 and evidencing a payment on 3 august 2015 of $10,000 to “home loan”, and (20) exhibit r21 – watkins tapsell solicitors matter inquiry transaction report for invoices issued to the father.  exhibit r2 – statements 103 and 104 for the commonwealth bank business transaction account in the name of “the proprietor company h” for the period 2 april 2015 to 1 october 2015, (2) exhibit r3 – letter dated 18 september 2015 from watkins tapsell solicitors to solari & stock lawyers, (3) exhibit r4 – two statements for a commonwealth bank awards credit card in the name of the father covering the period 19 june 2015 to 17 august 2015, (4) exhibit r5 – 11 colour photographs of, variously, the mother, the father and x, (5) exhibit r6 – photograph of an airline sick bag with writing and stickers and signed “x”, (6) exhibit r7 – photograph of the reverse of an airline sick bag with writing and stickers and bearing a trademark “zz”, (7) exhibit r8 – child dispute conference memorandum to court dated 25 july 2018, prepared by family consultant, mr hh, in relation to interviews with the parents on 19 july 2018, (8) exhibit r9 – 22 pages of screenshot pictures of text messages between the father and the mother, (9) exhibit r10 – affidavit of the mother affirmed 1 march 2019 and filed that day but only in relation to paragraphs 56 to 63 therein, (10) exhibit r11 – response to an application in a case filed, for the mother, on 8 may 2018, (11) exhibit r12 – “proof of evidence of mr finala – two pages, paragraphs 1 to 26, (12) exhibit r13 – statements 124 and 125 for commonwealth bank premium business cheque account in the name “the proprietor, company h” for the period 1 may 2020 to 31 october 2020, (13) exhibit r14 – transaction listing for commonwealth bank premium cheque account in the name of mr finala, trading as company h, for the period 1 to 23 october 2020, (14) exhibit r15 – n pty ltd, account history for mr finala for the period 1 november 2019 to 2 september 2020, (15) exhibit r16 – o school, suburb p student progress report 2020 semester 1 for x finala (two pages), (16) exhibit r17 – cars student reading strategy analysis report created 29 february 2020 for x finala, (17) exhibit r18 – cba term deposit final statement dated 11 may 2020 for a term deposit in the name of mr finala, (18) exhibit r19 – pages 6 of 8 and 7 of 8 from new south wales police cops entries for 16 february 2016, 4 september 2015, 5 september 2015, 27 september 2014 and 15 march 2014, (19) exhibit r20 – statement 104 for commonwealth bank business transaction account in the name “the proprietor, company h” for the period 2 july to 1 october 2015 and evidencing a payment on 3 august 2015 of $10,000 to “home loan”, and (20) exhibit r21 – watkins tapsell solicitors matter inquiry transaction report for invoices issued to the father.
17 the icl relied upon the following materials: (1) exhibit icl1 – case outline document dated 3 may 2020, (2) exhibit icl2 – family report dated 1 march 2019, prepared by dr k. (3) exhibit icl3 – icl’s cost notice from the commencement of the final hearing, and (4) exhibit icl4 – icl’s cost notice to the conclusion of the final hearing and in support of the icl’s costs application.  exhibit icl1 – case outline document dated 3 may 2020, (2) exhibit icl2 – family report dated 1 march 2019, prepared by dr k. (3) exhibit icl3 – icl’s cost notice from the commencement of the final hearing, and (4) exhibit icl4 – icl’s cost notice to the conclusion of the final hearing and in support of the icl’s costs application.
18 both the mother and her witness, mr l, were cross-examined for both the father and the icl. the father was cross-examined for the mother and the icl.
19 dr k was cross-examined on behalf of each of the parties and the icl.
the issues
20 in the parenting proceedings the principal issue was the amount of time that x would spend with each of her parents, the mother proposing that x live with her and spend time with her father for four consecutive nights per fortnight during school term and for seven nights during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays and for two weeks during the christmas school holidays, as well as arrangements for special occasions.
21 the father proposed that x spend time with him on a graduating scale for five consecutive nights per fortnight and then six consecutive nights per fortnight and then, as a third step, live on an equal shared care basis between her parents with changeovers on mondays at her school, for seven nights with each parent during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays and on a week about basis during the christmas school holidays, as well as arrangements for special occasions.
22 the mother proposed that any changeovers not occurring at x’s school take place at a location halfway between the parties as agreed and, failing agreement, suburb b mcdonalds. the father proposed that changeovers that do not take place at school occur at the mcdonalds at suburb g.
23 the mother seeks that x attend d school, suburb e. the father seeks that x remain at o school at suburb p.
24 the mother sought an order enabling her to enrol x in weekend sport and/or extracurricular activities and requiring the father to take x to such activities and, if he was unable to do so, to return her to the mother for that purpose, whereas the father sought an order that both parties be permitted to enrol x into weekend sporting and/or extracurricular activities “in coordination with the other so as avoid overlap” and each ensure that she attends her scheduled extracurricular activities.
25 in relation to the property settlement matter, the mother sought that, in effect, based upon the joint balance sheet, exhibit a7 (‘the balance sheet’), there be an overall division between the parties including a superannuation splitting order that provides 72 per cent of the net pool to the mother and 28 per cent to the father. the father sought property settlement orders that effected a division of the net pool, including superannuation, but without any superannuation splitting order, 60 per cent to the mother and 40 per cent to the father.
26 in relation to the property settlement proceedings, there were certain issues outstanding between the parties at the end of the hearing in relation to value of a motor vehicle and household contents, in relation to whether or not there should be addbacks and, if so, how they should be treated in relation to the interim distributions to the parties from the proceeds of sale of the matrimonial home at f street, suburb g and in relation to the husband’s paid legal fees, and issues between the parties as to what liabilities should be included in the calculation of the net matrimonial asset pool, all of those issues to be detailed hereunder.
the orders sought by the mother
27 the mother sought the following orders as set out in her minute of orders:
parenting orders parental responsibility that the mother shall have sole parental responsible for the child, x finala born in 2012 (“the child”) in relation to the decisions which affect the child’s education and health. (2) all other matters, the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the decisions which affect the child x’s long term care, welfare and development.
care arrangements that the child x live with the applicant mother. (4) that the child x spend time with the respondent father: (a) each alternate weekend from after school thursday (or 3.30pm) to before school (or 9.00am) monday during school terms and such weekend time shall be suspended during the school holidays, (b) during each of the short new south wales school holidays, for 7 nights at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first 7 nights for years ending in an odd number, and (ii) for the last 7 nights for years ending in an even year. (c) for the purpose of calculating school holidays, school holidays shall be defined as commencing after school on the child's actual last day of school and the last day of the school holidays shall be before school on the first day of the new term. (d) for two weeks of the christmas school holiday periods each year at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement for two weeks commencing 12 noon on new years' day in years ending in an even number and for two weeks commencing 12 noon on 15 january in years ending in an odd number. (e) at any other times, or alternate times, as agreed between the parties in writing. (5) if the parent that has care of the child, in accordance with the orders herein, is unable to provide care for the child for a period of 48 hours or longer that parent is to offer the other parent care of the child in the first instance. special occasions (6) that the care arrangements provided for in order 4 herein be suspended to provide that the child spends time with each of her parents on special occasions as agreed by both parties in writing or, failing agreement, as follows: (a) at christmas: (i) with the applicant mother from 9.30am christmas eve to 11.30am christmas day each year, and (ii) with the respondent father from 11.30am christmas day to 3.30pm boxing day each year. (b) on new year’s eve: (i) in even numbered years with the applicant mother from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the respondent father from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january. (c) on mother's day with the applicant mother from 9.30am to 5.00pm on mother's day. (d) on father's day with the respondent father from 9.30am to 5.00pm on father's day. (e) on the child’s birthday being the parent who does not otherwise have care of the child on her birthday pursuant to these orders is to spend time with the child for two hours on a school day and for four hours on a non-school day. (f) on the applicant mother’s birthday with the applicant mother from 9.30am to 5.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekend or from the conclusion of day care/school to 6.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekday. (g) on the respondent father’s birthday with the respondent father from 9.30am to 5.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekend or from the conclusion of day care/school to 6.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekday. changeovers (7) that: (a) all changeovers at the commencement or conclusion of the child's school to occur at the child’s school, (b) all other changeovers are to occur as agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at a place that is halfway between the parties' respective addresses and failing agreement, suburb b mcdonalds, (c) in the event that the child's residence is changed, then then changeover shall occur at the nearest mcdonald's restaurant or agreed public venue halfway between the parties' respective homes. passport (8) that: (a) each party shall cooperate with the other party in signing all further documents necessary to renew, replace or extend the child’s passport or to enable the child to travel internationally, including but not limited to visa applications, and (b) the parties each pay half the fees associated with renewing or replacing the child’s passport and the father shall pay the costs to the mother within 7 days of receiving a request for payment. (9) that the child’s passport be held by the applicant mother. (10) that should the child travel with the respondent father overseas, the applicant mother is to release the child’s passport to the respondent father at least 14 days prior to travel and the respondent father is to return the child’s passport to the applicant mother at the next changeover following their return from overseas. international travel (11) that: (a) either party be at liberty to travel overseas with the child at any time the child is in their care in accordance with the orders herein or as agreed between the parties in writing, and (b) if either party wishes to travel overseas with the child in accordance with this order they must provide to the other party in writing confirmation that they plan to travel with the child a minimum of two (2) months prior to the planned departure date and provide to the other party the planned dates of travel and all city and countries that will be visited. (12) at least 21 days prior to travelling overseas with the child the travelling parent will provide the following to the other party the following: (a) copies of any forward and return travel tickets, (b) an itinerary of the planned travel arrangements, (c) the location/s where the child will be staying, and (d) any other relevant information. (13) if either party wishes to travel internationally with the child in accordance with these orders, both parties are to sign all documents as may be necessary to enable the child to travel internationally, including but not limited to any visa or overseas travel document required by that country to enable the child to enter the country in the care of only one parent. (14) that the parent with whom the child is travelling overseas shall maintain sufficient travel insurance for the child for the duration of travel. (15) that the mother is at liberty to take the child x on an overseas holiday for a period of up to four weeks every two years and for that purpose the mother shall give the father two months' notice of her intention to travel and in the event that the holiday is to occur during the periods when x is otherwise in the father's care, then the mother shall make arrangements for the father to have some make-up time for the periods lost as a result of her overseas travel. (16) that orders 4 and 6 are to be read subject to order 15 herein. medical (17) that each parent notify the other, as soon as possible, in the event of any serious injury or serious illness suffered by the child whilst with that parent. (18) that the parents shall notify each other as soon as reasonably practicable of any medical issue involving the child whilst in their respective care wherein the child is required to attend upon a hospital or medical practice with that notification to include details of the illness, injury, treating doctor, prognosis and treatment, if known. should the child be prescribed medication, it is the responsibility of that parent to obtain such medication, which is to be provided to the other parent at changeover. (19) that each parent notify the other, as soon as possible, if they have become hospitalised or severely ill and unable to care for the child. in circumstances were one of the parties has become hospitalised or severely ill and unable to care for the child the other parent is to be given first option to care for the child whilst ever the parent is in hospital or unable to care for the child at home. communication (20) that the parties shall be able to have telephone communication with x whilst in the other parent's care, at all reasonable times and with all reasonable frequency. (21) that both parties shall allow x to contact the other parent whilst in their care if x has a wish to do so. discipline (22) that neither parent shall physically discipline the child at any time. (23) that neither parent shall not excessively discipline the child by any means, this includes but is not limited to physical, emotional, verbal or psychological discipline. injunction (24) that the parties both be restrained by injunction from denigrating or criticising the other party or members of their family to the child or in the presence of the child or at all. (25) that both parties are restrained by injunction from accessing the other parties: (a) personal computer and mobile phones (b) email account (c) social media pages, including facebook, linkedin and twitter, and (d) any other online account the other party may have including, external or cloud storage. other orders (26) that each party notify the other, not more than 24 hours after any change to their contact telephone numbers and/or their email address. (27) that both parties are to speak and treat the other party in a respectful manner at all times, in particular in the presence or hearing of the child, both parties are restrained by injunction from making any comments that are aggressive, sexual or threatening in nature towards the other party. (28) that both parties are to do all things to ensure that: (a) they use appropriate, age appropriate, parental locks on all electronic devices including, but not limited to, television, internet and applications, (b) the child receives appropriate adult and parental supervision, and (c) the child does not view or listen to any television or media that is not age appropriate. extra-curricular activities (29) that the mother be permitted to enrol x into any weekend sporting and/or extra- curricular activity and shall advise the father, with at least one month's notice of the activity, noting that x is currently involved in playing soccer in the winter and is intending to participate in q club next year. (30) that in the event that the father is unable to ensure that x attends each of her extra-curricular activities then the father's time shall be suspended from 8.00am on saturday until the end of the activity to enable the mother to take x to her sporting and/ or extra-curricular activities and the mother shall return x to her father at the end of her activity. (31) that the parents shall only attend the child x’s sporting events on days when she is in their care pursuant to these orders unless agreed to in writing by the other parent or unless the sporting event is significant such as a final or grand final. change of schools (32) that the parties shall do all things and sign all documents necessary to enrol x into school at d school suburb e with a view for her to commence school from term 1 in 2021. communications at changeovers (33) that the parties shall respect each other's personal boundaries at changeovers and ensure a swift and efficient changeover to occur between the parties or when both parties are participating in any school or extra-curricular activities. for that purpose, the parties shall, (a) not communicate with each other at the changeover unless to discuss an emergency or to greet each other at the commencement, (b) not discuss parenting matters in the presence of the child x, (c) not loiter around at the changeover or unnecessarily prolong the changeover, (d) respect and stay within 1.5 metres of the other, (e) not to follow each other around and/ or including to not follow the other parent to their motor vehicle, (f) not have any physical contact with the other, (g) not enter the other party's motor vehicle, injunction in relation to contact between parties (34) that the husband is injuncted and restrained from coming within 200 metres of the wife's address at r street, suburb s and any future place of residence of the wife. financial orders sought former matrimonial home (35) that the parties shall do all things and sign all documents necessary to cause the monies held in the controlled monies account administered by the husband's solicitors, watkins tapsell solicitors to be divided between the parties as follows: (a) in payment of 74 per cent to the wife as directed by her, and (b) in payment of 26 per cent to the husband as directed by him. company h (36) that the respondent husband be declared, as against the applicant wife, to hold the sole right title and interest in the company company h, (“company h”). (37) that the respondent husband indemnify the applicant wife against all manner of actions, suits, causes of action, debts, loans, guarantees, liabilities, dues, costs, interest, tax liabilities (including penalties and interest) and demands whatsoever both at law and in equity in relation to the company h, both current or at any future time. (38) that the husband shall provide to the wife within 14 days of the date of these orders, (a) framed picture of x (with her ballet costume on and craft within the frame), and (b) x's baptism candle, (c) dining room table and chairs, (d) outdoor setting, and (e) x's ride-on tricycles and scooters, superannuation splitting orders (39) that the court allocates, as required by section 90xt(4) of the family law act 1975 (cth) a base amount of thirty six thousand dollars ($36,000) to the respondent husband out of the applicant wife's interest in the super fund j member number ...19. (40) in accordance with section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act (cth), the court: (a) creates an entitlement on the part of the respondent husband to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (b) makes a corresponding reduction in the entitlement of the applicant wife would have had in the super fund j super fund but for this order. (41) whenever the trustee of the super fund j super fund makes a splittable payment out of the applicant wife's interest in that fund, the trustee shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to pay the entitlement created in paragraph 10 of this order in accordance with the requirements of the family law act and the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001. (42) this order has effect from the operative time and the operative time is four working days after the service of these orders on the trustee of the super fund j. other orders (43) that unless otherwise specified in these orders: (a) each party be solely entitled to all chattels, goods, motor vehicles, furniture, furnishings and any other property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party be solely entitled to any moneys, shares and debentures which stand in such party’s name as at the date of these orders, (c) each party be solely entitled to any superannuation benefits held in such party’s name and each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, and (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any debt, loan or liability whatsoever held in such party’s name as at the date of these orders. (44) except as specifically provided for by these orders to the contrary, the applicant wife hereby indemnifies the respondent husband from and in respect of all actions, claim, suits and demands as may be made against the respondent husband in relation to all liabilities in the name of the applicant husband. (45) except as specifically provided for by these orders to the contrary, the respondent husband hereby indemnifies the applicant wife from and in respect of all actions claim, suits and demands as may be made against the applicant wife in relation to all liabilities in the name of the respondent husband. section 106a (46) that in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument within seven days of that deed or instrument being forwarded to him or her or his or her solicitor, an officer of the sydney registry is hereby appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act, to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all acts and things necessary to give validity to the operation of the deed or instrument. the party in default is ordered to pay all reasonable solicitor/client costs incurred by the party not in default for the purpose of enforcing this order, to be taxed if not agreed. (47) that the husband pay the wife's costs of and incidental to these proceedings.  each alternate weekend from after school thursday (or 3.30pm) to before school (or 9.00am) monday during school terms and such weekend time shall be suspended during the school holidays, (b) during each of the short new south wales school holidays, for 7 nights at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement: (i) for the first 7 nights for years ending in an odd number, and (ii) for the last 7 nights for years ending in an even year. (c) for the purpose of calculating school holidays, school holidays shall be defined as commencing after school on the child's actual last day of school and the last day of the school holidays shall be before school on the first day of the new term. (d) for two weeks of the christmas school holiday periods each year at times agreed between the parties and failing agreement for two weeks commencing 12 noon on new years' day in years ending in an even number and for two weeks commencing 12 noon on 15 january in years ending in an odd number. (e) at any other times, or alternate times, as agreed between the parties in writing.  for the first 7 nights for years ending in an odd number, and (ii) for the last 7 nights for years ending in an even year.  at christmas: (i) with the applicant mother from 9.30am christmas eve to 11.30am christmas day each year, and (ii) with the respondent father from 11.30am christmas day to 3.30pm boxing day each year. (b) on new year’s eve: (i) in even numbered years with the applicant mother from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the respondent father from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january. (c) on mother's day with the applicant mother from 9.30am to 5.00pm on mother's day. (d) on father's day with the respondent father from 9.30am to 5.00pm on father's day. (e) on the child’s birthday being the parent who does not otherwise have care of the child on her birthday pursuant to these orders is to spend time with the child for two hours on a school day and for four hours on a non-school day. (f) on the applicant mother’s birthday with the applicant mother from 9.30am to 5.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekend or from the conclusion of day care/school to 6.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekday. (g) on the respondent father’s birthday with the respondent father from 9.30am to 5.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekend or from the conclusion of day care/school to 6.00pm if the birthday falls on a weekday.  with the applicant mother from 9.30am christmas eve to 11.30am christmas day each year, and (ii) with the respondent father from 11.30am christmas day to 3.30pm boxing day each year.  in even numbered years with the applicant mother from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the respondent father from 12 noon 31 december to 12 noon 1 january.  all changeovers at the commencement or conclusion of the child's school to occur at the child’s school, (b) all other changeovers are to occur as agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at a place that is halfway between the parties' respective addresses and failing agreement, suburb b mcdonalds, (c) in the event that the child's residence is changed, then then changeover shall occur at the nearest mcdonald's restaurant or agreed public venue halfway between the parties' respective homes.  each party shall cooperate with the other party in signing all further documents necessary to renew, replace or extend the child’s passport or to enable the child to travel internationally, including but not limited to visa applications, and (b) the parties each pay half the fees associated with renewing or replacing the child’s passport and the father shall pay the costs to the mother within 7 days of receiving a request for payment.  either party be at liberty to travel overseas with the child at any time the child is in their care in accordance with the orders herein or as agreed between the parties in writing, and (b) if either party wishes to travel overseas with the child in accordance with this order they must provide to the other party in writing confirmation that they plan to travel with the child a minimum of two (2) months prior to the planned departure date and provide to the other party the planned dates of travel and all city and countries that will be visited.  copies of any forward and return travel tickets, (b) an itinerary of the planned travel arrangements, (c) the location/s where the child will be staying, and (d) any other relevant information.  personal computer and mobile phones (b) email account (c) social media pages, including facebook, linkedin and twitter, and (d) any other online account the other party may have including, external or cloud storage.  not communicate with each other at the changeover unless to discuss an emergency or to greet each other at the commencement, (b) not discuss parenting matters in the presence of the child x, (c) not loiter around at the changeover or unnecessarily prolong the changeover, (d) respect and stay within 1.5 metres of the other, (e) not to follow each other around and/ or including to not follow the other parent to their motor vehicle, (f) not have any physical contact with the other, (g) not enter the other party's motor vehicle,  in payment of 74 per cent to the wife as directed by her, and (b) in payment of 26 per cent to the husband as directed by him.  framed picture of x (with her ballet costume on and craft within the frame), and (b) x's baptism candle, (c) dining room table and chairs, (d) outdoor setting, and (e) x's ride-on tricycles and scooters,  creates an entitlement on the part of the respondent husband to be paid the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, and (b) makes a corresponding reduction in the entitlement of the applicant wife would have had in the super fund j super fund but for this order.  each party be solely entitled to all chattels, goods, motor vehicles, furniture, furnishings and any other property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party be solely entitled to any moneys, shares and debentures which stand in such party’s name as at the date of these orders, (c) each party be solely entitled to any superannuation benefits held in such party’s name and each party hereby foregoes any claim they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, and (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any debt, loan or liability whatsoever held in such party’s name as at the date of these orders.
the orders sought by the father
28 the father sought final orders as set out in his “respondent’s proposed minute of order” as follows:
parenting parenting arrangements (1) that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child x finala, born in 2012 ("x"). (2) that x live with the parties during school terms as follows: (a) that from the date of these orders and for the duration of 2020, that x live with the father from thursday after school until tuesday morning delivery to school in alternating weeks, (b) that from 1 february 2021, x live with the father from wednesday after school until tuesday morning delivery to school in alternating weeks, (c) that for orders 2.1 and 2.2 above, that x live with the mother for all periods that x is not living with the father, (d) that from 1 february 2022, x live with each of the parents on a week-about basis from monday collection after school until the following monday delivery to school in alternating weeks, with the mother having the first week. (3) that x live with the parties during school holidays as follows: (a) during each of the short new south wales school holidays for 7 nights as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement: (i) for the first 7 nights of the school holiday period with the mother in odd years and the father in even years, and (ii) for the last 7 nights of the school holiday period with the father in odd years and the mother in even years. (iii) any additional school holidays granted by the school shall be shared equally between the parties. (iv) for the purpose of school holidays, school holidays shall be defined as commencing after school on the child's last actual day of school and the last day of the school holidays shall be before school on the first day of the new term. (v) for the christmas school holiday period, x shall spend time with each parent on a week-about basis commencing on boxing day until the conclusion of the christmas school holiday period. a week for the purposes of this order shall be from the first day following boxing day for seven consecutive nights. changeovers during this period to occur at 6:00pm. special occasions (4) that the parenting arrangements herein be suspended to provide that x spends time with each of her parents on special occasions as agreed by both parties in writing or, failing agreement, as follows: (a) at christmas: (i) with the mother from 9:30am on 23 december until 10:00 christmas day, and (ii) with the father from 10:00am christmas day to 5:30pm boxing day. (b) new year's eve: (i) in even-numbered years with the mother from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january, and (ii) in odd-numbered years with the father from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january. (c) easter: (i) in odd-numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday, and (ii) in even-numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday (d) on mother's day: (i) with the mother from 9:30am to 5:00pm on mother's day. (e) on father's day: (i) with the father from 9:30am to 5:00pm on father's day. (f) on the mother's birthday: (i) x will spend time with the mother on the mother's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day. (g) on the father's birthday: (i) x will spend time with the father on the father's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day. changeovers (5) that: (a) all changeovers at the commencement or conclusion of the school day are to occur at x's or school which she is then attending, and (b) all other changeovers are to occur at either mcdonald's f street, suburb g or any such other venue as agreed by the parties in writing. medical (6) that both parents are at liberty to attend any medical appointments for x. (a) that both parents will sign any authorities or other documents (if any) as may be required to authorise any doctor or specialist upon whom x attends while in their respective care to communicate with both parents in respect of all and any medical issues involving x. (b) that each parent keep the other informed as to any serious illness, accident, hospitalisation or medical condition with respect to x while they are in that parent’s care and keep the other informed of any medication to be taken by x. travel overseas & passports (7) that the parents shall each be permitted to take x out of australia for holidays and for other short periods of time, provided that the following has occurred: (a) the party wishing to travel overseas ("the removing party") shall give not less than twenty-eight (28) days written notice to the other party of his or her intention to travel overseas with the x the notice shall include details of the proposed travel including but not limited to anticipated departure and arrival dates and details of the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, (b) the removing party shall provide to the other parent in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the departure date, an accurate itinerary including but not limited to, the departure and return dates, the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which x will arrive and depart each country and a telephone number and address at which the parent and x can be contacted in each country, (c) the removing party shall not less than 48 hours prior to departure provide the other party with a copy of the x's return air ticket, and (i) the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions." (d) that neither party shall reside with x outside of the commonwealth of australia without the consent of both parties or orders made by the family court of australia. (e) that, in addition to parties pursuant to these orders, each party is at liberty to take the child x on an overseas holiday for a period of up to four weeks every two years and for that purpose the party taking part in such travel shall give the other party two months notice of their intention to travel. (f) that the father shall retain the passports and keep them in his care. (g) that within four (4) months of the x's passport expiring the parties will do all acts and things necessary and sign all documents necessary to apply for new passports for x. the parties shall share equally in the costs of applying for the passports and within 7 days of the passports issuing, the parties will do all acts and things necessary to deliver the passports to the father. specific issues (8) that the mother and father have liberal telephone contact with x between the hours of 6.00pm and 8.00pm during periods of time that x is in the other parent’s care. (9) that at any time whilst x is in the respective care of either parent, immediately upon x requesting to telephone the other parent, the parent who has the care of x forthwith arrange for her to have access to a telephone and assist the her in telephoning the other parent and each party shall give the x privacy on the telephone and shall not linger in the same room. (10) that each parent is at liberty to attend all and any school functions and/or extra-curricular activities that parents are in the normal course invited to attend. extra-curricular activities (11) the both parties are permitted to enrol x into any weekend sporting and/or extra curricular activity in coordination with the other so as to avoid overlap and shall advise the other party, with at least one month's notice of the activity. (12) each party will ensure that x attends her scheduled extra-curricular activities. (13) each party will have liberty to attend all of x's extra-curricular, sporting and school- related activities. property (14) that the residual proceeds from the sale of the f street, suburb g property held in controlled monies by watkins tapsell solicitors be divided so as to affect a division of 50% of the net proceeds to the father and 50% of the net proceeds to the mother, inclusive of any distributions to the parties previously made from these funds. (15) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the father shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (a) the father’s bank accounts, (b) the father’s contents, (c) the father’s business, (d) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are in his possession as at the date of these orders and in future, and (e) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders and in future. (16) that save as otherwise provided in these orders the mother shall be declared the sole owner both at law and in equity of: (a) the mother’s bank accounts, (b) the mother’s superannuation, (c) the mother’s contents, (d) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are in her possession as at the date of the orders and in the future, and (e) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders and in the future. (17) that save as otherwise provided in these orders to the contrary: (a) the father hereby indemnifies the mother in respect of any actions, claims, suits and demands as may be made against the mother in relation to all liabilities in the name of the father including but not limited to the father’s credit card accounts, (b) the mother hereby indemnifies the father in respect of any actions, claims, suits and demands as may be made against the father in relation to all liabilities in the name of the mother including but not limited to the mother’s credit card accounts. (18) in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders then the registrar of the court is appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act, to execute such deed or instrument in the name of such party and to do all things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed or instrument.  that from the date of these orders and for the duration of 2020, that x live with the father from thursday after school until tuesday morning delivery to school in alternating weeks, (b) that from 1 february 2021, x live with the father from wednesday after school until tuesday morning delivery to school in alternating weeks, (c) that for orders 2.1 and 2.2 above, that x live with the mother for all periods that x is not living with the father, (d) that from 1 february 2022, x live with each of the parents on a week-about basis from monday collection after school until the following monday delivery to school in alternating weeks, with the mother having the first week.  during each of the short new south wales school holidays for 7 nights as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement: (i) for the first 7 nights of the school holiday period with the mother in odd years and the father in even years, and (ii) for the last 7 nights of the school holiday period with the father in odd years and the mother in even years. (iii) any additional school holidays granted by the school shall be shared equally between the parties. (iv) for the purpose of school holidays, school holidays shall be defined as commencing after school on the child's last actual day of school and the last day of the school holidays shall be before school on the first day of the new term. (v) for the christmas school holiday period, x shall spend time with each parent on a week-about basis commencing on boxing day until the conclusion of the christmas school holiday period. a week for the purposes of this order shall be from the first day following boxing day for seven consecutive nights. changeovers during this period to occur at 6:00pm.  for the first 7 nights of the school holiday period with the mother in odd years and the father in even years, and (ii) for the last 7 nights of the school holiday period with the father in odd years and the mother in even years. (iii) any additional school holidays granted by the school shall be shared equally between the parties. (iv) for the purpose of school holidays, school holidays shall be defined as commencing after school on the child's last actual day of school and the last day of the school holidays shall be before school on the first day of the new term. (v) for the christmas school holiday period, x shall spend time with each parent on a week-about basis commencing on boxing day until the conclusion of the christmas school holiday period. a week for the purposes of this order shall be from the first day following boxing day for seven consecutive nights. changeovers during this period to occur at 6:00pm.  at christmas: (i) with the mother from 9:30am on 23 december until 10:00 christmas day, and (ii) with the father from 10:00am christmas day to 5:30pm boxing day. (b) new year's eve: (i) in even-numbered years with the mother from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january, and (ii) in odd-numbered years with the father from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january. (c) easter: (i) in odd-numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday, and (ii) in even-numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday (d) on mother's day: (i) with the mother from 9:30am to 5:00pm on mother's day. (e) on father's day: (i) with the father from 9:30am to 5:00pm on father's day. (f) on the mother's birthday: (i) x will spend time with the mother on the mother's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day. (g) on the father's birthday: (i) x will spend time with the father on the father's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day.  with the mother from 9:30am on 23 december until 10:00 christmas day, and (ii) with the father from 10:00am christmas day to 5:30pm boxing day.  in even-numbered years with the mother from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january, and (ii) in odd-numbered years with the father from 12:00 noon on 31 december to 12:00 noon on 1 january.  in odd-numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday, and (ii) in even-numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school or day care (or 3:30 if easter falls in the school holidays) on easter thursday until school or care drop off (or 9:30am if easter falls during the school holidays) on easter tuesday  with the mother from 9:30am to 5:00pm on mother's day.  with the father from 9:30am to 5:00pm on father's day.  x will spend time with the mother on the mother's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day.  x will spend time with the father on the father's birthday from 9:30am to 5:00pm if on a weekend or from after school until 6:00pm if the birthday falls on a week day.  all changeovers at the commencement or conclusion of the school day are to occur at x's or school which she is then attending, and (b) all other changeovers are to occur at either mcdonald's f street, suburb g or any such other venue as agreed by the parties in writing.  that both parents will sign any authorities or other documents (if any) as may be required to authorise any doctor or specialist upon whom x attends while in their respective care to communicate with both parents in respect of all and any medical issues involving x. (b) that each parent keep the other informed as to any serious illness, accident, hospitalisation or medical condition with respect to x while they are in that parent’s care and keep the other informed of any medication to be taken by x.  the party wishing to travel overseas ("the removing party") shall give not less than twenty-eight (28) days written notice to the other party of his or her intention to travel overseas with the x the notice shall include details of the proposed travel including but not limited to anticipated departure and arrival dates and details of the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, (b) the removing party shall provide to the other parent in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the departure date, an accurate itinerary including but not limited to, the departure and return dates, the country or countries the removing party and x will be travelling to, the approximate dates on which x will arrive and depart each country and a telephone number and address at which the parent and x can be contacted in each country, (c) the removing party shall not less than 48 hours prior to departure provide the other party with a copy of the x's return air ticket, and (i) the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions." (d) that neither party shall reside with x outside of the commonwealth of australia without the consent of both parties or orders made by the family court of australia. (e) that, in addition to parties pursuant to these orders, each party is at liberty to take the child x on an overseas holiday for a period of up to four weeks every two years and for that purpose the party taking part in such travel shall give the other party two months notice of their intention to travel. (f) that the father shall retain the passports and keep them in his care. (g) that within four (4) months of the x's passport expiring the parties will do all acts and things necessary and sign all documents necessary to apply for new passports for x. the parties shall share equally in the costs of applying for the passports and within 7 days of the passports issuing, the parties will do all acts and things necessary to deliver the passports to the father.  the period of travel shall occur wholly during the time the removing party is scheduled to spend time with x pursuant to these orders, unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. (ii) the travel shall not occur to a country that is not a signatory to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction. (iii) the travel shall not occur to a country which has a travel alert warning issued by the department of foreign affairs and trade above level 1 "exercise normal safety precautions."  the father’s bank accounts, (b) the father’s contents, (c) the father’s business, (d) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are in his possession as at the date of these orders and in future, and (e) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in his sole name as at the date of the orders and in future.  the mother’s bank accounts, (b) the mother’s superannuation, (c) the mother’s contents, (d) any chattels, goods, furnishings and other property of whatsoever kind or nature which are in her possession as at the date of the orders and in the future, and (e) any monies, shares, debentures and superannuation entitlements, which stand in her sole name as at the date of the orders and in the future.  the father hereby indemnifies the mother in respect of any actions, claims, suits and demands as may be made against the mother in relation to all liabilities in the name of the father including but not limited to the father’s credit card accounts, (b) the mother hereby indemnifies the father in respect of any actions, claims, suits and demands as may be made against the father in relation to all liabilities in the name of the mother including but not limited to the mother’s credit card accounts.
orders sought by the icl
29 in closing submissions, the icl expressed the view that orders should be made by the court in accordance with the father’s minute of order except that the order for the father’s time with x should be confined to orders 2.1 to 2.3 therein and not progress to equal time as proposed in order 2.4, not order 6.1, and for order 7.6 he proposed that the mother retain x’s passport rather than the father.
30 at the end of the hearing, the icl made application that the parties pay the icl’s costs and disbursements in equal shares, including the costs incurred in relation to preparation of the family report by dr k and the doctor’s attendance at the hearing to give evidence. senior counsel for the father and counsel for the mother both indicated that their client consented to the costs order sought by the icl. the icl’s costs are set out in exhibit icl4.
31 the hearing took place entirely by microsoft teams.
history of the proceedings
32 it is important to give some history of the proceedings, and in particular of the interim orders made along the way, particularly those made by consent on 4 march 2019.
33 the proceedings were commenced by the mother filing her application initiating proceedings in relation to property matters only on 20 november 2017, to which the father replied by filing a response confined to property matters on 16 january 2018. the matter had its first return date on 7 february 2018 before judge henderson (as her honour then was) who made certain orders in relation to disclosure by consent and adjourned the matter to 21 may 2018.
34 on 28 february 2018 the father filed an amended response adding parenting issues and on 8 may 2018 the mother filed her reply addressing parenting issues.
35 the matter was again before the court on 2 june 2018 when orders for valuations were made by consent, a child dispute conference was set down for 19 july 2018, and the matter was adjourned to 24 july 2018 for a mention following the cdc (later administratively adjourned to 28 august 2018).
36 the cdc conference took place on 19 july 2018 with the memorandum to court being available on 25 july 2018 (exhibit r8).
37 on 28 august 2018, an order was made under section 68l appointing an icl to represent the interests of x in the proceedings, for the parents to engage in family therapy and setting the matter down for an interim hearing on 4 march 2019. interim orders were made in relation to the father’s time with x, summarised as follows: (1) for the father and x to continue having time in accordance with the “current time regime”, (2) during the september 2018 school holidays the father’s “usual weekend time regime continue and extend on one occasion from friday night to tuesday at 5.30 pm”, (3) during the december 2018 school holidays, up to christmas, the father’s usual alternate weekend time extend to monday at 5.30 pm, (4) x be with her mother at christmas from 23 december 2018 till 12 noon on 12 december 2018 and with her father from 12 noon 25 december 2018 until 9.30 am on 26 december 2018, (5) on two occasions during january 2019 “the father’s usual weekend time is extended from friday night at 5.30 pm to the following friday night at 5.30 pm [a full week], and (6) during school term time, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate thursday from the end of school to the start of school on friday.  for the father and x to continue having time in accordance with the “current time regime”, (2) during the september 2018 school holidays the father’s “usual weekend time regime continue and extend on one occasion from friday night to tuesday at 5.30 pm”, (3) during the december 2018 school holidays, up to christmas, the father’s usual alternate weekend time extend to monday at 5.30 pm, (4) x be with her mother at christmas from 23 december 2018 till 12 noon on 12 december 2018 and with her father from 12 noon 25 december 2018 until 9.30 am on 26 december 2018, (5) on two occasions during january 2019 “the father’s usual weekend time is extended from friday night at 5.30 pm to the following friday night at 5.30 pm [a full week], and (6) during school term time, each alternate weekend from the end of school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate thursday from the end of school to the start of school on friday.
38 accordingly, the interim orders pending interim hearing, made on 28 august 2018, provided for the father to spend time with x at least each alternate weekend from after school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate thursday night from the end of school until the start of school on friday and for two occasions of one full week each during january 2019.
39 on 4 march 2019, the interim matter was settled as between the parties and the following orders were made by consent: (1) releasing the family report prepared by dr k, (2) discharging all previous parenting orders, (3) that x live with her mother, (4) that x spend time with her father: (a) until she turns seven on 28 june 2019, each alternate weekend from end of school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate week from end of school on thursday until start of school on friday, (b) once x reaches seven years of age, each alternate weekend from after school on thursday until start of school on monday, and (c) from the making of the orders by consent, during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for seven nights, being the first half of holidays in odd-numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even-numbered years and for half the christmas school holidays on a week about basis, the father starting with the first week during odd-numbered years and the second week in even-numbered years, and (d) at other times as may be agreed between the parents. (5) first refusal order for the other parent if either parent is unable to care for x, (6) at christmas, x be with her mother from 9.30 am on 24 december until 11.30 am on 25 december each year and with her father from 11.30 am on 25 december until 3.30 pm on 26 december each year, (7) on new year’s eve with her mother from 12 noon 31 december in even-numbered years until 12 noon on 1 january and with her father from 12 noon on 31 december in odd-numbered years until 12 noon on 1 january, (8) on mother’s day and father’s day with the applicable parent from 9.30 am until 5 pm, (9) on x’s birthday, if not already spending time with the parent, from 3.30 pm until 6 pm, (10) on the mother’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5 pm if occurring on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6 pm is occurring on a school day, and (11) on the father’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5 pm if occurring on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6 pm if occurring on a school day. (7) changeovers to occur at school or as agreed between the parents and, failing agreement, at f street, suburb g mcdonalds, (8) the parties to cooperate in obtaining a passport for x, the passport to be held by the mother, (9) an order under section 65y of the act providing for both parents to be able to have x travel overseas with them on the giving of certain notice and compliance with certain conditions, (10) orders in relation to each parent keeping the other fully informed in relation to medical matters affecting x, (11) for each parent to have telephone communication with x when in the other parent’s care on tuesdays and saturdays between 6 pm and 6.30 pm, (12) neither parent to physically discipline x, (13) neither parent to “excessively discipline x by any means, this including but not limited to physical, emotional, verbal or psychological discipline”, (14) a non-denigration order in the usual terms, (15) an injunctive order restraining each of the parents from accessing the other parent’s personal computer and mobile phones, email account, social media pages including facebook, linked in and twitter, any online account or cloud storage, (16) both parents to enrol in the parenting after separation course, (17) an order that parents only attend x’s sporting events on days when she is in their care pursuant to the orders unless agreed to in writing by the other parent or unless the event is of significance such as a final or grand final.  releasing the family report prepared by dr k, (2) discharging all previous parenting orders, (3) that x live with her mother, (4) that x spend time with her father: (a) until she turns seven on 28 june 2019, each alternate weekend from end of school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate week from end of school on thursday until start of school on friday, (b) once x reaches seven years of age, each alternate weekend from after school on thursday until start of school on monday, and (c) from the making of the orders by consent, during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for seven nights, being the first half of holidays in odd-numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even-numbered years and for half the christmas school holidays on a week about basis, the father starting with the first week during odd-numbered years and the second week in even-numbered years, and (d) at other times as may be agreed between the parents. (5) first refusal order for the other parent if either parent is unable to care for x, (6) at christmas, x be with her mother from 9.30 am on 24 december until 11.30 am on 25 december each year and with her father from 11.30 am on 25 december until 3.30 pm on 26 december each year, (7) on new year’s eve with her mother from 12 noon 31 december in even-numbered years until 12 noon on 1 january and with her father from 12 noon on 31 december in odd-numbered years until 12 noon on 1 january, (8) on mother’s day and father’s day with the applicable parent from 9.30 am until 5 pm, (9) on x’s birthday, if not already spending time with the parent, from 3.30 pm until 6 pm, (10) on the mother’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5 pm if occurring on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6 pm is occurring on a school day, and (11) on the father’s birthday, from 9.30 am until 5 pm if occurring on a non-school day and from the end of school until 6 pm if occurring on a school day. (7) changeovers to occur at school or as agreed between the parents and, failing agreement, at f street, suburb g mcdonalds, (8) the parties to cooperate in obtaining a passport for x, the passport to be held by the mother, (9) an order under section 65y of the act providing for both parents to be able to have x travel overseas with them on the giving of certain notice and compliance with certain conditions, (10) orders in relation to each parent keeping the other fully informed in relation to medical matters affecting x, (11) for each parent to have telephone communication with x when in the other parent’s care on tuesdays and saturdays between 6 pm and 6.30 pm, (12) neither parent to physically discipline x, (13) neither parent to “excessively discipline x by any means, this including but not limited to physical, emotional, verbal or psychological discipline”, (14) a non-denigration order in the usual terms, (15) an injunctive order restraining each of the parents from accessing the other parent’s personal computer and mobile phones, email account, social media pages including facebook, linked in and twitter, any online account or cloud storage, (16) both parents to enrol in the parenting after separation course, (17) an order that parents only attend x’s sporting events on days when she is in their care pursuant to the orders unless agreed to in writing by the other parent or unless the event is of significance such as a final or grand final.  until she turns seven on 28 june 2019, each alternate weekend from end of school on friday until 5.30 pm on sunday and each alternate week from end of school on thursday until start of school on friday, (b) once x reaches seven years of age, each alternate weekend from after school on thursday until start of school on monday, and (c) from the making of the orders by consent, during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for seven nights, being the first half of holidays in odd-numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even-numbered years and for half the christmas school holidays on a week about basis, the father starting with the first week during odd-numbered years and the second week in even-numbered years, and (d) at other times as may be agreed between the parents.
40 on 26 september 2019, the matter was in a call over and was set down for hearing on 4 to 6 may 2020, though in the event the matter went over part-heard to 4 and 5 november and then 16 december 2020.
41 i have included in detail the orders made by consent on 4 march 2019 as that was the regime that prevailed up to the time of the final hearing and thereafter, providing for the father to have four nights per fortnight with x during school term time and half of the school holidays.
42 i note here that each parent having seven nights during school holidays is not half the school holidays as when school term holidays run for a fortnight from break up of school on friday until recommencement of school at a monday they involve 16 nights.
the evidence
43 in preparation for these reasons i have read and carefully considered all of the material relied upon by the parties and the icl. i have reviewed the transcripts of each day of the hearing, both in printed form and electronic recordings, including submissions made on behalf of each party and by the icl.
44 in relation to the property settlement issues, i have referred to and had the assistance of the balance sheet, though certain issues between the parties set out thereon need to be resolved and appropriate findings made.
45 at the time of conclusion of the final hearing, both parties were 36 years of age. the mother is of country u heritage. the father is of country v heritage on his father’s side and country w heritage on his mother’s side.
46 the mother is living at suburb s and the father in suburb y, both southern suburbs of greater sydney.
47 the mother is in employment with the employer z as a professional. the father is self-employed as a sole trader of the business company h and is a an it worker.
48 as i have set out earlier, the parties commenced cohabitation in 2009, married in 2011, separated on 16 august 2015 and were divorced on 18 july 2017, their divorce becoming final on 19 august 2017. at the time of separation, the mother and child left the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g and the father remained in occupation until the home was sold in january 2018.
49 i will detail the parties’ evidence going principally to the parenting issues first and then specific evidence relating to the property settlement issues, though there is of course much crossover between the two.
50 at the commencement of cohabitation the mother was employed as an educator at suburb aa and then in 2010 she changed her employment to employer bb.
51 at cohabitation, the father was self-employed as a sole trader of the business company h, which he had commenced in early 2000 while still at high school. he continued operating that business throughout the period of cohabitation and through separation up to the hearing.
52 the husband worked principally from home, though he attended at customer premises for software installations, whilst the mother’s employment was away from the home at the relevant education centres and thereafter, from march 2015, as a professional for the then-named employer z.
53 x was born in 2012 and the mother took maternity leave from about the time of x’s birth until 2012 when she returned to work on a part-time basis four days per week from 7 am till 1.30pm at employer bb. by the end of 12 months from returning to work she was working on a full-time basis. in 2014 the mother changed her employment to become a director at the employer cc and then in 2015 obtained employment with the employer dd.
54 the mother asserts in her evidence that she was the primary carer for x throughout the whole period of cohabitation and that the father was uninterested in x and of no assistance in her care except when third persons were present when, according to the mother, he put on a display of care and affection for x.
55 the father, for his part, says that he assisted with x’s care to the extent that he was a co-primary carer, being available at the home most of the time, that he was an involved father, and he vehemently denies that he was ever, in any manner, uninterested in x’s care.
56 though the father was working from home most of the time, once the mother returned to employment after her maternity leave, x was not at the home for the mother’s working day as the mother was able to place her at the various centres at which she was employed until such time as she took up her employment with the employer dd in march of that year. there is conflicting evidence between the parties as to who was principally involved in collecting her, though i accept that it was the father who collected her in the afternoon more than the mother as that arrangement continued on past the parties’ separation in august 2015 until the start of 2016.
57 the parties separated on 16 august 2015 when x was three years of age, the mother and x leaving the matrimonial home to stay with the mother’s parents for a short time until she rented a townhouse at suburb ee. the father remained in the matrimonial home at f street, suburb g until it was sold in january 2018.
58 at the time of separation, the parents entered into an agreement that the father would spend time with x each tuesday, wednesday and thursday, collecting her from pre-school at about 3 pm and taking her home to the f street, suburb g home and the mother collecting her from the father when she had finished work.
59 the agreement also provided that the father spend time with x each sunday for four or five hours. the mother asserts in her evidence that she agreed to this arrangement as she was afraid that the father would “take her away from me”, though by this time she had been a professional with the employer dd for 17 months, and must have had some idea of the legal avenues open to her in that event.
60 the mother asserts in her evidence that the father often made verbal statements to her that if he did not get what he wanted, that he would take x away from her, but that he never committed such threats to writing in any manner or repeated them in front of witnesses.
61 during her cross-examination, the mother admitted that from the time of separation to the time she was under cross-examination the father had never, on any occasion, done anything to “take her away from me”.
62 on 16 january 2016 the parties attended counselling and entered into, what the mother describes as, an “informal agreement” but as such was in writing and signed by each of the parties, it fits within the definition of a parenting plan under section 63c of the act.
63 a copy of the document is exhibit tab 5 to the mother’s affidavit. pursuant to that agreement (which qualifies as a parenting plan), the father was to spend time with x each tuesday from 3 pm until 5.30 pm and each alternate weekend during the day only from 9.30 am until 5.30 pm until 25 april 2016, at which time his time with x was to increase to each alternate tuesday night and each alternate weekend saturday to sunday. the parenting plan document stated:
mr finala and ms finala agree that x would be able to sleep at her father’s place at the week beginning 25 april 2016. if x’s sleep patterns improve before 25 april 2016 the [sic] she will sleep at her father’s place. mr finala and ms finala agree that in six months x will sleep at her father’s for every second weekend 9.30 to 5.30 pm and tuesday from 3 pm to 5.30 pm.
64 as events unfolded, the parents agreed in march 2016 that the father’s time with x would include alternate weekends from saturday to sunday commencing 16 april 2016.
65 when x turned four, on 28 june 2016, it was agreed between the parents that she would spend time with her father for three nights each fortnight, being each tuesday from the end of pre-school at 3 pm until the start of pre-school on wednesday and each alternate weekend from 9.30 am on saturday until 5.30 pm on sunday, with changeovers taking place at a mcdonalds. this arrangement was put in place and continued up until february 2018 when x started school at o school at suburb p when the tuesday commencement and wednesday ending changed from her pre-school to her school.
66 thereafter, on 28 august 2018, the interim orders pending interim hearing were made by her honour judge henderson (as her honour then was) and the parties followed those orders and on 4 march 2019 the interim orders were made by consent between the parties, that regime continuing through to the hearing.
67 the mother makes it very plain in her evidence that in her view the parents ability to communicate is “very poor”, the mother having asked the father, in a text message on 31 january 2018, to contact here thereafter only through her solicitors (mother’s trial affidavit exhibit tab 8). the father, for his part, made the same request in a text message of 7 february 2018 (contained in the same exhibit to the mother’s trial affidavit).
68 the father asserted in his evidence that, in his view, he and the mother “have a decent parenting relationship. it’s not perfect, but it works and functions”. he added that the parties “do not speak face to face” but communicate through texts when necessary.
69 it is inherent in all of the evidence that the parents ceased communicating some years ago and have an extremely poor, virtually non-existent co-parenting and communication relationship.
70 the mother expressed concerns in her evidence about the father’s parenting capacity, giving evidence about an occasion where she asserted the father dropped x to school at 8 am when teacher supervision was not available until 8.30 am. the father, for his part, asserting that there were a number of other parents at the school at that time as well as five teachers. on the evidence, this only happened on one occasion.
71 the mother also asserts that she was told by x that during an occasion when the father was spending time with her at the beach, he went into the water to use his boogie board leaving x alone on the beach to watch him. the father’s version has x being cared for on the beach by her paternal grandparents.
72 the evidence from the hearing as a whole does not enable me to resolve that conflicting evidence. however, the mother’s asserted incidents establishing the father’s lack of adequate parenting capacity to properly supervise x speak to three asserted occasions in five years of separation. however, she also asserts that during their cohabitation she saw the father “shaking x while yelling into her face” though she gives no evidence of what action she took, if any, on the occasion, as to x’s age at the time and as to the extent or force of the asserting “shaking” or what she meant by “yelling”. she asserts that on another occasion during cohabitation the father placed x inside a dark room and stood outside holding the door handle so that x could not get out. she asserts that she heard x screaming and she intervened to release her and settle her for bed. the father denies the asserted conduct.
73 x has been engaged in weekend soccer and in swimming lessons. for one season, the mother was x’s team coach for her soccer and she asserts that the father would attend x’s games and force his attentions upon the mother by standing close to her, speaking to her, making comments about her appearance and glaring at any male persons the mother spoke to. the father, again, denies that asserted conduct and said that on occasions when he attended x’s soccer games, playing for ff football club, the mother approached him. he asserts that on one occasion she asked him to give her a lift in his car, an assertion the mother, in her turn, denied in her cross-examination.
74 the mother complains that having enrolled x in swimming lessons on mondays, the father would fail to take her to the swimming lessons during his time, and once again the father asserts that when x had a swimming lesson on a monday during his time he took her to the lesson.
75 the mother complains that the father talks to x about the court proceedings and used some occasions of changeovers to attempt to talk to the mother about the court proceedings in x’s presence. the father denies all of those assertions.
76 in her trial affidavit, the mother asserts that, following the interim orders being made by consent on 4 march 2019, x was not coping with the extra time with her father and was exhibiting some behavioural problems, though she does not go on to give any evidence of what led her to believe that x was not coping or of behavioural problems, other than asserting that x was tired.
77 the mother established a relationship over the internet with mr l, a member of the armed forces, and they conducted a long distance relationship from its start in about january or february of 2017 until mr l was able to have his posting changed from queensland to suburb e army base in sydney. they commenced cohabiting together in about december 2019.
78 prior to that move, the mother fell pregnant and their child, m, was born in 2019. mr l met x on various occasions from march 2017 through to when he commenced cohabiting with the mother and he has established what, on all of the evidence, including that of the father, is an excellent relationship with x.
79 the father, to his great credit, says in paragraph 92 of his trial affidavit, referring to mr l:
[he] has been a good influence on x. x gets on with him. this is reassuring to me as x’s father.
80 at the time of the final hearing the mother was pregnant with the second child of herself and mr l.
81 when mr l joined the mother, x, and m in sydney, the mother and children were living at suburb gg. shortly before the commencement of the hearing in may 2020, the mother, mr l, and the children moved to r street, suburb s (near suburb e) on 30 april 2020. this move led to one of the issues to be determined, being what school should be attended by x.
82 x commenced her schooling and at hearing remained at the o school at suburb p, but the mother seeks an order that she change to d school, suburb e at the start of the school year (now the start of term 1, 2022), a school closer to where the mother now resides and consequently a shorter car trip from the mother’s home, though a longer car trip from the father’s home.
83 the mother provides evidence that the distance by car from her home to the school at suburb p is 35.3 kilometres, estimated to be a 42 minute drive though she gives evidence it is more like a 55 minute drive each way, whilst the distance from her home to the suburb e school is 8.7 kilometres or an 11 minute drive. she also gives evidence that the distance from the father’s home to the suburb e school is 27.9 kilometres or a 30 minute drive.
84 the father gives evidence, in paragraph 67 of his trial affidavit, that:
...when x is in my care she attends school. when x is in ms finala’s care she is frequently absent.
and he attaches, as document 1 to his affidavit, identified as tender document 1, x’s school attendance records from o school”.
85 those school attendance records run to 15 pages and there is no differentiation as to who dropped her at or collected her from school. i am unable to use that document to bear out the father’s assertion.
86 mr l’s affidavit is, of course, very much in support of the mother’s original stance on hearing, that there should be no increase in the time to be spent between the father and x (though her position softened by the end of the hearing when she conceded that an extra night per fortnight was appropriate.
87 in particular, he gives evidence of what he observes to be a change in x’s emotional state at changeovers from her mother to her father and from her father to her mother. this is not surprising for x, given the patent hostility and poor co-parenting relationship between her parents, and is not at all uncommon to be observed in children who find themselves in such circumstances.
88 however, in paragraph 24 of his affidavit he says:
i do not believe x enjoys the time she spends with her father as i have heard her expresses [sic] reluctance to go to her father’s place before handover occurs, particularly with stays of a longer duration. i have also seen and heard ms finala encourage x to go with her father and reassure her and make her feel comfortable.
89 during cross-examination by ms christie for the father, mr l conceded that his observations leading to his expression of his belief in his paragraph 24 were based upon the point of changeovers and that he could have no real knowledge of x’s demeanour, level of comfort and enjoyment during her time with her father.
90 mr l, to his credit, says in paragraph 6 of his affidavit:
... i know that i am not [x’s] father and i have no intention of replacing her father. x knows me as “mr l” and i consider that she sees me as a friend and guardian.
91 finally, in relation to mr l’s evidence, i note the contents of paragraph 16 of his affidavit:
x has told me and ms finala “dadda said m is not my real sister and it made me feel sad – i said to dadda – no she is my sister and he kept saying half. every time i said sister – he kept saying half – half” ms finala and i both said "no – m is your sister.” we did not want x to feel upset about it. she felt better after we talked about it. this made x feel that she wasn’t allowed to feel happy about her new sister.
92 it does the father no credit if there is any truth in what x said to mr l, who was not cross-examined on this matter and i accept his evidence. it is not appropriate parenting for the father to in any way limit or demean the relationship between x and her sibling, m. if it has occurred, it is another example of the poor co-parenting relationship between the father and the mother, as being an example of the father’s attempt to minimise an aspect of x’s life in her mother’s home. it pairs with the mother being unable to say anything whatsoever to the credit of the father in any way, other than that he wants to have a relationship with his daughter.
93 the father has paid child support as assessed for x since the time of separation. in paragraphs 277 and 278 of her trial affidavit, the mother asserts that the father does not pay enough towards x’s expenses, but she conceded during cross-examination that in addition to paying child support as assessed, currently in the sum of $991 per month, he also pays half of her school fees, maintains private health cover for x, pays for her piano lessons and has purchased school uniforms and clothing for her use when in his care.
94 in the mother’s trial affidavit, she estimated that x’s monthly expenses “exceed more than $1600 per month”. during her cross-examination, the mother confirmed that as an approximately accurate figure and then conceded that the father maintains private health cover insurance for x, pays half her school fees, pays for her piano lessons, and pays for clothes and uniforms in his household. when asked why she complained that the father should be giving more money towards x’s expenses, she complained that the father had never paid for her soccer costs, hobby club costs, or swimming.
95 the mother complains in her affidavit that the father does not take x to birthday parties to which she is invited during his time with her, but in cross-examination she conceded first that he does take her to “some”. when pressed that the father had only missed taking x to such birthday parties when he had a prior important commitment, the mother prevaricated.
96 similarly, in relation to her complaint that the father failed to take x to her hobby club event in february 2020, she conceded in cross-examination that the first the father knew of her hobby club event was when he received a text message from the mother, to which he responded immediately “we have a christening” and that as a reason for not being able to take x to the hobby club event it was “perfectly reasonable”.
97 it was the mother’s case that the father had perpetrated physical and emotional coercive and controlling family violence against her, including an accusation that ranged from six sexual assaults upon her leading up to their separation to six sexual assaults upon her each week from august 2014 until their separation in august 2015.[2] the mother’s accusations that the father engaged in serious family violence, including of a serious criminal nature, is a very important aspect of this matter.
98 the mother asserts that the father constantly demanded that she account for how much money she has spent, particularly if her expenditure was over $200. the father asserts in paragraph 149 of his trial affidavit that the mother’s accusation is false and he states that the parties maintained separate bank accounts throughout their relationship and that he had no say in how the mother spent her money. he gives as example the mother’s purchase of a motor vehicle 3 during the relationship at a cost of $57,000, on finance, without any notice to or discussion with him.
99 from the mother’s cross-examination:[3]
ms christie: now you were working full time between the time you got together and the time you went on maternity leave? ms finala: correct. ms christie: my client didn’t make you deposit your pay in his bank account, did he? ms finala: no. ms christie: my client didn’t make you deposit it in a joint account, did he? ms finala: no. ms christie: my client didn’t make you deposit your pay in an account to which he even had access, did he? ms finala: no.
100 the mother asserts that as the father worked from home most of the time, he would not tolerate the mother and x making any noise and that the mother would take x out for the day and “find things for x and i to do”. the period of time she is referring to must necessarily have been during her six months maternity leave and on the one day a week that she was not working, from resuming part-time work after her maternity leave until taking up full-time work 12 months later. the father denies the mother’s assertion.
101 the mother says that in august 2014 she was in the kitchen cutting up vegetables for dinner and that x was in the kitchen with her. she says that the father entered the kitchen and grabbed her wrist and pinned her against the cupboard, causing her to feel pain in the back of her head and wrist. she says he held her very tightly and shouted “i’m the man of the house. you have to listen to me and what i say goes”. she says that x came and stood between them and tried to physically push the father off the mother, at which the father released his grip on the mother leaving fingerprint marks on her wrist that later turned to bruises.
102 the mother asserts that when discussing the incident the next day, the father blamed her and said to her, “it’s your fault. my dad even said ‘you need to control my wife’”, though taken literally the wife is asserting that the paternal grandfather told the father that he needs to control the paternal grandmother. the mother says that she never reported the incident to anyone as she felt ashamed and that the father threatened her by saying “if you tell anyone, i will make sure you never see your family again”.
103 the father says that no such incident ever occurred. the father further says that no such incident could have occurred because the mother “never cooked”.
104 the father points to a letter of 11 september 2015 (in tender document 7 to the father’s affidavit) in which the mother’s solicitors state:
your client has not physically hit our client, however over the past 12 months there has been coercive controlling violence perpetrated by your client against our client.
105 there is no mention therein of the physical violence asserted by the mother to have occurred in august 2014 or of the sexual violence she asserts occurred “up to six times a week” from august 2014 until the parties separated in august 2015. there is no mention of an incident the wife asserts occurred on good friday 2015 (outlined below) or any assertion of violence by the father against the family pets.
106 the mother asserts that:
from august 2014 and until the end of our relationship [august 2015] mr finala would regularly, up to six times a week, demand sexual intercourse from me and he would often force himself upon me.
107 she asserts that such abuse by the husband caused her pain, vaginal tears and bleeding. this assertion is denied absolutely by the father and conflicts with what was noted by mr hh, family consultant, in the child dispute conference memorandum from the interviews on 19 july 2018 when mr hh noted the mother said that the father had perpetrated six sexual assaults upon her “towards the end of our relationship”.
108 in the family report, at paragraph 12, dr k notes:
ms finala alleged that, from 2014 until the end of their relationship, mr finala sexually assaulted her on at least six occasions.
109 from the mother’s cross-examination (5 may 2020, page 41, line 11 to page 43, line 10):
ms christie: ms finala, you told the family report writer, dr k, that your husband had sexually assaulted you on at least six occasions, didn’t you? ms finala: i – i don’t recall how many times i told – like, the – the number that i told her. ms christie: well, if she has recorded that that’s what you said, i want to put to you that’s because that’s what you said? ms finala: okay. i, i don’t recall, but okay. ms christie: well, that’s different from the version in your affidavit, isn’t it? ms finala: so my version in the affidavit is at – can i look at my affidavit and check ‑ ms christie: no. ms finala: no. ms christie: remember, ms finala, you are obliged to tell the truth ‑? ms finala: yes. ms christie: ‑ ‑ ‑ and we are to assume that when you say something in your affidavit it was true?‑‑‑okay. yes. ms christie: given the seriousness of what you alleged, isn’t it safe to assume that you know without looking at your affidavit? ms finala: that i know how many times he assaulted me? ms christie: correct? ms finala: i did not keep track of how many times he assaulted me, so i don’t know. ms christie: yet, you have given different versions to different people over a period of five years, do you accept that? ms finala: i don’t recall the – like, the number or figure which i’ve given people i’ve spoken to in regards to sexual assault. ms christie: do you not think it’s important if you’re making such a serious allegation that you do so with precision? ms finala: i, i agree with your statement. i just can’t give a figure because it was a build-up of the incidents. ms christie: when dr k records at least six occasions, were you telling her the truth then? ms finala: i was – i was telling her the – from – the truth from what – you know, from my account of events, but i don’t recall, like, saying how many times. ms christie: the only occasion you’ve given any detail in respect of – to the court – is one occasion on 3 april 2015, do you agree with that? ms finala: 3 april? that was when he attacked me in my sleep. that’s – yes, that’s ..... ms christie: okay. ..... occasion which you have told the court about in any detail, do you accept that? ms finala: can you repeat the question? sorry. just the – your question stopped at the beginning. ms christie: that is the only occasion – are you having trouble – is somebody having trouble hearing? ms finala: no, i ..... didn’t hear half of – the half of your question. sorry. ms christie: 3 april 2015 is the only occasion that you have given any detail in respect of? ms finala: in respect to the sexual assault? ms christie: yes? ms finala: that’s the only occasion that i recall a lot of detail, correct, in regards to sexual assault. ms christie: madam, it’s the only occasion you’ve given any detail, whatsoever, in your affidavit, isn’t it? ms finala: i speak in regards to three events and that’s one of the sexual assault. it’s not ‑ ms christie: madam, you do not speak about three sexual assaults- ms finala: no. ms christie: in any detail in your affidavit, do you? ms finala: no. ms christie: just one? ms finala: to one in detail. ms christie: well, just – there are no details about any other occasion? ms finala: no, because when they were occurring i wasn’t aware of the time, the date, you know. i – there was quite a blur of, you know – without – because he – he was blaming me that it happened. the reason i remember – i recall that ..... ms christie: madam, i’m not asking you for an explanation. i’m just asking you to confirm it is the only occasion that you have spoken about in your affidavit in any detail at all. ms finala: the only sexual assault occasion. correct. ms christie: so the reality is – and tell me if you disagree with this – you have, in retrospect, decided that there were occasions on which you, in hindsight, didn’t want to have sex with my client, and you have called them sexual assaults, do you agree with that, or disagree with that? ms finala: i disagree with that. ms christie: right. and because – i take it, though, that if you were saying that he had had sex with you and you had told him “no”, you would have put some details in your affidavit? ms finala: no, because i don’t ‑ ms christie: madam, you would have done that? not why. you would have done that, wouldn’t you? you would have told the court what happened? ms finala: no, because i don’t recall every single time he forced himself on me in regards to details. ms christie: madam, you would have done something about it if this had happened on as many occasions as you suggested? ms finala: no, because i was in fear. no. ms christie: so afraid that you thought you would take an overseas vacation with him? ms finala: so afraid that i didn’t know what to do. i didn’t – like, i’ve never experienced this before. i didn’t know what to do at the time. ms christie: and you didn’t know what to do after you started working at employer dd, either? ms finala: when i started working at employer dd i was more aware of domestic violence, and that’s when i also came up with a plan to ..... plan to leave.
110 the mother asserts that during the relationship the father intimidated her by clenching his fists so hard his knuckles went white, whilst leaning over her, causing her to feel scared.
111 the only specific incident of violence described by the mother, other than the kitchen incident in august 2014, is an incident she asserts occurred on good friday 2015 (3 april 2015 – about four months before separation) and she says she was in bed asleep and woke up with the father on top of her, pinning her to the bed, and trying to have sexual intercourse with her. she said, “no, stop it” and pushed the father off herself three times, but the father continued to grab her and attempt to have sexual intercourse with her. the mother got up and ran out of the bedroom. the father did not follow her. the mother asserts that on the next day she had bruises on her inner thighs, which she asserts are depicted in the photographs in exhibit a4. other than the mother’s assertion that the photograph is of her inner thigh showing bruising caused by the father’s asserted actions, the photographs do not assist as they do not enable the court to assess independently who is being photographed or what limb or what part of the limb is photographed.
112 the mother says that on the following day, easter saturday, she spoke with the father and had the following conversation:
mother: what you did was wrong and what it is called is attempted rape. father: i don’t like you working for employer dd. you are learning too much. if you tell anyone, i will make sure you don’t see your family again. no one will believe you anyway. and i will make sure you don’t see x again.
113 the father denies that that incident ever occurred, or any such incident of attempted sexual assault or sexual assault by him of the mother. the father says:
i never struck ms finala (or anyone) in my entire life.
and:
at no point in our relationship did i ever physically abuse, intimidate or injure ms finala in any way.
114 the mother says that she began seeing a psychologist, ms jj, at “kk counselling”, on a referral from her general practitioner for:
...marital stress that had become worse since the birth of their daughter.
the first session was on 7 may 2015, and the mother had 10 sessions with ms jj through to 25 september 2015. a letter from ms jj addressed “to whom it may concern” dated 25 september 2015 is exhibited at tab 1 to the mother’s trial affidavit, and the third paragraph details three incidents, apparently described to ms jj by the mother, of family violence by the father, being:
in april this year, ms finala iterated that her husband attempted to have sexual intercourse with her while she slept without her consent. ... ms finala also recollects and [sic] incident in august last year when her husband forcibly held her by her wrists while she was cooking dinner. ... ms finala described an incident in august this year when her husband woke her by slamming his fist into the mattress next to her head and saying, “i want to kill someone.” this incident occurred in the presence of their daughter, as ms finala had fallen asleep with her daughter while settling her down for the night.
115 the last described incident is a reference to the mother’s evidence that in july 2015, while the parties were on a holiday in country u to visit members of the mother’s extended family, the mother had fallen asleep on a bed with x and woke to the father punching the pillow beside her face and saying in an angry tone, “i want to kill something.” the mother says that the father then got up and punched and slammed things in the hotel room. she says that she felt scared and that x was awoken. she says the father left the hotel and walked around.
116 the mother attended at suburb y police station on 27 august 2015, but:
...decided not to make a formal statement until she had attended family mediation on friday, 4 september 2015 at 9.30 am at the ll centre in suburb mm.[4]
117 the mother says that she described the sexual assault incidents and violence to the domestic violence liaison officer at the police station. the cops entry details that the mother told the officer that:
she has kept a detailed diary of the incidents, police advised her to bring the diary with her when she felt comfortable to make the formal statement regarding the incidents.
118 the mother took no further action in that regard until august or september 2017, when she says that she again attended a police station and gave two formal statements, one on 2 september and one on 26 september 2017, and provided her diaries to police. when a subpoena to nsw police force to produce all relevant documents was answered, the diaries were not produced, though the mother gives her evidence that they are retained by the police.
119 the mother alleges in paragraph 47 of her trial affidavit that during the last 12 months of the parties’ marriage leading up to separation, the father made a number of threats to her, as follows: if you leave me, i will take x away, and i will make sure you don’t have her. i will tell them that you’re crazy, and they will believe me. they won’t believe you. i am going to drag it out in court. i am going to take x away from you. i will make sure you don’t get a single cent.
120 the mother’s evidence asserts that it was based on such comments by the father to the mother, unheard by any third person, that she acquiesced in so many matters post-separation out of fear that the father would take x away from her.
121 from the mother’s cross-examination (transcript, 5 may 2020, page 13, line 30 to 40):
ms christie: can you give me an example, in the period between when you separated ‑? ms finala: yes. ms christie: ‑and when you first had court orders, where he retained your daughter contrary to the agreement? ms finala: so from when i separated until before the orders? ms christie: yes ms finala: that he withheld her and didn’t return her? ms christie: yes ms finala: okay. he did not – he did not withhold her, without returning her. ms christie: right. ms finala: and after the court orders were made, he has never withheld her, has he? ms christie: correct.
122 from cross-examination of the mother (transcript, 5 may 2020, page 14, lines 29 to 41):
ms christie: now, i asked about there having been a week-about arrangement in the christmas school holidays, and leave aside whether or not all of the weeks had seven days in them. i don’t read in your affidavit that that was a problem for x anywhere. and i take it that’s because it wasn’t a problem for her? ms finala: so you’re asking me if it was a problem that ‑ ‑ ‑ ms christie: i take it that if x had had a hard time with that week-about arrangement, we would have read about it in your affidavit? ms finala: she – no, she didn’t have a hard time. is that ‑ ‑ ‑ ms christie: okay ms finala: ‑ what you’re asking me? ms christie: yes.
123 throughout the whole of the mother’s cross-examination, she was not prepared to make even a single tiny concession in favour of the father, and if such concession looked like becoming inevitable, she resorted to asserting lack of memory.
124 from cross-examination of the mother (transcript, 5 may 2020, page 36, line 19 to page 37, line 7):
ms christie: well, i’ll talk to you about how you communicate. i wanted to ask you a general proposition about your text messaging. there is not a single text message in which the father has abused you, is there? ms finala: i don’t think – well, i think he’s very careful about what he puts in writing. ms christie: madam, has he sent you an abusive text message since separation? ms finala: i don’t recall. ms christie: i take it that, if he did, you would have given it to your solicitor. do you agree with that or disagree with it? ms finala: don’t know. i’m not very good with record-keeping. i think – i think if it was really bad i probably would of, but – i’ll note it down. ms christie: and we don’t find any references to it in your affidavit, do we? ms finala: no. ms christie: because it didn’t happen, did it? ms finala: that he didn’t send me any text messages that were abusive? ms finala: is that- ms christie: did not send you a single abusive text message after separation, did he? ms finala: i don’t recall. ms christie: the answer is no, isn’t it? ms finala: i don’t recall all his text messages he sent me. ms christie: the father hasn’t sent you a single abusive email after separation, has he? ms finala: his emails – there’s [indistinct] – his emails that are passive aggressive – i don’t know if you would classify that as abusive. ms christie: do you have examples of passive aggressive emails my client has sent you? ms finala: no, i [indistinct] no. ms christie: no. you don’t have any because there aren’t any? ms finala: i don’t ‑ ms christie: what do you say – oh, sorry ms finala: i don’t have all the emails that he sent me, no, because i don’t keep track of all his emails he sends me. ms christie: if they’d been passive aggressive, that would be relevant to the decision his honour has to make, wouldn’t it? ms finala: i think – i think – in the family law court i hear there’s a lot of tit for tat, and i think the important information is to be presented. i think passive aggressive emails aren’t that important.
125 further, from the mother’s cross-examination (transcript, 5 may 2020, page 56, line 30 to line 42):
ms christie: right. and the only possible reason for changing her school next year is because the school that you would be changing her to is 12 kilometres from the house you’re moving to, agree? ms finala: that’s not the only reason, no. ms christie: right. but we’re completely happy with her current school, aren’t we? ms finala: yes, of course. ms christie: right. we’re not changing it because there’s a problem there? ms finala: we’re changing that because the travel is the issue. well, that’s what i ..... ms christie: okay. so let’s get back to my other proposition. you want to change her school because it would be more convenient for you to drive her to a school closer to the house you have just moved to, that’s the long and the short of it, isn’t it? ms finala: yes.
126 in paragraph 120 of the mother’s trial affidavit, she says:
after our separation, mr finala was keeping my mail from me. mr finala gave me a bundle of unopened letters that included a fine, the reminder of the fine, a warning about a suspension notice if the fine was not paid, and a suspension notice as the fine was not paid. when i finally received the mail from mr finala, i immediately paid the fine, explained the situation and the suspension was automatically lifted. i went to the post office and obtained a redirection on my mail and contacted the rta and advised them.
127 in relation to that assertion, the mother was cross-examined by ms christie as follows (transcript, 5 may 2020, page 63, line 44 to page 66, line 11):
ms christie: now, can i ask you a question. i think you complain in your affidavit that my client retained your mail, do you remember saying that? ms finala: yes, he did. yes. ms christie: are you genuine about that complaint? ms finala: it’s correct. yes. ms christie: you’re an adult person able to do a mail redirection, aren’t you? ms finala: yes, and once i found out ‑ ms christie: and did you – ms finala: ‑about what he was doing – sorry. ms christie: -to do that when you moved out? ms finala: i did that when i found out he was holding my – my mail, yes. ms christie: did you do that when you moved out? ms finala: straightaway? no, i didn’t, because i was ..... i wasn’t thinking clearly. so – no, i did not do that straightaway. ms christie: you can’t blame him for the fact that your mail came to your address that you hadn’t changed, can you? ms finala: no, i can’t blame him that it didn’t come to my – well, where i was currently residing ..... ms christie:..... and, specifically, i think you complain about fines in respect of your car, am i right about that? ms finala: yes. correct. ms christie: okay. now, that has to do with either your registration or your drivers licence, do you accept that? ms finala: and – or parking fines ..... ms christie:..... they are connected to you via either (a) your registration, or (b) your drivers licence, do you accept that? ms finala: i accept that, but i know they’re also connected to parking fines, yes. ms christie: forget parking fines for a moment. how do they know where to send the parking fine, ms finala? ms finala: through the registration to me, yes. ms christie: right. yes. now, nothing that my client did stopped you from changing the registration of your car, it was not his responsibility, was it? ms finala: i agree it’s not his responsibility – it’s mine. i agree, yes. ms christie: so let’s talk about your mail for a minute. when do you say that you accrued the first of those fines? ms finala: i don’t recall. ms christie: how many parking fines did you accrue? ms finala: i don’t know. i don’t recall. sorry. ms christie: there’s a balance-sheet item in the joint balance sheet where you say the court should take into account a debt you owe of $1734, from memory, are they for parking fines? ms finala: yes, i believe that is parking fines, and i think there’s – was a registration issue as well. ms christie: right. why should that be in the balance sheet? why should my client share that? ms finala: well, it’s a debt. ms christie: on 18 september 2017, two years after you moved out, my client sent you this message:
hi ms finala a lot of mail has come for you today at f street, suburb g, i will put in x’s schoolbag tomorrow.
ms christie: that was appropriate, wasn’t it? ms finala: yes. correct. but- ms christie: okay. now, as soon as that happened, that was your signal, “oh my goodness me, i should have changed my address”, agree? ms finala: correct. i agree. ms christie: but you didn’t do it, did you? ms finala: i don’t know. i don’t – i don’t recall ..... ms christie: because – sorry, your honour. i apologise, your honour. there is another one about mail but i have to find it. okay. i apologise. ms christie: the first time – it wasn’t 2017 that my client first raised it with you, it was 25 october 2016, and he sent you this text message:
hi ms finala you have two letters from the rta, so i will put them in x’s schoolbag.
ms christie: now, that was more than a year after you had moved out. that was appropriate for him to alert you to that that way, wasn’t it? ms finala: yes. correct. ms christie: right. but you didn’t change your address because you got – he received more on 18 september the following year? ms finala: i don’t recall when i changed my address, and i don’t like ..... messages ..... but they are appropriate. ms christie: but you’ve included it as an example of my client doing something inappropriate, haven’t you? ms finala: i think really because, i mean – well, from the position that he had mail and didn’t give it to me when he received it. ms christie: madam, that’s just not true. he gave it to you as soon as he received it by sending it with x? ms finala: no, that’s not true. ms christie: right. because i would expect, then, if he – you had received it and it was old, you would have written back and said, “why did you sit on this for so long?” or you would have raised it through your solicitor? ms finala: no, i didn’t, because i didn’t want to cause conflict. so – i know that they wait – he was ..... the mail ..... he received it. i know, because when i opened the mail the dates on the – on the mail were older than when i – they – they weren’t just from one – from one date – it was multiple dates that he had – had accumulated. ms christie: madam, you’re just giving that evidence now because i’ve suggested to you that your evidence is inconsistent? ms finala: i believe i – i shared that with my solicitor at the time. ms christie: and would have instructed her to write something about it to my client to make sure that you got your mail in the future? ms finala: i don’t recall if i did that. ms christie: and would have thought it was so important that you immediately changed your address? ms finala: i got a po box. ms christie: well, madam, you didn’t change your address, because it happened again? ms finala: i got a po box, and i got mail ‑ ms christie:..... change your address, because it happened again? ms finala: if it happened again it would have been to an organisation that i may have missed.
128 the following is from the cross-examination of the mother by the icl, mr holmes.
129 from the transcript, 5 may 2020, page 70, line 4 to page 71, line 24:
mr holmes: and so you say to his honour that you really know x better than anyone, don’t you? ms finala: i believe i do, yes. mr holmes: yes? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: yes. with all of that knowledge that you say you have, you can’t tell his honour one good thing about the father, can you? ms finala: i – i do see, like, some good qualities in him i know that i haven’t presented in evidence. mr holmes: right. i’m going to give you the opportunity now to tell his honour all of the good things about x and her relationship with her father? ms finala: so i believe a positive note that – that – that mr finala demonstrates is that he is willing to have a relationship with his daughter and that he shows interest in her, so that is positive. and i think, for x, i think it’s very important for her to have a relationship with her father because, regardless of what happened between mr finala and i, he is her father at the end of the day and i believe as a father, you know – for x, it creates, like, a sense of identity and belonging so i do think it’s important for her to have a relationship with him. and, you know, as much as, you know, mr finala and i don’t have a relationship or get on well, you know, i do want to encourage her to maintain that relationship with him because i think that it’s likely to – will affect her as a person growing up in some way if she was not to see him at all. i think what – you know, what that looks like, it needs to – it needs to be around positive memories, creating positive ..... and i think, you know, limiting conflict and her being witness to it is very important and i think that needs to, you know, take into consideration. nevertheless, i do think it’s important for her to maintain a relationship and, you know ..... yes. sorry. ms lawson: i’m sorry, your honour, the audio cut out on my end. is ‑ his honour: yes. it cut out on the last sentence, ma’am. do you recall what your last sentence was? it’s important ?— ms finala: yes. i think ‑ mr holmes: you were saying it’s important ‑? ms finala: yes. i think – i think it’s important for x to have her identity, to maintain a link with her paternal side, with her father, with his parents. i think it’s just – it creates a sense of identity and belonging. yes. i think the culture as well because she’s made up, you know, of different cultures. yes. and i think because – because it’s quite different, she’s – you know, from her father, you know, half country w, half country v, i think it’s important to maintain that culture and then the country u side from my family, i think that’s important to maintain as well. yes. i think, you know, that connection is important. he’s willing to maintain a relationship with her and, you know, i think it’s important for her. but i think what that looks like, it needs to be in a – in a way that’s positive and, like, i don’t think it’s fair on her to be exposed to conflict or stress or anxiety or seeing her parents fight. i think that would be, you know ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: i think, perhaps, you’re drifting away from mr holmes’ question and going to the reverse side of mr holmes’ question- ms finala: yes. his honour: if i could just suggest- ms finala: yes. his honour: counsel may disagree. mr holmes may disagree but that was my perception. ms holmes: yes. ms finala: yes. ms holmes: madam, what are the good things in this child’s life that the father has done for the child’s benefit? be specific. what are the good things that he has done? ms finala: i think it’s good when he has taken her to, like, the curricular activities that he likes and participates in. i think, for instance, you know, when he has taken her from – for swimming – for him to see that. when he has taken her to the soccer, i think that’s good for her. i think she – i know recently they started doing piano lessons on his – on his fortnight. i think that’s – that’s good because it’s showing her interest and following her interests. i think that’s – that’s good. and when he will say – will take her to birthday parties to make sure that she’s socialising with children her age and communicating with the parents for playdates. i think that – that’s good for her because it shows – you know, it’s – it shows that he’s – he’s trying to, you know, maintain those friendships that she has. yes.
130 from the transcript, 5 may 2020, page 72, line 17 to page 73, line 39:
mr holmes: all right. those photographs that you were asked questions about, which are exhibit r5, you recall those? do you want to see them again? ms finala: yes. yes. i’ve got them. yes. mr holmes: you’ve got them?‑‑‑yes. mr holmes: and you were asked question by senior counsel in relation to the posture of the father and whether that was part of his fake persona. do you remember being asked all of those questions? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: okay. well, i’m not going to go over that. but what i would like you to look at is your daughter in those photos? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: all right? look at the first photo with, you know, the water in the background and the mountains and your daughter. what’s your daughter doing? ms finala: she’s hugging her dad. she’s hugging her dad. mr holmes: yes. she’s hugging him pretty tightly, isn’t she? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: and she’s got her cheek right next to – embracing his cheek, isn’t she? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: and do you think that’s an expression of her love for her father? ms finala: yes. i do. yes. mr holmes: yes. that’s an overt display of the way she feels at that time about her father, isn’t it? ms finala: yes. i agree. yes. mr holmes: irrespective of what he father is doing, whether he’s faking it or not, she’s not, is she? ms finala: i agree. correct. yes. mr holmes: let’s go to the next one. the next one, again she is hugging her father tightly, isn’t she? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: and there’s another overt display of what she feels like about her father?‑‑‑yes. mr holmes: agreed? ms finala: yes. correct. mr holmes: so, cut to the chase, all of those photos display that same attitude of this child to her father, don’t they? ms finala: yes. i – i believe x loves her father, yes. i can see that, yes. mr holmes: and those photos display a very intense affection, don’t they? ms finala: they do. yes. mr holmes: so let’s go forward, now ‑? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: ‑to x in the family report interviews. do you remember reading about the observations of father with x, particularly looking at paragraph 81, your honour, of the family report. mr holmes: do you see the – do you have the family report there? ms finala: ‑‑‑myself, no. ..... mr holmes: can your solicitor give you page 29 of the family report? ms finala: yes. yes. i’ve got it. mr holmes: right. can you just read paragraph 81 to yourself. can you see that? ms finala: yes. mr holmes: okay. does that give you comfort that the child still appears to be showing significant affection to her father all these years past the trip to country u? ms finala: so you asked me if it gives comfort that she gives affection to her father? mr holmes: yes? ms finala: yes. i think it’s quite ..... his honour: the sound is breaking up. i’m missing some of your answer, ma’am. mr holmes: say that again. can you say that again? ms finala: it does give me comfort to know my child is affectionate with the father, yes. mr holmes: and that would give you comfort that – and this was in 2019, wasn’t it? ms finala: ..... mr holmes: so despite all that has gone on between you and the father in those years, x still is greatly attached to her father, isn’t she? ms finala: i don’t know if i would say she’s greatly attached to him.
131 from the transcript, 5 may 2020, page 76, lines 1 to 24:
mr holmes: and – okay. so what i suggest to you is that the amount of affection that x showed to her father, notwithstanding the way that interview progressed, was most significant. what do you say? ms finala: i don’t understand the question. what do you mean by notwithstanding? mr holmes: well, she survived the hostility that was in the waiting room and she could still display that level of affection to her father in circumstances where it’s her mother and her mother’s mother who brought her to the interview. what do you say? ms finala: i’m glad that she was able to play with – with the father. i – and i’m glad that she was able to interact with him and feel – and, you know, settle. yes. mr holmes: see, it’s not just playing with her father, is it? it’s the emotional attachment to her father that’s important, isn’t it? ms finala: i agree. yes. i agree. emotional attachment is good for her. mr holmes: would you agree she has a strong emotional attachment to her father right now? ms finala: i don’t know what that attachment looks like. i know she feels attached to her father because it’s her father. i don’t know if she – i would say it’s a strong attachment. i think she wants it to be a strong attachment. mr holmes: so when you talk about one of the aspects that is needed is to limit the conflict in her presence, would you agree that the behaviour in that waiting room is sort of inconsistent with limiting conflict between the two of you? ms finala: i agree that that was a very awkward situation and it could have been handled better.
132 from the transcript, 5 may 2020, page 78, lines 45 to 47:
mr holmes: so the best way to reduce the level of difficulty would be for his honour to specify precisely the times when the child is with the father and with you, agreed? ms finala: yes. correct. yes.
133 during the cross-examination of the father, the following occurred:
ms lawson: you say the mother made up the whole of the allegations of sexual assault by you against her? father: yes – a repulsive idea. ms lawson: did it happen, did you sexually assault the mother? father: absolutely not. ms lawson: the mother says you did? father: yes. ms lawson: more than once? father: yes. ms lawson: and you say that’s a fabrication? father: yes. ... ms lawson: changeovers are mainly school to school now? father: yes. ms lawson: in the school holidays, they have to be face to face? father: yes. ms lawson: the two of you don’t converse at changeovers? father: correct. ms lawson: changeovers take place in silence? father: between me and the mother, yes. ms lawson: you say the mother doesn’t engage with you in any way? father: yes. ... ms lawson: you distrust the mother and fear that she will make false allegations against you? father: yes. ms lawson: your distrust of the mother goes further than that? father: for example? ms lawson: in relation to her care of x? father: she is a good mother. if x is with her mother, i know she is well looked after.
134 in relation to the mother’s assertions that the father sexually assaulted her on many occasions, the father was cross-examined as follows:
ms lawson: the mother makes very serious allegations against you of sexual assault? father: i’m well aware of that. ms lawson: the mother asserts that you raped her on many occasions? father: she says so. ms lawson: you did do so. father: that’s absurd, i am not violent at all. ms lawson: you told your wife that you had not married her for her cooking, but so that you could f-u-c-k her whenever you wanted to? father: no. ms lawson: you caused her bruising when you attacked her. father: no. ms lawson: in 2014, the mother was in the kitchen and you grabbed her wrist and pinned her to a cupboard. father: no. ms lawson: you told the mother that you were the man and she has to listen to what you say. father: no. ms lawson: you use your medical condition as an excuse to say you couldn’t have done these things. father: the condition doesn’t mean i can’t do manual labour – i find it hard, but i can do it. ms lawson: are you offended by the allegations? father: i was shocked. i felt like i was about to vomit when i read them. ms lawson: were you angry when you read the allegations? father: i was highly disappointed and disgusted. it was not a pleasant day reading those things. ms lawson: she has maintained her assertions throughout this court case. father: yes. ms lawson: it would be hard for you to co-parent due to these allegations and your reaction to them. father: i agree it would be hard.
135 in relation to proposed orders, the father was cross-examined by the icl, and i find the following evidence from that cross-examination is particularly significant:
holmes: in paragraph 40 of the mother’s affidavit, she says that she would accept and agree for x to attend o school at suburb nn – what do you say to that? father: i would not call that a halfway point. holmes: what do you say the distance is? father: about 70 per cent my journey. holmes: if that is to be the school, you will accept that? father: yes. holmes: you could accommodate taking x to and from school there? father: yes. ... holmes: do you have any proposals for how you and the mother can improve your level of communication, do you see any way forward to change? father: in 2016, we did face to face, not as it is today. we could do it in 2016. i hope things de-escalate and communication improves. holmes: what do you say is the best way to communicate with the mother about x? father: sms. holmes: sms works for both of you? father: yes. holmes: are you happy for the mother to call you? father: yes. holmes: but you don’t volunteer that you would call her. father: the mother said not to. holmes: you would call the mother if she allows it? father: yes. holmes: have you used any communication apps like family wizard and so forth, or thought of using them? father: i haven’t done, but i would. holmes: you say sms works, and so you see no need to change? father: yes. holmes: you want an order that you can both attend medical appointments together? father: yes. holmes: if you don’t talk, do you see that would be difficult? father: that’s a good point. holmes: so do you agree it’s not a good idea for the court to make that order? father: i accept that. holmes: do you agree that you should share the christmas day/boxing day period? father: yes, i’m not absolutely sure of the country u tradition, but i think she celebrates in accordance with her tradition, and i’m happy with that. holmes: what is her tradition? father: i do believe that they celebrate at night-time on christmas eve. holmes: so you agree that the mother should get each christmas eve? father: yes. holmes: now, in relation to new year’s eve, are you willing to alternate? father: yes. holmes: on mother’s day, x be with her mother? father: yes. holmes: on father’s day, x be with you? father: yes. holmes: in relation to x’s birthday, what do you propose? father: that we share that day by some means. holmes: you each have some time with x? father: yes. holmes: most changeovers would be at school? father: yes. holmes: if the court does not order that you both attend medical appointments, the court should order that you both communicate in relation to medical matters? father: yes. holmes: in terms of international travel, you both want to take the child overseas? father: yes, i would love to take x to country w. yeah. holmes: where would the mother want to take x overseas? father: i believe to country oo and country u. holmes: do you see a problem in relation to country oo and country u? father: i think that country u has had an interesting history with parents who have divorced. now that ms finala is in a relationship, i trust the mother to take x to country u and do what is best. holmes: you’re not proposing any restrictions other than as in the orders you’ve put to the court? father: correct. holmes: you agree it would be a little unfair if you take x to country w to your family and the mother cannot take her to country oo or country u? father: i agree. there has got to be compromise on both sides. holmes: do you have any objection to the mother holding x’s passport? father: none. i agree with that.
the family report – the evidence of dr k
136 i note the following in particular from the family report dated 1 march 2019 prepared by dr k (exhibit icl2):
[3] the parties described a somewhat different experience of their relationship trajectory. ms finala stated that she was quite focused on building her career at the expense of the relationship. she claimed that she and mr finala shared very little couple time together and, at the most, spent one day a week together. mr finala stated that he felt wholeheartedly committed to the relationship while also building his business. ... [11] ms finala asserted that mr finala perpetrated physical, sexual and emotional abuse towards her. she claimed that prior to their marriage, mr finala punched the walls and broke a light switch when she purchased a car without speaking to him about it. she also referred to an incident that occurred at the time of her sister’s wedding in 2013. she said that mr finala’s parents were also invited and, at the end of the festivities, she was scolded by mr finala’s mother for not saying goodbye to her. she asserted that she and mr finala had an argument and he hurt her as he pinned her head against the wall ...
137 i note that neither of the particular incidents referred to are contained in the mother’s evidence at trial.
[12] ms finala alleged that, from 2014 until the end of their relationship, mr finala had sexually assaulted her on at least six occasions. ... ... [40] ... ms finala claimed that x is afraid her father will come and take her from school, although it does not seem he has ever attempted to do this. ...
138 from dr k’s interview with x:
[75] ... x nominated her parents as the people who give her the best hugs and described her mother’s hugs as “good” and her father squeezing her a bit when he hugs her. she nominated her mother as the person who she would like to look after her if she was sick. she referred to her mother as having normal blood and her father having problems with his blood, so when she is sick, she does not want her “problems” to go to him.
139 it seems from the passage quoted that x’s nomination of her mother as the person to look after her if she is sick is in consequence of her concern that she may cause some harm to her father (consequent upon her father having “problems with his blood”) if he looks after her.
[77] ... x said that her father is strong and nice. she stated that he acts a “bit like a kid” when he’s angry and that he takes his anger out on her and tells her to “go away” in a louder voice than her mother. she added that she feels sad and upset at those times. ... [78] ... she stated that she can’t remember anything that makes her feel sad.
140 very significantly, from dr k’s interview with x, in paragraph 79:
[79] x said that if she could wave a magic wand, she would want her parents “to get back together”. she said that they are not friends because they do not speak to each other, and she described how she tries to [get] them to converse when they come into contact, but she feels sad because she does not think they are going to do that. she referred to her father being quiet and mumbling and her mother just taking her bag when they meet at changeovers. she described how [it] makes her feel sad and that changeovers are uncomfortable for her. ...
141 from the observation of x with her father, paragraph 81:
[81] ... there were exchanges of affection between mr finala and x initiated by mr finala but responded to by x. ... [83] ... x appeared at ease with her father.
dr k noted, in paragraph 84, that “x seemed more relaxed in the presence of her mother ... “
142 in the family report under the heading “evaluation”, dr k expresses the following opinions:
[86] there is a strong body of research to suggest that children who are able to sustain intact relationships with both parents following a separation have a much better prognosis for their emotional, educational and psychological well-being. ... ... [89] x currently seems to have an intact relationship with both parents. ... she is possibly aware of her mother’s fears about the time she spends in her father’s care and is identifying with them. [94] x is now six years and six months. she was interviewed, and her disclosures suggest that she loves both parents and members of her extended family. [95] ...the planting of irrational fears about a parent can lead to anxiety reaction. ms finala has already alluded to x displaying some anxiety in the past. ms finala’s suggestion that x is afraid that her father will take her from school and that she will be old enough to call for help if she spends more time with her father when she is more mature suggests that there may be some elements of irrational fears being planted with x. [96] ... already, x discloses that she feels confused as to the messages she receives from her parents and which one is telling the truth. she also indicated that she does not want to upset one or the other and is trying to get them to have a better relationship with each other. mr and ms finala need to free x from the fear that she might be seen as partisan and to allow her to unproblematically love both parents, as currently she is working harder at getting her parents to have a better relationship than they are working themselves. [102] ... ms finala is hypervigilant and not convinced that mr finala is well intentioned. she fears that he has malevolent intentions and is out to hurt her through x, and her mistrust of him is also overwhelming and palpable. [103] ms finala seems to need some assistance to accept that her proposal is the bare minimum of what would be expected for children in x’s situation and for x to consolidate the relationship with her father. ideally, in situations such as this, x should be spending substantial time during school terms with the non-live with parent, which enables parents to take an active role in recreational but also school life, and the parties should be moving towards equally sharing school holidays and special occasions. there are no indicators to suggest why this should not be the case in this matter.[5] [107] ... there are also significant benefits which x derives from contact with her paternal extended family, and maybe members of her maternal extended family, through spending time with her father, just as she is enjoying members of the maternal family when she is in her mother’s care. ... [110] there are no indicators that x has been at risk in the care of either parent. ... [113] the parties demonstrate a palpable level of animosity and disdain towards each other, and their demeanour suggests that they are maintaining their rage, which is accelerating rather than abating, notwithstanding that they have now been separated for four years. [114] the parties need to be mindful that children such as x who are trapped between two warring camps and witness family conflict are prone to suffer adverse consequences in their emotional and cognitive development. depression, anxiety and temperament problems are commonly seen in such children. they also sometimes manifest disorganisation of planning and organising functions, hypervigilance, poor inhibition of inappropriate responses and attention to distractions, resulting in symptoms not unlike adhd. any biological predispositions for mental health vulnerabilities in children are likely to be exacerbated by being exposed to environmental stressors and family conflict.
143 in relation to the parents, dr k opines “...their capacity to dialogue and make collaborative decisions ... is currently non-existent.”
144 further, she expresses an opinion:
[121] ... the parties would be strongly encouraged to reflect on the benefits for x if they were to adopt a more inclusive and collaborative parenting relationship. this includes being more transparent about educational and health decisions and at the very least sharing information, even if there is not more active participation in the form of attendance at appointments. ... [122] failure to do this is likely to impact adversely on x, whose needs will become overshadowed by the adult dynamics. ... [123] ... the choice of granting sole parental responsibility to one parent is one that is not made lightly by the court and reserved to situations where there has been severe family violence or the children are seriously at risk, and this is not one of those cases. unfortunately, such orders send a poor message to children about the worth of both parents in their lives and would only serve to reinforce the perceptions that x is already forming that her father is a less significant part of her world. ... [124] ... even if her own fears of mr finala were real, and she seemed to experience some ambivalence in that regard, [ms finala] has not been able to put those to the side and foreground the needs of x to have a totally open relationship with her father, and she has engaged in considerable gatekeeping and controlling behaviour. ... [126] the parties currently have fraught communication which is unlikely to improve if they continue on the current trajectory. equal shared care is usually recommended in situations where parties have a cordial and businesslike capacity to communicate, and geographically, their homes allow the children to attend school without having to travel lengthy distances. while the latter is in place in this matter, the former is not. the chances of children becoming more involved in the parental conflict and parties not being able to facilitate their moving between households without the constant threat of parental conflict is an important contra-indicator to equal shared care. [127] the communication of the parties is such that equal shared care would not be recommended. this is a matter, however, which would lend itself to substantial care, ie, x spending a maximum of five evenings per fortnight with mr finala, which ideally would be increased in increments over the coming year. in addition, it is timely for x to move towards longer periods during school holidays until she eventually spends one half of school holidays with each parent. ... [131] ... it would be recommended that a substantial care arrangement be worked towards. it is also recommended that progress be made, again incrementally, for x to spend one half of school holidays with each party and for special occasions to be shared equally.
145 dr k recommends that x continue to live with her mother and that her time with her father increase to substantial time, being no more than five evenings per fortnight with him, preferably in a block of three or four evenings in one week and one evening in the other, and that school holidays be shared equally between the parties. she recommends that x have regular telephone contact at least twice a week with her father. she recommends that both parents be involved in x’s educational and medical decisions and extracurricular activities.
146 evidence given by dr k in cross-examination is of particular assistance to the court. from a cross-examination by mr holmes as icl:
holmes: if the court orders that the mother have sole parental responsibility for education and health issues, do you see what might flow from that? dr k: that may reduce conflict, but it marginalises the father. i would only recommend that as a last resort, as it communicates to x the real limitations of her parents, who are educated, smart people. holmes: if the court orders equal shared parental responsibility and things are no better between the parents since the interviews, how do you see that playing out? dr k: there’s a risk of intractable conflict and x becoming involved in it as she gets older. there are losses for x when she sees that her parents cannot come together on decisions. ... holmes: does the fact that they have existed for the last five years with shared parental responsibility give you any encouragement for the future if it stayed that way? dr k: i guess that decisions have been made – not in the most perfect situation ..... x is now eight, and they separated when she was three, and decisions that have been made presumably have been in her best interest. ... dr k: i would never say that this is an equal shared care situation, due to the conflict of the parents and the history of the matter. i recommended four to five evenings per fortnight and equal school holidays. in relation to their geographical distance, four evenings per fortnight would still work. you have a family unit with two baby siblings, and that’s very attractive for an eight-year-old, but also, going from a single child to having two younger siblings within two years, and the need to share attention, x may benefit from time away from that milieu. i still hope that a substantial and significant care arrangement would be workable.
147 from cross-examination of dr k by ms christie for the father:
ms christie sc: did you get the impression from the interviews and from what you have read that the problem at callover was that the parents are not engaging at all? dr k: yes, that’s what i saw on the day. christie sc: is that different from overt conflict, hostility and violence? dr k: not being able to acknowledge each other is not overt, but it is covert ... none of what i’ve recorded from the interviews suggested that there was overt conflict between the parents. ... christie sc: the mother has said that she is concerned in relation to the father’s ability to care for the child. dr k: yes. christie sc: are you aware of anything to substantiate that concern? dr k: no. christie sc: after the report was issued, the orders for the father spending time with x were increased to four nights per fortnight. does it concern you that the mother’s application is to reduce the father’s time? dr k: i would want to know why. christie sc: [read out to the witness the whole of paragraph 152 of the mother’s trial affidavit] the mother proposes that x spend time with her father for three nights per fortnight, from friday to monday with, presumably, changeovers at school. dr k: in cases like this, a neutral changeover at school is the best option. christie sc: the only non-school changeovers are during school holidays, and if the court finds there has been no issues at changeovers, you would be concerned that the mother gave that as a reason to reduce the father’s time? dr k: yes. christie sc: would that make you worried that she is not understanding the importance of the child having time with her father? dr k: yes. ms christie: another reason she gives to reduce the time is “persistent involvement with the mother’s family”. the father facilitates the child having time with members of the mother’s family that the mother does not see. that’s not a reason to reduce x’s time with her father? dr k: i agree. christie sc: it would be a positive if x was able to spend time with members of her mother’s family? dr k: as long as there is no undermining or denigrating. christie sc: there is no evidence that there is. the next reason is, “i don’t believe that he provides the same level of emotional support that i provide for her when she is with me.” you’ve not seen anything supporting that? dr k: i agree. christie sc: that’s another example of the mother not seeing the importance of the father in x’s life? dr k: yes. no two parents give the same thing to their children. i don’t see that as a reason to reduce the time. the mother’s presentation to me was that the mother considered herself to be the better parent to provide for x. christie sc: would it concern you if the mother referred on a number of occasions to “we decided” and, when asked, said “we” is the mother and her partner? dr k: yes, that’s a concern. christie sc: that means the mother has put aside the need to discuss matters with the father. dr k: the pair would need to discuss the school proposals with her partner so as to make sure it works for the family unit. christie sc: the mother proposes school 1, and the father agreed. the mother proposed school 2, and the father agreed. x was enrolled. just before the matter came to court, the mother moved away from x’s school, not for economic reasons or to be near her partner’s work, and it was not subsidised. the resolution in relation to x travelling to school would be the mother returning to live near x’s current school, which is also near where the mother works? dr k: yes, but in a family unit, everyone’s needs have to be considered. christie sc: you would need convincing evidence that the change of schools is in the child’s interest. the only factor from the mother in relation to changing x’s school was that the mother has moved. otherwise, the current school suits all the good factors. dr k: that’s often the case. when a child moves school, there is a balance sheet of losses and gains for the child in such a move. christie sc: in family law situations, the main concern is what’s best for the child? dr k: yes. christie sc: if the court finds that the move had no economic advantage, and that the only factor was that it was closer to mr l’s work, that would not place it in x’s best interest on the balance of advantage against disadvantage? dr k: where a family lives is determined by a number of factors, including the needs of the partnership. i did not have the opportunity to speak to the mother and mr l. there are many needs that have to be put in the scale. ... christie sc: in this case, there is nothing to suggest that the parents sharing parental responsibility since separation has exposed x to any risk. dr k: i’m not aware of anything to that effect. christie sc: if the court is not aware of anything to that effect, then five years of equal shared responsibility is a good track record? dr k: the parties are to be complimented on that. ... christie sc: if the parties for three years after separation changed over x every week, if there was a risk to a parent, it has not been seen yet. dr k: i did not see any when we did the family report, and i have not been made aware of any incident. christie sc: when the mother says to the court x is in year 2 but we should go backwards on spending time with her father, does that illustrate your concerns raised in the report? dr k: yes. the idea is to progress time, not to reduce it, when there are no concerns. on what you have put to me, i do not see any grounds for less time. ... christie sc: if the court finds that the mother only raised her allegations after years of regular unsupervised time, does that cause you concern? dr k: it’s not uncommon for disclosures of violence to be made after the parties are no longer in a relationship. the fact that those allegations are made a considerable time later did raise questions in my mind, and i do not have an answer to that. the court needs to try to make meaning of why the mother waited until then. it would derail any trust between the parties. christie sc: x gets to develop a relationship with her father by spending proper time with her father? dr k: yes. christie sc: in the family report, you conclude that 5/9 is the appropriate arrangement, as there’s not enough communication and too much conflict for equal time? dr k: yes. christie sc: if communication is a difficulty, why is an extra day – from 5 to 6 – a difficulty for x? dr k: my understanding of children who cope best with an equal shared care arrangement is a need to be able to see that their parents are able to acknowledge each other and have a cordial, civil communication and are businesslike. whoever is to blame, it’s the child’s experience, and when i saw x, she was not able to observe that in my presence. i understand that that has not changed. ... christie sc: it is hard to see why five nights is better than six nights or better than seven nights? dr k: except that equal shared care depends on parents working together to make it work for the child. i did not assess these parents as being there. christie sc: some parents who are not able to co-parent can parallel-parent? dr k: yes. christie sc: they can do so on a week-about basis? dr k: not always. a lack of consistency is not good for children. children become confused unless they feel they can move seamlessly between two households and cause no reaction if they raise what happens in one household with the other parent.
148 from dr k’s cross-examination by ms lawson for the mother:
lawson: there is nothing perplexing about a victim of crime electing not to report the crime until they are ready to do so? dr k: correct. ... lawson: if there is to be shared parental responsibility, it requires communication? dr k: it would, but that can take various forms. it can be written. it needn’t be face to face. lawson: you recommend family therapy. why? dr k: to help the parties communicate. it needn’t be joint, it can be individual so that they can get some strategies. lawson: so joint family therapy is contraindicated? dr k: yes. ... lawson: in 2020, there is still conflict in relation to x’s possessions moving between the two homes. does that militate against an equal time arrangement? dr k: yes. i made it clear that it takes a pretty unique set of circumstances for equal time, and i didn’t recommend that in 2019, and on what i’ve heard today, i say that the parents are not at the benchmark for equal shared time. lawson: you recommend against equal shared time? dr k: yes. lawson: you say that five nights is the upper limit that you recommend to the court? dr k: yes. lawson: and that the court should be guided by a number of matters, including geography and how manageable the changeovers are? dr k: yes. lawson: and the level of conflict between the parties? dr k: yes. that’s part of the consideration of four days or five days. ... lawson: the child is popular at school and has no educational issues. in such a case, it’s easier to transition a child between schools? dr k: any school change for a child is unsettling, it is best for that to be as stable as it can be, with continuity of school, of friends and so forth. but in this case, i hear x has resilience factors. lawson: resilience factors – easily makes friends. dr k: yes. lawson: resilience factors – no educational problems. dr k: yes. lawson: she would benefit from having her friends proximate to her primary residence and being more involved in her local community through her school? dr k: yes and yes. lawson: with x’s current school, the mother says it’s just under an hour each way and that x finds travel tiring. that doesn’t surprise you? dr k: no. lawson: that’s a long commute for an eight-year-old? dr k: yes. it’s preferable that the child not spend long periods each day in the car.
149 in a short further cross-examination by mr holmes as icl, after cross-examination of dr k for each of the parties, the following exchange occurs:
holmes: referring to the family report, paragraph 111, if the court finds that the allegations made by the mother are not made out, does that have any effect on the question of the number of nights? dr k: i maintain my position of four or five nights per fortnight. i have other problems other than those allegations. i believe that substantial and significant care – four to five nights, or four nights and an afternoon, is best.
evidence specific to property settlement issues
150 at the commencement of the parties’ cohabitation in 2009, the mother was working as an educator at suburb aa. in 2010, she changed her employment to employer bb, and then upon the birth of x in 2012, she took maternity leave until 2012, at which time she returned to work on a part-time basis four days a week, from 7 am till 1.30 pm, and at the end of a further 12 months, she was back working full-time.
151 in 2014, the mother again changed her employment to director at “employer cc”, and in 2015, obtained her dream job as a professional with the then employer dd.
152 at commencement of cohabitation, the father was a sole trader conducting a business “company h”, which he had commenced in early 2000 while still at high school. the husband continued to operate that business throughout the parties’ separation and right up to the time of their final hearing.
153 i find that both parties contributed the whole of their earnings from their employment/conduct of business through the period of cohabitation to the welfare of the family unit by payment of living expenses and toward the acquisition, conservation and improvement of their property, joint and individual.
154 the only joint account the parties held with any financial institution was their loan account, obtained for purchase of the matrimonial home at f street, suburb g, secured on that property by way of mortgage. otherwise, they maintained separate accounts.
155 at the commencement of cohabitation, the mother asserted that she had about $5000 in savings, some home contents and furniture, some superannuation and a motor vehicle. the father asserts that at that time the mother had “no assets of significance at the start of the relationship” other than some liabilities by way of a personal loan and a car loan.
156 at the commencement of cohabitation, the father was operating the business “company h” and had done so for the previous nine years. he was also sole registered proprietor of a property at qq street, suburb rr, purchased by him in 2009, shortly before commencement of cohabitation, for $280,000. he borrowed $223,572 on a loan account that was secured on the property by way of a mortgage. he gives evidence that he contributed a sum of $99,000 from his own savings toward the purchase price and toward payment of stamp duties and other costs of purchase.
157 the husband sold the suburb rr unit in about 2013 for either 410,000 or 411,000 dollars (the parties’ evidence differs on the price), and the father asserts that he achieved a net profit from the sale of about $300,000, most of which he contributed toward purchase of the f street, suburb g property.
158 the parties resided in the suburb rr property until it was sold in february 2013, and undertook renovations, including a new bathroom, kitchen and flooring and painting. the wife asserts that those renovations were carried out at the parties’ joint expense, and that she and her family undertook a certain amount of the labour involved without assistance from the husband.
159 for his part, the husband says that he paid the majority of the costs of the renovation from his earnings from the business and that the wife contributed “a minimal sum” toward the renovation of the kitchen. the husband asserts that he contributed labour toward the renovations and that the wife did nothing by way of personal exertion except assist with some of the painting.
160 the parties purchased f street, suburb g as their family home in 2013 for $665,000. they borrowed money on a loan account in their joint names from ss bank in the sum of either $500,000 (the husband’s evidence) or $498,470 (the wife’s evidence).
161 the wife asserts that they contributed the sum of $20,000 from the joint savings accumulated since commencement of cohabitation and that the balance was paid from moneys obtained by the husband from the sale of the suburb rr property, though the wife does not assert an amount of that contribution, but on her evidence it must necessarily have been no less than $146,530 plus payment of the stamp duty. the husband says that following completion of the purchase, he reduced the amount owing on the loan account secured by a mortgage by paying it down with $100,000, being the balance of the funds received by him from the sale of the suburb rr property.
162 the wife asserts that tab 13 to her trial affidavit is a copy of the first page of the contract of sale relating to the purchase of the f street, suburb g problem, but that document is not such. it is a copy of the first page of the contract of sale for the husband’s purchase of the suburb rr unit.
163 the parties embarked on some renovation of the f street, suburb g property, which the wife asserts were paid for from moneys drawn from the loan account secured on the property. once again, the wife asserts that she provided a great deal of her personal exertion in assisting with the renovations, whilst the husband says that he did “the majority of the labour” and that he continued to undertake the renovations by both paying for tradesmen and expending his own exertion following separation, all at his own expense.
164 the parties sold the f street, suburb g property in january 2018 for $1,100,000. pursuant to a consent order between the parties made on 7 february 2018 in these proceedings, the wife received the sum of $95,000, the consent order reciting that “...the same capable of review by the trial judge.”
165 the wife applied those moneys as follows: (1) toward payment of legal fees in relation to these proceedings – $41,647’ (2) payment down of a tt bank credit card – $5500 (3) payment down of a uu bank credit card – $5000 (4) payment down of a loan with vv finance in relation to purchase of her motor vehicle, still retained at the time of the hearing – $38,000.  toward payment of legal fees in relation to these proceedings – $41,647’ (2) payment down of a tt bank credit card – $5500 (3) payment down of a uu bank credit card – $5000 (4) payment down of a loan with vv finance in relation to purchase of her motor vehicle, still retained at the time of the hearing – $38,000.
166 that is a total of $93,147 and presumably, though not in the evidence, the balance up to $95,000 was expended by the wife on living expenses.
167 by agreement between the parties, not pursuant to orders in these proceedings, there were further distributions from the proceeds of sale of f street, suburb g to the parties, being $10,000 to each of the parties on 31 october 2018 and $12,000 to each of the parties on 10 february 2020.
168 the mother asserts that she was the main carer for x from the time of her birth up to separation and that the father had “limited involvement”, as she was cared for by the mother during her maternity leave, and, thereafter, she was at day care, where the mother worked most of the time until the mother commenced her employment with employer dd in 2015, at which time x went to a childcare centre at suburb ww.
169 the father asserts that he assisted with x’s care and was involved in her care such that the parents were equal carers for x up to separation.
170 the mother asserts that she was primarily responsible for the homemaker role in relation to cooking and cleaning, washing, ironing, shopping and so forth, and asserts that the husband gave limited assistance with the homemaker role, occasionally cooking dinner or a barbecue and occasionally vacuuming.
171 for his part, the father asserts that following x’s birth, the mother had postnatal depression, and he says that he did “all of the housework and tended to x” because “ms finala was unwell”, though this period of time could not have lasted more than the mother’s period of maternity leave, in any case.
172 in paragraph 207 of the father’s trial affidavit, he asserts “i was responsible for the majority of all the housework during the relationship.”
173 he asserts that his position of working from home necessitated him undertaking the majority of the housework, as the mother worked outside of the home. he also asserts “i did all the cooking” for the family, whilst conceding that the wife did all of the washing-up and the laundry, as exposure to detergents would have caused him problems.
174 for her part, the wife concedes that the husband maintained the gardens and lawns at the f street, suburb g home. she also concedes that the husband built a cubbyhouse for x.
175 following the parties’ separation, the wife moved out with x and resided for a short period with her parents and then took up residence in rental accommodation, whilst the husband remained residing in the matrimonial home from separation in august 2015 until the home was sold in january 2018 – a period of two years and four months. it is common between the parties that during that period the wife was responsible for payment of rent for her accommodation without any specific assistance from the husband in that regard, whilst the husband resided in the matrimonial home at f street, suburb g until its sale without making any payments on the mortgage.
176 on the husband’s evidence, the loan account secured by the mortgage was paid well in advance of what was required by the mortgagee, without actual figures being given, and that on 3 august 2015, at about the time of separation, he had paid a sum of $10,000 from his business bank account with the commonwealth bank (exhibit r20) into the loan account with ss bank. of course, that sum of $10,000 accrued during the period of the parties’ cohabitation, from 2009 to august 2015.
177 copies of the ss bank loan account statements from drawdown of the loan for $499,018.02 on 30 august 2013 (why it is not february 2013 is not revealed in the evidence) to 18 september 2017 is exhibited at tab 15 to the wife’s trial affidavit, and from those statements it is apparent that at the time of the parties’ separation, the amount outstanding on the loan account was $323,876 (after payment in of the $10,000). as at 18 september 2017, the amount outstanding was $360,548, an increase in the debt of $36,672 over the period during which no moneys were paid in reduction of the loan by any person, the father having the benefit of occupation of the premises during that time.
178 the husband paid child support to the wife for x from separation. at separation, he was paying $900 per month for a period of six months, then $330 per month for three years, then $700 per month from june 2018 till june 2019, then $800 per month from june 2019 until early 2020, and then $900 per month, with the assessed amount being paid by him at the time of the trial being $991 per month.
179 after separation, the wife sold her motor vehicle 3 for $8000 and applied those moneys toward moving costs and purchase of furniture.
180 the wife asserts in her evidence that the husband “drew down against the mortgage” to pay legal fees, however, no evidence whatsoever is presented to substantiate that assertion, and certainly the bank statements exhibited at tab 15 to the mother’s trial affidavit do not bear out that assertion.
181 on 30 june 2015, about two months before separation, the wife’s superannuation was valued at $47,337.09. at 17 april 2020, the wife’s superannuation was valued at $90,796.81.
182 following separation, the wife has been the primary carer for x, with the father providing care only in accordance with the arrangement between the parties for her spending time with him from separation up to the commencement of interim orders on 28 august 2018, and thereafter in accordance with the interim orders.
183 the parties’ current financial circumstances will be discussed hereunder when assessing whether it is appropriate to make any adjustment between the parties pursuant to section 79(4)(e), referencing section 75(2) of the act, in the event that it is found to be just and equitable to proceed with the making of adjustive orders between the parties.
submissions
184 mr holmes, as the icl, submitted that the court must make findings in relation to the mother’s allegations of extreme family violence by the father before going on with the legislative pathway. he submitted that if those allegations are accepted in full, that it would normally be a “no time” case. however, he submitted that on the basis of the evidence and applying the civil standard, and in particular in the light of the course of the parenting of the child prior to the commencement of litigation, the court would not be satisfied that the mother’s allegations had been established.
185 he submitted that if the court did find that the mother’s evidence in relation to the violence was accepted, the icl would not support the orders proposed by the mother as being in the best interests of the child, as it would indicate a no-time or supervised time order as appropriate and a referral of the father to anger management.
186 he further submitted that if the court does not accept the mother’s evidence in relation to the violence, finding that she had either lied or exaggerated, then the court must decide the best way to protect the relationship between the father and the child, where there would be a danger of the mother seeking to make further allegations, where the mother in her evidence in cross-examination by mr holmes could not agree to even one redeeming aspect of the father, and where the court could have no confidence that the mother and her new partner would act to maintain the relationship of the child with her father.
187 in the cross-examination of the mother by mr holmes,[6] mr holmes gave the mother several opportunities to disclose or volunteer any good things about the father, and the only matters she could refer to before diverting her answer away from the question on each occasion were the father’s willingness to have a relationship with x and showing an interest in her.
188 mr holmes submitted that the court should look to the period before the litigation began and that there was nothing to be found to indicate that the mother should have sole parental responsibility for the child. he supported, in the main, the orders sought by the father, though not going to a progression to equal shared care during school term time but stopping at either five or six nights, as the court determined appropriate in x’s best interests.
189 ms christie sc made submissions on behalf of the father in relation to the parenting issues by reviewing the evidence and referring to the mother’s demeanour during cross-examination and asserting that she was evasive, resorting to “i don’t recall” as her standard answer whenever a question may have elicited evidence contradictory to her case.
190 ms christie reviewed the mother’s reasons why the father’s time with the child should be reduced, as set out in paragraph 152 of her trial affidavit, and submitted that the evidence was against each of the mother’s arguments.
191 in relation to the property issues, ms christie submitted for the father that the father’s evidence should be accepted in relation to values on disputed items on the balance sheet – the husband’s motor vehicle 1 (the wife saying $15,000 whereas the husband saying $7000) and the household contents (the wife saying $2000 and the husband saying $1000) – on the basis that the husband gave sworn evidence in his financial statement as to his value and there was no expert evidence provided to the court. especially in relation to the household contents, it is not unusual for the court to not have expert evidence, given the cost aspects involved in obtaining valuation.
192 ms christie submitted that the court should include in the matrimonial asset pool all of the interim distributions made to the parties from the proceeds of sale of the f street, suburb g property, but noted in her submissions in reply that the proper figure to be included in relation to the $95,000 received by the mother under an order is $57,000, given that $38,000 therefrom was expended by the mother in paying down the vehicle finance on a vehicle included in the balance sheet.
193 ms christie submitted that the moneys paid by the husband for legal fees of the proceeding should not be included, as they had been paid from his after-separation income and not from capital.
194 in relation to the liabilities shown on the balance sheet, ms christie submitted that the only liability that should be taken into account is the balance of the wife’s car loan with vv finance, as the relevant vehicle was on the balance sheet, but that the credit card debts of each party accrued post-separation should not be taken into account, nor should the wife’s debt for her legal fees in the sum of $142,000, and that the wife’s debt owed to “state debt recovery” on the balance sheet in the sum of $1743 should not be included in calculation of the matrimonial asset pool, given that the wife had accrued that debt from parking or traffic fines post-separation.
195 ms christie submitted on behalf of the husband that an appropriate settlement was to: (1) divide the remaining net proceeds of sale of the f street, suburb g property equally between the parties, (2) each party to retain the assets in their power, possession or control, including as notional property an add-back of the interim distribution amounts, and (3) the wife to be responsible for her car loan with vv finance.  divide the remaining net proceeds of sale of the f street, suburb g property equally between the parties, (2) each party to retain the assets in their power, possession or control, including as notional property an add-back of the interim distribution amounts, and (3) the wife to be responsible for her car loan with vv finance.
giving an overall division between the parties as to 60 per cent to the wife and 40 per cent to the husband. this was on the basis that, on contributions, a proper assessment favours the husband as to 60 per cent and the wife 40 per cent, with a 20 per cent adjustment to the wife.
196 in submissions on behalf of the mother, ms lawson confirmed that the mother had changed her position from that at the commencement of the hearing – a reduction in the time spent by the father with x during school term time from four nights per fortnight to three nights per fortnight – and now sought orders that maintained the four-nights-per-fortnight regime.
197 ms lawson submitted that orders as proposed by the mother should be made, and those proposed by the father as to five nights per fortnight then six nights per fortnight then equal time, or as proposed by the icl, going to either five or six nights per fortnight during school term time, should be rejected on the basis that there was no trust between the parties and there was an abundance of conflict between them.
198 ms lawson submitted that the sexual assault allegations made by the mother against the father did not require the court to make specific findings as to whether such events had or had not happened, as in a criminal trial, and that same were:
...not directly relevant to the time to be spent between the father and the child, but rather go to explain the mother’s attitude to communicating with and co-parenting with the father, and as to why equal time and equal shared parental responsibility will not work.
199 ms lawson pointed out in submissions that dr k “...never abandoned her position under hard cross-examination, that this is not an equal time case.”
200 she submitted that an order for equal shared parental responsibility relies on the parties being able to communicate effectively and share information, and that if the parents cannot do so, the child becomes a carrier of information and is subjected to more conflict.
201 in relation to the school to be attended by x, she submitted that the mother is in a position of having two children in her care, x and m, with another soon to arrive after the hearing, and that it was in x’s best interests that she go to a school placed in her local community where she lived with her mother and reduce the travel burden on x.
202 in relation to the property aspects of the matter, ms lawson submitted that the father was able to accumulate funds to pay his legal fees from income because he was not making any payments on the loan account secured by a mortgage on the f street, suburb g property for two and a half years after separation while he resided there, that previously a sum of $1000 a week had been paid on that loan account, and that accordingly the father had been able to accumulate about $130,000. she further submitted that as the husband did not pay any superannuation, he was further able to accumulate money to pay legal fees, and that for all of these reasons, the husband’s legal fees at $218,000 should be added back.
203 ms lawson submitted that the mother accepted that the father’s initial contribution of at least $99,000 had turned into about $300,000 on sale of the suburb rr property, but that during the parties’ cohabitation up to the sale of that property, the mother had been contributing to the property from both her income and in the renovations.
204 ms lawson submitted that if the father’s legal fees at $218,000 were not added back, then the father’s occupation of the former matrimonial home without payment for his accommodation whilst the mother paid rent for her accommodation should be taken into account as a contribution factor.
205 ms lawson submitted that the mother’s proposal, pursuant to which she will receive 95 per cent of the sale of the f street, suburb g property, meant an ultimate division between the parties on the basis of contributions and section 75(2) considerations of about 72 per cent of the net asset pool to the mother and 28 per cent to the father.
the law – parenting issues
206 in parenting proceedings under the act, the court is required to follow the legislative pathway set down in the act.
207 the court must give attention to section 60b of the act that sets out the objects of part iv of the act relating to children. those objects inform the making of parenting orders.[7] that section also contains the principles behind those objects. in this matter i have considered those objects and the principles behind those objects.
208 section 60ca of the act provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. the child’s interests are not the only consideration. parents and other persons, especially partners and extended families, are almost always relevant in the matter, but the child’s interests must always be the paramount consideration.
209 in parenting proceedings, pursuant to section 65d of the act, the court may, subject to the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility in section 61da and consideration of parenting plans under section 65dab, make such parenting order as it thinks proper.[8] the court may make a parenting order that discharges, varies, suspends, or revives some or all of an earlier parenting order.[9]
210 in determining what is in a child’s best interest, the court must consider the matters set out as the primary considerations and additional considerations in section 60cc and make findings. [10]
211 section 61da provides that when making a parenting order in relation to a child the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.[11]
212 the presumption does not apply in circumstances where a parent has perpetrated family violence or abuse. the presumption, when applying, may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.[12]
213 if a parenting order provides that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, then pursuant to section 65daa, the court must consider: (a) whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[13] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[14]   whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[13] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[14]
214 if both questions are answered ‘yes’, the court must consider making an order to provide for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.[15]
215 if the court does not make an order for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents, then the court must consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child and consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable and, if the answer to both is yes, the court is to consider making an order to provide for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.
216 what is meant by substantial and significant time is set out in section 65daa(3) of the act and includes days that fall on weekends and holidays, days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, the child being able to be involved in occasions and events special to the parents, the parents being able to be involved in occasions and events of particular significance to the child, and the parents being able to be included in the child’s daily routine.
217 if the court does not make an order for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the child’s parents, the court must then go on to determine what parenting orders are proper in the best interests of the child, per section 65d.
218 as to what is ‘proper’ and how the court’s discretion is to be exercised i note the comments of the full court of the family court of australia in the recent decision of grella & jamieson:[16]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[17]
219 there is much jurisprudence on the issue of risk in parenting proceedings. the jurisprudence may be simplified by saying that the task of the court where risks are asserted is not necessarily to make a finding as to whether the actions and events asserted have actually happened or have definitely not happened, as such a finding may not be open to the court on the state of the evidence.
220 rather, the task of the court is to assess whether the evidence establishes that there is a risk to the best interests of the child. if the evidence establishes that there is such a risk, briefly expressed, the court must: (c) assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (d) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (e) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (d) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (e) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.
221 detailed exposition of the treatment of risk in parenting matters can be found in the decision of the high court in m & m[18] and the decisions of the full court of the family court of australia in a & a & the child representative,[19] napier & hepburn,[20] johnson & page,[21] deiter & deiter,[22] and eaby & speelman.[23]
section 60cc – the primary considerations
222 the primary considerations are the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents and any need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence. section 60cc(2a) mandates that the court is to give greater weight to any consideration of a need to protect x over consideration of the benefits to x of having a meaningful relationship with both parents.
223 what is meant by “a meaningful relationship” has been made clear in the decided cases. in an oft-quoted passage from a judgment in mazorski & albright,[24] brown j said, at paragraph 26:
a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitative one.
224 in tait & densmore,[25] cronin j considered the distinction made by kay j in godfrey & sanders,[26] between an optimal relationship and a meaningful relationship, and said, at paragraph 170:
kay j distinguished between the optimal relationship and the meaningful relationship. the distinction is clear. an optimal relationship is one which is second to none, unmatched and unequalled. that cannot be what the legislation intended. to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child ... those adjectives mean that children need their parents to lead by example about self-discipline. children need to learn to develop the ability to relate to others. they need to learn about the privileges and responsibility which will devolve upon them as parents. those are fundamental parts of the meaningful relationship.[27]
225 in mccall & clark[28] at [122], the full court said:
no doubt in the majority of cases there will be a positive benefit to a child of having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent if this would not be in the child’s best interests.[29]
226 again, in mccall & clark, the full court said that there were three possible interpretations of meaningful relationship and concluded that the preferred interpretation was what it called the “prospective approach”, but also said that depending on certain factual circumstances, the “present relationship approach” may be relevant.
227 the “present relationship approach” was defined by the court in paragraph 118 as follows: one interpretation is that the legislation requires a court to consider the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents by examination of evidence of the nature of the child’s relationship at the date of the hearing, to make findings based on that evidence, which finding will be reflected in the orders ultimately made (“the present relationship approach”). ...[30]
228 the prospective approach, preferred by the full court in the majority of cases, was set out at paragraph 118 as follows: the third interpretation is that the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in the child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents (“the prospective approach”).[31]
229 it is a given that as a general rule it is to the benefit of a child to have a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, but the primary considerations require that that general rule be examined in each individual case for each individual child, to ascertain whether there are factors affecting the child in consequence of either of the parents that make it less than in the best interests of the child to have a meaningful relationship with both parents.
230 it may be factors affecting the child’s best interests in relation to one parent or to both parents.
231 the primary consideration in relation to any need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence goes to any matters of risk that may be present in any particular case, though the risks found in that second primary consideration are confined to the words of the subsection, and there may be other risks that must be considered under the first primary consideration in deciding if it is to the benefit of a child to have a meaningful relationship with both parents.
232 the primary considerations reflect the objects of part vii of the act set out in section 60b(1)(a) and (b) and the principles that underline those objects as set out in section 60b(2).
233 i need not parse through the jurisprudence relating to risks, whether risks are acceptable or unacceptable and how the court approaches the making of orders in the best interests of a child in circumstances of there being an unacceptable risk or risks posed by either or both parents, as this is not a “risk case”.
234 though the mother’s evidence is replete with allegations that the father has engaged in family violence, including family violence of the most extreme kind by way of sexual assault with violence, in relation to which i must attempt to make relevant findings in due course, it is made plain in the evidence of dr k that she does not consider that this is a matter where there is any risk to x from either of her parents, and i note the submission – very properly made, in my view, on the basis of all of the evidence in the hearing – by ms lawson for the mother that the allegations made by the mother in relation to sexual assaults are not directly relevant to the issue of what time should be ordered for the father and x, other than as to its effect upon the mother and consequently upon the co-parenting relationship and the relevance of that to considerations of shared care and equal shared parental responsibility.
235 x having a meaningful relationship with her mother would be “healthy, worthwhile and advantageous” to her. in the same way, x having a meaningful relationship with her father will be “healthy, worthwhile and advantageous” to her.
236 it is to x’s benefit to have a meaningful relationship with both of her parents. as there are no considerations of risk to x in the care of her father, no need to protect her from psychological or physical harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse or family violence in her father’s care, then the orders properly to be made in relation to the amount of time x should spend with her father must have, as one of the prime considerations in deciding what is proper, the maintenance and future development opportunities for the meaningful relationship between x and her father.
237 the mother proposes that such time be four nights per fortnight during school term and half the school holidays and time between her parents on special occasions – in effect, a maintaining of the current spend-time-with arrangement.
238 the icl proposes that such time be progressed from four nights per fortnight during school term time to five nights per fortnight and then possibly to six nights per fortnight, though in his submissions mr holmes indicates that it was his view that x’s best interests can be served by the five nights per fortnight. that is an increase of either one or two nights per fortnight to occur in school term time. mr holmes agrees with half school holidays and special occasion sharing.
239 the father’s proposed order would provide the time for x with her father would increase first to five nights per fortnight during school term time and then, after about three months, to six nights per fortnight during school term time, with a further step 12 months later to shared care on a week-about basis during school term time, for half the school holidays throughout and sharing of special occasions.
240 i find that the proposal for such orders by the mother is in confirmation of her acceptance that there is no risk element to x in spending time with her father and no need to protect her in that regard, but that the time proposed by the mother comes to the beginning edge of what is referred to as “substantial and significant time” where that phrase is given meaning in section 65daa(3).
241 i find that the primary consideration of the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of her parents tends in favour of an increase in the time x spends with her father during school term time beyond what is provided under the current interim regime and proposed by the mother.
section 60cc – the additional considerations
242 the court is not compelled by section 60cc to consider each of the additional considerations set out in section 60cc(3), but only consider such of those additional considerations are relevant to the court making findings to determine what is in a child’s best interest.
243 the first consideration is “any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views.”
244 the mother gives some evidence in paragraph 121 of her affidavit of a conversation she had with x. she was not cross-examined on the paragraph. in that conversation, x makes comments to the effect that she does not want to spend any increased amount of time with her father and complained, “why doesn’t the judge care about what i think?”
245 such comments by x in conversation with her mother must be seen against the background of x’s all too apparent awareness of the state of the relationship between her parents and what the court is most familiar with as a child’s natural desire to please each of her parents by indicating that he or she is the parent the child prefers and that spending time with the other is a bit of a trial. this is most particularly between x and her mother when it is x’s own observation that, though her father is “quiet and mumbling” at changeover, her mother “just [takes] her bag” and makes no even faint at interaction with her father. she knows that her parents are not friends.[32]
246 x has expressed a wish that, if she could wave a magic wand, she would want her parents “to get back together”, which indicates her desire for the affection of both parents and for her parents to at least appear to her to get on with each other to some degree as co-parents.
247 when observed with her father, x was able to exchange affection with him and “appeared at ease with her father”.[33]
248 mr holmes indicated in the hearing that he had sought, but not been able to achieve due to lack of communication from the mother, an opportunity to have a conference with x shortly prior to the hearing, at which time her updated views may have become available.
249 i find that x’s views are not of any great weight as, at the time of hearing, she was eight years of age, and that, at the time of the conversation referred to in paragraph 121 of the mother’s trial affidavit, referred to above, she was some months short of her seventh birthday.
250 i find that consideration of any evidence gleaned in relation to x’s views on the issue of spending time with her father are likely to be not opposed to an increase in time, but not accepting of a shared care arrangement. it may seem that i have plucked that last finding from nowhere, but i base that finding upon the evidence of x having been in the primary care of her mother since 16 august 2015 (five years to the end of the hearing, six years to now) and on the basis of the observations reported by dr k in the family report and her report of her interview with x, to be far more bonded to and prefer the greater part of her time to be in the care of her mother.
251 the next relevant consideration is “the nature of the relationship of x with each of her parents and with other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of x)”.
252 a scene running through the whole of the evidence of the mother is her inference that x never developed a secure attachment with her father because of her father’s disinterest in her up to the time of the parties’ separation and that, accordingly, their relationship is not a full parent/child relationship.
253 however, all of the evidence of the mother in relation to the father’s attitude to x when third parties were not present is rejected by the father, and i find that there is an attached, close and loving relationship between x and her father. this is based upon the evidence of: (1) the progression of the time between them from the time of separation up to the hearing, such time occurring without outbreaks by x of behaviours that indicate that she is having problems with that time, and (2) the mother’s admission in cross-examination by ms christie sc for the father that even the periods of time of a week’s duration spent by x with her father have occurred without x experiencing any problems whatsoever with that time.  the progression of the time between them from the time of separation up to the hearing, such time occurring without outbreaks by x of behaviours that indicate that she is having problems with that time, and (2) the mother’s admission in cross-examination by ms christie sc for the father that even the periods of time of a week’s duration spent by x with her father have occurred without x experiencing any problems whatsoever with that time.
254 i find on all of the evidence that the nature of the relationship between x and her mother is a very close and loving relationship, that her mother was, in her infancy, her primary attachment and that she has been her principal carer since the parties separated in august 2015.
255 x is able to pursue her relationship with the father’s extended family while spending time with him and there is nothing in the evidence to indicate other than that such time is to her benefit. similarly, x is able to pursue her relationships with her maternal extended family, both while in her mother’s care and, uncommonly enough, in her father’s care – something about which the mother makes several complaints.
256 the evidence does not show in any way that the father’s relationship with the mother’s family members post-separation was either an entirely new development or was the cause of estrangements between the mother and certain members of her family. those estrangements have other groundings.
257 x is able to maintain and pursue her relationship with her paternal and maternal grandparents through her time with her father and with her mother.
258 the mother and mr l both give evidence in relation to the nature of the relationship between x and mr l and between x and her sister, m – her second mr l sibling not having been born at the time of the hearing. i accept that evidence and, accordingly, am able to find that the relationship between x and mr l is an excellent relationship as between a child and a step-parent and, in that regard, i have the father’s acknowledgement in his affidavit at paragraph 92 that mr l “has been a good influence on x. x gets on with him. this is reassuring to me as x’s father.” that acceptance of mr l in his role as x’s step-parent in the mother’s household stands out as extraordinarily rare in parenting matters before the court.
259 similarly, i accept fully the evidence of the mother and mr l in relation to x’s excellent sibling relationship with her sister m and there is nothing in the evidence that would cause me to have any concern that her relationship with her newer sibling in her mother’s household would be any different.
260 the third additional consideration is the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x, to spend time with x, and to communicate with x.
261 i find that there is nothing to assist me in determining what parenting orders are properly to be made in x’s best interests as the paramount consideration, under this additional consideration. both parents have participated in making decisions about long-term issues, despite some complaints by the father about enrolment of x in some extracurricular activities without full discussion and in relation to some school matters.
262 however, the willingness of the mother to involve the father in decisions about major long-term issues, despite her extreme disinclination to have anything to do with him, to talk to him or meet face to face, is shown by her placement of the question of x’s change of school before the court rather than it being an occasion of a unilateral action by her.
263 patently, both parents have taken every opportunity available to them to spend time with x and communicate with her. the father pursues these proceedings to expand the time he is able to spend with x and to communicate with her.
264 the next additional consideration is “the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parents’ obligation to maintain x”.
265 despite: (1) the mother’s complaint to the contrary in her affidavit material, and (2) her extreme unwillingness to acknowledge the father’s voluntary efforts in this regard that go beyond his legal obligation under the child support legislation and pay more regard to his primary duty to maintain x under section 66c of the act,  the mother’s complaint to the contrary in her affidavit material, and (2) her extreme unwillingness to acknowledge the father’s voluntary efforts in this regard that go beyond his legal obligation under the child support legislation and pay more regard to his primary duty to maintain x under section 66c of the act,
on the evidence, the father has paid child support for x since the parties separated in accordance with assessments and, at the time of hearing, in addition to paying child support as assessed, was paying on a voluntary basis: one-half of her school fees, (2) the cost of her piano lessons, (3) the cost of maintaining her on xx health cover – which makes that private health cover more expensive than if maintained purely for himself, and (4) the costs (as they arise) to maintain and provide school uniforms and clothes for use by x when in his care and going to school from his care.
266 other than the financial support for x provided by the father as referred to above, the mother provides the financial support for x in her household in concert with mr l.
267 accordingly, i find that both parents have fulfilled their obligation to maintain x.
268 the next relevant additional consideration is the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on x of any separation from either of her parents or from any other child or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the x), with whom x has been living.
269 the orders proposed by the mother do not have the effect of change as referred to in this additional consideration. the orders proposed by the icl and, even more so, by the father would affect a change in x’s circumstances in that they would increase the amount of time that x spends in her father’s care during school term time and, in consequence, decrease the amount of time that she is in the care of her mother and together in the household with her siblings, m and the new baby. i do not consider that the consequent increase in amount of time that she is separated from mr l needs to be considered, which comment is by no means intended as any demeaning of or belittlement in any way of their step-parent/step-child relationship, which has been so praised by the father.
270 x has been in her mother’s care, as between her parents, for the greater part of the time since her parents separated on 16 august 2015. it is reasonable to expect that x considers her mother’s home as her home and her father’s home as the other comfortable home that she visits to spend time with her father.
271 x is protective of her mother in terms of her knowledge of the conflicted relationship between her parents. that is not to the extent where she is rejecting of her father, but, rather, to the stage where she will frame her comments more to please her mother than her father and she will make comments to her mother to assure her of their close bond and relationship and that such is not in danger from her time with her father. i find this in the evidence of the mother in relation to her conversations with x about her time with her father and in x’s interview with dr k in the family report.
272 in the event that orders are made as sought by the father (not supported by the icl and recommended against by dr k) that x move to an equal care arrangement on a week-about basis during school term time, then there will be a consequent affect upon the mother due to her loss of her principal care of x. further, if orders were made as sought by the father for a progression to equal time on a week-about basis, it would involve x being separated from her two siblings in her mother’s household for a week at a time, over stretches of between eight and 10 weeks (school terms) and this must have an effect upon their sibling relationship.
273 accordingly, i find that the likely effect on x of any change in her circumstances in consequence of orders being made for her to spend week-about with each parent during school term time would not be orders made in her best interest.
274 the next additional consideration is “the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense would substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.”
275 the practical difficulties and expense involved in x spending time with her father that i will discuss under this consideration would not substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis. they would not go that far. however, they must be considered particularly in view of the parties’ competing position in relation to the school to be attended by x in 2023 and thereafter.
276 the mother lives at suburb s and the father in suburb y. i can take judicial notice from what i regard as common knowledge[34] of the location of both suburb s and suburb y in the suburbs of sydney and their proximity. i am even assisted in relation to consideration of their proximity by annexures “a” to “e” to the mother’s affidavit of 30 october 2020. the mother seeks to have x move from her current school, o school at suburb p, to d school, suburb e.
277 the school at suburb p must necessarily be further away from where the mother resides at suburb s than the father’s place of residence is from where the mother resides at suburb s. the school at suburb e is between the parents’ places of residence, though considerably closer to the mother’s than the father’s, and certainly no further from the father’s place of residence, by the yy street route, a bit closer to the father’s place of residence, than the suburb nn school that the father accepted during his cross-examination by mr holmes he “could accommodate x travelling to and from school there”.
278 i find that the practical difficulty and expense involved in making an order as sought by the mother, that x move schools to a school considerable closer to where she lives with her mother would not entail such practical difficulty and expense for either party as would substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations with them, nor would it involve such practical difficulty and expense as would make the travel more onerous than, or even as onerous as, x’s travel from her home with her mother at suburb s to the suburb p school. that is particularly so in the event that the final orders made do not involve x being in the equal care of her parents on a week-about basis during school term time, but residing more nights per fortnight with her mother than with her father.
279 the next additional consideration is “the capacity of each of x’s parents and the capacity of any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of x) to provide for the needs of x, including her emotional and intellectual needs”.
280 i do not consider it is necessary to consider the said capacities for anyone other than x’s parents.
281 dr k gave evidence during her cross-examination that she was not aware of anything that indicated that the father lacked capacity to provide for x’s needs. given that evidence, she was aware of the assertions made by the mother that the father had on an occasion delivered x to school before there was formal supervision for her and her assertion that he had left x unattended on the beach on an occasion when he went in to use his boogie board.
282 i accept the evidence of the father that, on the occasion when he delivered x to school at 8 am, that he was satisfied that there was appropriate supervision present and available at the school for x before he left. further, in consequence of the issue made of the occasion by the mother, he has shown his adequate parenting capacity by ensuring that such an occasion is not repeated. i am satisfied that the father would not have left x unattended on a public beach while he went into the water. the mother was not present to see either asserted event and in her evidence relies on comments by x. i have made some comments about that previously in these reasons.
283 the mother patently has capacity to provide for x’s needs, other than her demonstrated reluctance to foster the maintenance and continued development of the meaningful relationship between x and her father. the mother approached the final hearing with a proposal that sought a reduction in the amount of time spent between x and her father during school term time, but by submissions at the end of the hearing she had revised that to seeking orders that maintained the regime for such time that had been in place since the interim consent orders of 4 march 2019.
284 neither parent has the capacity at present to provide for x’s emotional needs by effectively masking from x’s perception their woeful co-parenting relationship and their mistrust and palpable dislike of each other. on whatever orders i make, the necessity for face-to-face changeovers will be rare, being confined to mid-school holiday occasions and special occasions such as christmas, new year’s, birthdays and mothers and fathers days.
285 in x’s best interest, the parents need to put on the mask and be civil to each other, for x’s consumption, on these occasions, whilst not extending beyond the necessary civilities and any communication of important information for x’s welfare. i make that comment in view of the evidence from the mother of the father’s actions in pursuing her to her car on occasions of changeovers and making comments to her, including comments of a personal nature. i cannot make a finding that such events have occurred, such a finding not being open to me even on the balance of probabilities in view of the conflicted evidence and such conflicts not being resolved in the course of cross-examination.[35]
286 any occasion of such conduct by the father at changeovers will be greatly to his detriment and, as a result, greatly to x’s detriment, as it is likely to lead to flashpoints and even further litigation, at worst, and a compounding of the mother’s attitude to the relationship between father and child, at the very least.
287 the next additional consideration, as relevant in this matter, is “the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of x’s parents, and any other characteristics of x that the court thinks are relevant.”
288 x is now nine years of age, a few years below her teenage years. her lifestyle is normal sydney suburban. her background, including culture and traditions, is to her parentage where her mother has country u heritage and her father has mixed country v and country w heritage. x will have the opportunity to know and develop her understanding and appreciation of her cultural heritages through her time with each of her parents and her extended maternal and paternal families. it is important that x have an adequate amount of time with her father on a regular basis to enable her to be involved with contacts with her paternal cultural heritage.
289 the additional consideration of “the attitude to x and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents” does not assist other than to open the criticism inherent in the evidence and indicated under earlier considerations for being not only unable but unwilling to shield x from exposure to the dislike and mistrust between her parents. it is that parlous co-parenting relationship between x’s parents, the dislike and the distrust and the lack of effective communication between them, that i find tends mostly against orders being made as sought by the father for his time with x to progress to a shared care arrangement on a week-about basis during school term time. i will address that further in considering what time is appropriate hereunder.
290 next, there is the consideration of “any family violence involving x or a member of x’s family.”
291 the mother asserts that family violence was perpetrated against her by the father. she describes specific incidents: (1) august 2014 – in the kitchen with pain to the back of her head and bruising to her wrist), (2) good friday 2015 – the father lying on top of the mother and attempting to force sexual intercourse with her until pushed off by the mother and her leaving the room unpursued, resulting in bruising to her inner thigh the next day, and (3) july 2015 during the country u trip – the father punching the pillow beside the mother’s face and saying in an angry tone, “i want to kill something,” and “punching and slamming things in the hotel room”.  august 2014 – in the kitchen with pain to the back of her head and bruising to her wrist), (2) good friday 2015 – the father lying on top of the mother and attempting to force sexual intercourse with her until pushed off by the mother and her leaving the room unpursued, resulting in bruising to her inner thigh the next day, and (3) july 2015 during the country u trip – the father punching the pillow beside the mother’s face and saying in an angry tone, “i want to kill something,” and “punching and slamming things in the hotel room”.
292 aside from those specific incidents, the mother does not give any specifics of what she purports to betray as persistent family violence during the relationship and particularly of sexual assaults upon her by the husband varying, on her description, from six occasions leading up to separation to “up to six times a week from august 2014 until august 2015.”
293 the father denies the three specific occasions described by the mother and he maintained his denial that such occasions had occurred during cross-examination. his denials were not shaken. there is no contemporaneous evidence to assist in making a finding as to whether those occasions occurred or not, though there is no necessity for there to be evidence or contemporaneous reports by the mother as such contemporaneous reports are so very often absent in family violence situations, and i am conscious of the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in amador & amador.[36]
294 the mother asserts that x was involved in the incident in the kitchen in august 2014, stood between the parties and tried to physically push the father off the mother, and that she was involved in the incident in country u in 2015 because she was asleep on the bed with the mother and awoke due to the father’s actions.
295 taking the evidence all in all and particularly the cross-examinations of the parties, i am not able to find, on the balance of probabilities, that the family violence described by the mother did occur. that is not to say that the incidents did not occur, or that the mother is fabricating her evidence. it is only to say that it does not reach the civil standard of the balance of probabilities.[37]
296 finally, i find that it is preferable to make orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x. such further proceedings would be disastrous in their effect upon x.
297 another circumstance that i consider relevant to consider is whether the mother is capable of fostering the relationship between x and her father and whether the mother will foster that relationship, rather than infect it with such negativity that it will have an effect of slowly withdrawing x from that relationship.
298 the mother acknowledged in cross-examination that she is aware of and accepts that x having a relationship with her father is important and in x’s best interests. the mother’s proposal for time between x and her father as it stood at the end of the hearing accepts the relationship between x and her father.
299 should the mother convey to x by word or deed, whether in express terms or implied terms, in any way that x should lessen her relationship with her father, then the mother is not acting in x’s best interests but, rather, is acting directly against her daughter’s best interests.
section 61daa – the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
300 the presumption that it is in x’s best interests that her parents have equal shared parental responsibility for her applies unless there are reasonable grounds for the court to believe that one of x’s parents has engaged in abuse of x or in family violence. where the presumption does apply, it may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interest of x for her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for her.
301 the father seeks an order that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for x and that order is supported by the independent child’s lawyer. the mother seeks an order that she have sole parental responsibility for x in relation to decisions which affect her education and health, and that the parties “shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the decisions which affect x’s long-term care, welfare and development” in all other matters.
302 i note at this point that it is not appropriate for the court to make an order for equal shared parental responsibility for “all other matters” where a sole parental responsibility order has been made in relation to any issues, in this case, x’s education and health.[38]
303 i have found that i cannot make a finding on the balance of probabilities that a family violence perpetrated by the father has occurred as asserted by the mother in her evidence.
304 i find that the necessity for a finding on the balance of probabilities is different to the court finding that there are “reasonable grounds to believe” that family violence has been perpetrated by the father.
305 on the basis of the evidence, i find that there are not reasonable grounds to believe that the father has perpetrated family violence.
306 accordingly, i find that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility being in x’s best interest applies.
307 the mother accepts that an order for shared parental responsibility is appropriate in all areas other than x’s education and health. the mother presents her wealth of evidence of the parlous state of the co-parenting relationship between the parties and their lack of adequate communication. it is those defects in the parenting relationship that she argues justify the order for sole parental responsibility in her favour in relation to issues of x’s education and health and justifies the limiting of the orders for the father’s time with x during school term time that is sought by her.
308 however, the recommendation of dr k in the family report is that the parents continued to share parental responsibility and that they work on developing a more collaborative relationship so that they can effectively exercise their shared parental responsibility. both in the family report and in her cross-examination in the hearing, dr k indicated that the making of a sole parental responsibility order serves to reinforce a perception by x that her father is a less significant part of her world than her mother.
309 the need for decisions in relation to x’s education and health go to the making of major long-term issues as opposed to short-term issues relate to the school she should attend and any significant long-term health concerns.
310 the parties have placed the question of the primary school to be attended by x before the court and i will decide that issue, and the next occasion for decision will come when she is ready to go to high school. the parents must find a way to effectively consult and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue, in x’s best interest.
311 it is not a case of the mother taking a position where she seeks sole parental responsibility “across the board”, and, accordingly, she must acknowledge that it is possible for the parties to consult and make a genuine effort to reach agreement in relation to major long-term issues that do not concern education and health.
312 on the basis of the findings i made on the primary and additional considerations under section 60cc, based upon the evidence in the matter, i find that the presumption in section 61da that it is in x’s best interests that her parents have equal shared parental responsibility for her applies and is not rebutted.
section 65daa – consideration of x spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each of her parents
313 as i have found that the presumption in section 61da applies and that it is in x’s best interests to make an order that her parents have equal shared parental responsibility for her, i must consider the matters set out in section 65daa of the act.
314 is it in x’s best interest to spend equal time with each of her parents? dr k recommends firmly against orders being made for x to spend equal time with each of her parents, both in the family report and in her oral evidence in cross-examination.
315 during her cross-examination by mr holmes, she said:
i would never say that this was an equal shared care case, due to the conflict of the parents and the history of the matter.
316 during cross-examination by ms christie sc for the father, who seeks an equal care order, dr k said:
my understanding of children who cope best with equal shared care is that they need to see their parents are able to acknowledge each other and have a cordial, civil communication and are businesslike.
317 she went on to say that she had not observed that such was the situation at the time of the interviews for the family report, and that on all of the information available to her up to the time of her cross-examination, she understood that the situation had not changed. in response to a question from ms christie sc “so it’s hard to see why five nights is better than six nights or better than seven nights?” dr k responded:
except that equal shared care depends on parents who work together to make it work for the child. i did not assess these parents as being there.
318 nothing in the course of the evidence of events from the interviews on 6 december 2018 and 9 february 2019 up to the time of trial leads me to find that there had been any sign of “these parents being there” either.
319 when it was put to dr k by ms christie sc that “some parents who are not able to cooperate can parallel-parent?” dr k responded “yes”. and when then asked “they can do so on a week-to-week basis?” dr k responded:
not always. a lack of consistency is not good for children. children become confused unless they feel they can move seamlessly between two households with no reaction if they raise what happened in one household with the other parent.
320 i find on the basis of all of the evidence that such seamless movement between the parents’ households would not at present be available to x.
321 during the cross-examination by ms lawson, dr k indicated that family therapy may assist each of the parents, but that it would need to be individual therapy so the parents can gain some therapies toward better co-parenting, whilst indicating that joint family therapy is contraindicated. later in her cross-examination by ms lawson, dr k confirmed that she recommended against an equal shared time arrangement and confirmed that she was of the opinion that five nights per fortnight during school term time was the upper limit of the time between x and her father that she would recommend to the court.
322 at the end of her cross-examination, when asked a further question by mr holmes as to her opinion in relation to the appropriate nights per fortnight during school term time if the allegations made by the mother of family violence, including sexual assault by the father, were not made out, dr k responded:
i maintain my position of four or five nights per fortnight. i have other problems other than those allegations. i believe that substantial and significant care, that is four to five nights, or four nights and an afternoon, is appropriate.
323 based upon my findings when considering the matters under section 60cc, i find that it is not in x’s best interest that orders be made that she spend equal time with each of her parents.
324 in considering whether it is reasonably practicable for x to spend equal time with each of her parents, the court must have regard to the matters set out in section 65daa(5). in that regard, i have already made comments and findings earlier in these reasons about the distance between the parents’ places of residence, and the main consideration in relation to the reasonable practicability of x spending equal time with each of her parents is in relation to the location of the school that she would attend and the effect on x’s best interests of travelling from each of her parents’ homes to school.
325 if x remains at the suburb p school, then for one week in every two, she would have a long journey from the mother’s home to and past the father’s home and on to her school at suburb p. if she attends either of the schools chosen by the mother, and in particular the school at suburb e that the mother nominates in the order that she seeks, then for one week in two she would have five days of being delivered to and collected from school by her father with a car journey of, depending on the traffic, from about 40 minutes to an hour on each trip. in her evidence in cross-examination, dr k expressed some concern about the concept of x spending a large part of each day in the car for extended periods of time.
326 at present, the evidence leads to very serious doubt that x’s parents have the current or future capacity to implement an arrangement for x spending equal time in each of their households, of her being able to move seamlessly between those households. similarly, in relation to the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise from an arrangement where x spends equal time between her parents, it is hard to see the parents having the capacity to maintain such an arrangement in such a manner as would not add to x’s current state of confusion and unhappiness consequent upon the state of the relationship between her parents.
327 that is, in fact, the next consideration under the subsection, the impact that such an arrangement would have on x. on the present state of the relationship between the parents, such a relationship, requiring a high level of cooperation so that x can move seamlessly between two households on a week-about basis, is not available.
328 accordingly, i find that not only is it not in x’s best interest to spend equal time with each of her parents, but it is not reasonably practicable for her to do so. on that basis, i need not go on to consider the equal time question any further whilst considering the matters mandated under section 65daa.
329 is it in x’s best interests to spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents?
330 on the basis of the evidence i have detailed above from dr k, i have the expert’s opinion that the appropriate arrangement for x is one that goes to the edge of, or right into, what is regarded as substantial and significant time as described in section 65daa(3). four nights per fortnight and one afternoon in the other week, during school term time, and half of school holidays, and time for each parent on special occasions, would bring the father to the inner edge of substantial and significant time by providing for days that fall on weekends and holidays and days that do not fall on weekends or holidays (being a friday or a monday, depending on how the alternate weekend is structured), and would provide time for the father to be involved in x’s daily routine and occasions of particular significance to her, and for x to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the father.
331 it would certainly provide substantial and significant time for the mother. an order that x spend five nights per fortnight with her father, whether four nights in a block and one night in the “off week” or five nights in a block, would certainly provide substantial and significant time for each of the parents.
332 on the basis of the findings that i made on the considerations in section 60cc, i find that it is in x’s best interests to spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents. what the nature of the substantial and significant time with the father should be in x’s best interest, i will examine and make appropriate findings hereunder.
333 is it reasonably practicable for x to spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents?
334 it may be most convenient here to reach a decision in relation to the issue of the school to be attended by x, as that can have a bearing on the reasonable practicability of substantial and significant time with each parent. i have found that it is not in x’s best interest, or reasonably practicable, for her to spend equal time with each of her parents. i will not be going on to make an order for x to spend equal time with each of her parents when considering the orders properly to be made in her best interest hereunder.
335 on that basis, she will be living more nights per fortnight during school term time with her mother than her father. the school x attends at suburb p is not between the parents’ places of residence, but is beyond the father’s place of residence in the opposite direction to where the mother’s place of residence is located. for x to remain at that school on the long-term basis would impose upon her an onerous burden of travel during each fortnight of the school term during more days than not.
336 the court was not given evidence, nor need it have been, of any other matters relating to the competing schools, such as academic record, courses offered, sports and extracurricular activities available and so forth, to assist in making a determination of which school is appropriate for x with her best interests the paramount consideration. i find on the evidence, on the balance of probabilities, that it is more in x’s best interests that she attend a school closer to her mother’s place of residence than remain at the school at suburb p that imposes the onerous travel burden upon her when in her mother’s care. accordingly, i will make an order as sought by the mother that, unless the parents agree in writing otherwise, the parents do all things necessary to enrol x at d school at suburb e, with a view to her commencing school there from term 1, 2022.
337 having made the relevant finding and determination in relation to the school to be attended by x, i go back to examining how reasonably practicable it would be for x to spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents. the trip from the father’s place of residence to the school at suburb e is by no means as onerous as the trip from the mother’s place of residence to the suburb p school. the father is self-employed and works the greater part of the time from home and is in a position, as he indicates in his evidence, to arrange any times that he needs to spend away from the home, such as software installation for clients onsite, to suit his obligations arising from his care of x. he is available to take her to school and collect her from school each day that she is in his care, far more available than he would be if he had an “onsite” employment situation and regular hours.
338 the parents have demonstrated since the making of the interim orders by consent on 4 march 2019 that, despite their parlous co-parenting relationship and lack of verbal communication, they are able to implement an arrangement whereby x spends four nights per fortnight with her father during school term time and a week at a time in school holidays. they have shown that they have capacity to communicate with each other and resolve any difficulties that may arise in performing that current interim arrangement. there is no incident detailed in the evidence of either party that shows serious problems of any nature arising from the implementation of those interim orders. accordingly, i find that they have a current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for x spending substantial and significant time with each of her parents and to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that may arise from implementing that arrangement.
339 i find that the impact that an arrangement that amounts to substantial and significant time, being either four or five nights per fortnight, would have no different impact on x than the arrangement that has subsisted since march 2019 has had upon her. that is not to say that such arrangement has not had a deleterious effect upon x – that is made plain in the evidence – but in the hope that each of these parents have learnt some lessons from these proceedings, and in particular from the opinions expressed by dr k up to the end of the hearing, and can put on a front for x sufficient to make her feel more comfortable on those occasions when she is in a position to observe her parents interacting in any way. hopefully, the ending of these proceedings – which i acknowledge should have happened well before now – will assist in that regard.
340 accordingly, i find that it is reasonably practicable that x spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents.
341 having found that it is in x’s best interest and reasonably practicable, i will consider now what orders are properly to be made, with x’s best interest as the paramount consideration, for her to spend substantial and significant time with each of her parents.
342 x has been spending four nights per fortnight during school term time with her father since march 2019. there have been no issues that lead the court to question whether the arrangement is in x’s best interest or not.
343 i find that going to six nights per fortnight is a step beyond what is appropriate in the circumstances in which x finds herself, of having parents with a defective co-parenting relationship and poor communication. it is open to the parents to improve their parenting relationship if they choose to take steps. i do not intend to order that the parents attend family therapy, but it is open to the parents of their own volition to engage individually, not jointly, in family therapy with a view to obtaining strategies on the part of each to cope and to improve their co-parenting relationship. but i must take the matter as i find it to the end of the hearing, and on that basis, i make the finding that six nights per fortnight is more substantial and significant time to be spent between x and her father than is in her best interests.
344 having found that the regime of four nights per fortnight during school term time has worked, despite the circumstances, and having found that six nights per fortnight is too much, i find that the appropriate order is that x spend five nights per fortnight with her father, and i find that it is appropriate in x’s circumstances that such time be in a block from the end of school on thursday until the start of school on tuesday, so as to eliminate any mid-week change in her school routine that would arise from having one overnight in the “off week”, and so as to eliminate changeovers during school term time (other than as made necessary on special occasions) between her parents.
345 accordingly, i have found that it is in x’s best interests that her parents have equal shared parental responsibility for her, that she live with her mother and she spend time with her father during school term time each alternate weekend from end of school thursday until start of school tuesday.
resolution of the remaining parenting issues
346 the parents are in agreement in relation to the school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3, that they should be seven nights each. however, such school holidays are not 14 nights long, but 16 nights long, and accordingly, i will make an order that for the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, x spend half of the school holidays with each of her parents.
347 the parents are in conflict as to who should have the first half of the holidays, and who should have the second half of holidays, the mother proposing that x be with her father for the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years, and the father proposing that x be with him for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. i will make an order that x spend time with her father for the first half of term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays in even numbered years, and the second half in odd numbered years.
348 in relation to the christmas school holidays, the father proposes that they be shared between the parties on a week about basis, commencing from 26 december each year, whilst the mother proposes that the father’s time with x be for a period of two weeks during january, being either the two weeks commencing on new year’s day, or two weeks commencing on 15 january. to provide an order that x spend time with her father for two weeks commencing on 15 january would take that time over to 28 january, and it is sometimes the case that school has resumed immediately after the australia day holiday, which can be 27 january.
349 i find that the appropriate order is that the sharing of x’s christmas school holidays commence at the time proposed by the father, 26 december in each year, and that the time be shared on the basis of that indicated by the mother, being half each of the remaining time, so as to minimise the occasions of changeover between the parties which would be more frequent on a week about basis than a half/half basis.
350 the mother seeks an order that if the parent that has care of x is unable to provide care for her for a period of 48 hours or longer, that parent is to offer the other parent care of x in the first instance. i find that such orders, known as “first refusal orders” are more a recipe for further conflict between parents and, particularly so in the circumstance of these parents, and accordingly, i decline to make that order.
351 if either parent wishes to offer care of x to the other parent on any occasion, they may do so.
352 the parents seek slightly different arrangements in relation to sharing the christmas period with x. they are as one in proposing that x always be in the mother’s care over christmas eve and through into christmas day, but they differ as to the changeover time on christmas day, the mother seeking it be 11.30 am whereas the father seeking it be 10 am.
353 they are also apart in relation to the ending of the father’s time on boxing day, the mother seeking it be 3.30 pm and the father seeking it be 5.30 pm.
354 i propose to make the orders sought by the father on the basis that it proposes a longer period that x will be with her mother leading up to christmas, being from 9.30 am on 23 december through to 10 am on christmas day, then with her father until 5.30 pm on boxing day.
355 the parents seek the same order in relation to new year’s eve to new year’s day, and in relation to mother’s day and father’s day, and in relation to time between x and the applicable parent on each parent’s birthday.
356 the father seeks specific orders in relation to easter, whilst the mother is silent on easter. i will make the father’s order.
357 the mother seeks an order in relation to x’s birthday, whilst the father is silent in relation to x’s birthday. i will make the mother’s order.
358 in relation to changeovers, the parents agree that wherever possible, changeovers occur at x’s school, but disagree in relation to changeovers occurring otherwise. the mother proposes that they occur at suburb b mcdonalds given the parties’ current places of residence, and that if x’s residence is changed, changeover occur at the mcdonalds or agreed public venue halfway between the parties’ respective homes. the father seeks that changeovers occur at mcdonalds at suburb g.
359 once again, i take judicial notice of the location of f street, suburb g in relation to suburb y, where the father lives, and suburb s, where the mother lives. it is the suburb right beside where the father lives, and on the other side of suburb y from where the mother lives. further, on the basis of judicial notice, suburb b is more a location between the parents’ place of residence, though by no means the most convenient via the yy street route. i will make an order that any changeovers do not occur at x’s school, occur at suburb b mcdonalds or such other place as may be agreed between the parties from time to time.
360 the father seeks an order that both parents be at liberty to attend any medical appointment for x, but in the course of his cross-examination by mr holmes, he accepted that it was not a good idea for the court to make that order. accordingly, i will make a blend of the orders sought by the mother and the father under the heading “medical” in each of their minutes of order.
361 similarly, i will make orders that are a blend of the orders sought by the parties in relation to a passport for x and overseas travel, noting that in accordance with the concession made by the father during his cross-examination by mr holmes, i will order that the mother retain the passport, other than when it is being used by the father for travel with x outside australia.
362 the mother seeks an order that the parties have telephone communication with x whilst she is in the other parent’s care at all reasonable times and with all reasonable frequency. with the findings i have made about the state of the co-parenting relationship between these parents, the state of their distrust and dislike of each other, i find that leaving the concept of “all reasonable times and with all reasonable frequency to the parents” is a recipe for conflict and disaster, and accordingly, i prefer the order proposed by the father and supported by the icl that both parents have liberal telephone contact with x between the hours of 6 pm and 8 pm during periods of time that x is in the other parent’s care.
363 both parents seek an order to the effect that upon x making a request to contact the other parent, it be facilitated by the parent who has care of her. i will make an order to that effect.
364 the parties differ in relation to the order they seek relating to x’s extracurricular activity. the mother seeks an order that she permitted to enrol x into any weekend sport and/or extracurricular activity that she may choose, and that she advise the father of it with at least one month’s notice of the activity, and that any event the father is unable to ensure x attends each such activity, then the father’s time is suspended to enable the mother to arrange that.
365 the orders sought by the father is that each parent be permitted to enrol x into any weekend sporting and/or extracurricular activity “in coordination with the other so as to avoid overlap and shall advise the other party with at least one month’s notice of the activity”. and that “each party will ensure that x attends her scheduled extracurricular activities”. once again, noting the state of the relationship between the parents, the mother should not have power to schedule how the father spends his time with x by imposing upon him attendance at extracurricular activities, or causing him to cede his time with x if he cannot take her. i will make the orders sought by the father.
366 the father seeks an order that each parent have liberty to attend all of x’s extracurricular sporting and school-related activities, whilst the mother seeks an order that the parents only attend such of x’s sporting events on days when she is in their care, unless written agreement otherwise, or unless it is a significant event such as a final or grand final. being mindful of the evidence presented by the mother, of what she asserts has been the father’s conduct during occasions when they both attend one of x’s activities, i will make the orders sought by the father, but with the rider that the parents are to interact on such occasions only by exchanging polite greetings, and that they are not otherwise to impose their immediate presence on the other parent.
367 i find that it is appropriate in x’s best interests to make orders 26, 27 and 28 as sought in the mother’s minute of order, not being matters addressed in the father’s minute of order, and not specifically opposed by him. i also find it is appropriate to make order 33 as sought by the mother in her minute of orders so as to regulate their conduct at changeovers, which, on the evidence contained in the family report, has been the occasion of most discomfort for x.
368 i find on the whole of the evidence, that there is no basis for making the injunctive order sought by the mother in order 34 in her minute of order, which seeks to restrain the father from coming within 200 metres of the mother’s place of residence. there is no evidence whatsoever of the father taking any action to do so, other than the rather nebulous evidence of x asserting that he had pulled into a next door neighbour’s driveway.
369 such an order as sought by the mother is an injunction under section 114 of the act, not being described as a personal protection order within the terms of section 68b of the act, and i find that there is no basis for making such an order.
the law – property adjustment order issues
370 the law relating to the alteration of property interests between two parties to a marriage is governed by section 79 of the act.[39] relevant in this case, section 79(1) vests the court with power to alter the interests of the parties in property,[40] and the power to make orders providing for the settlement or transfer of property, as determined by the court.[41]
371 however, the court must not make an order under section 79 unless the court is satisfied that, in all of the circumstances, it is just and equitable to do so.[42] the legislative process required by section 79 was considered by the high court in stanford & stanford.[43]
372 in that decision, the high court held that section 79(2) requires that at the outset of the court’s decision-making process the court must consider whether or not, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make an order under section 79(1) altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in property.
373 in considering the proposition posed by this first step, a court should start by identifying items under the following categories: (1) the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in property, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, (2) the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (3) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[44]  the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in property, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, (2) the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (3) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[44]
374 that the interests as described above are ‘existing’ is of importance, as the court noted, because the text of the section gives reference to ‘altering’ the interests.[45]
375 i further note the comments of the high court in stanford at paragraph 42 which i reproduce in full here:
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[46]
376 i will examine the matrimonial asset pool and the existing interests of the parties, before determining whether it is just and equitable to make a property adjustment order.
377 if the court determines that it is just and equitable to make an order under section 79, the court must then consider what orders are appropriate to be made. in doing so, i will follow the four-step process set out in hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia.[47]
378 in hickey, the full court of the family court set out a process of four inter-related steps that must be taken by a court when determining a property application: (1) first, “the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing”,[48]  first, “the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing”,[48] second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [49] (3) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[50] (4) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[51]
379 the full court pointed out in hickey that pursuant to the wording of section 79, there can only be one property settlement order at any one time, and that the one property settlement order is final, subject only to anything that may be properly done pursuant to section 79a of the act.[52]
380 the full court held in fontana:[53]
... indeed, the authorities are consistent in finding that assessing contributions is not an accounting exercise but a holistic one (brandt & brandt [1997] famca 21, (1997) flc 92-758, norbis & norbis (1986) 161 clr 513).[54]
381 the court is required to consider the parties’ contributions made on and from the commencement of their relationship, during their relationship, and following separation.[55]
382 the approach to determining the appropriate percentage of the net value of property in relation to the contributions of the parties, at step two of the four-step process, requires an assessment of contributions by, or on behalf of, each of the parties in a holistic manner, rather than attaching specific contributions to a specific item of property and making a determination upon that basis. to do the latter would be to disregard the whole of the contributions made during the whole of the relevant period of the relationship by or on behalf of each of the parties.
383 as the full court said in dickons & dickons[56] at paragraphs 14 to 16:
[14] as is plain from earlier decisions of this court, regard must be had to the use made of contributions of various types so as to compare the contributions made by each of the parties during the course of, and over the length of, their relationship (see, for example, in the marriage of pierce (1998) flc 92-844) but that is an entirely different proposition to, as it were, causally linking contributions with their asserted financial “product” or “value”. the former recognises that the nature, form and extent of contributions made by each of the parties might differ, the latter suggests that the absence of a causal link counts as no contribution at all. [15] the search for a causal link might be seen to come instinctively to the necessary inquiry and all the more so when regard is had to s 79(4)(a) which refers to financial contributions made “...directly or indirectly...” “...to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property ...” and goes on to also refer to the financial contribution made “...otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property...” the terms of that sub-paragraph might, naturally enough, be seen to suggest a causal link between those contributions and the “financial product” which those contributions of that type are said to have produced. that same requirement might also be seen to suggest that relevant contributions of that type can be seen to be quantifiable – or, at least, conceptualised – in monetary terms, in contradistinction to contributions made pursuant to s 79(4)(c). [16] while that apparent “causal connection” might be seen in s 79(4)(a) (and (b)), no such connection is apparent from the terms of s 79(4)(c), contributions of that latter type are not linked by the words of the sub-paragraph to the “...acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property...” or, indeed, to “property” at all. this is not a legislative oversight, the 1983 amendments to the act which inserted the current s 79(4)(c) were specifically intended, relevantly, to remove any suggestion that there needed to be a causal link between contributions of that type and any particular asset or property. the explanatory memorandum to the family law act amendment bill 1983 provides, at clause 36, that a specific purpose of the re-casting of s 79(4) was, relevantly, to:
... revise sub-section 79(4) to remove the possibility of an interpretation of the sub-section requiring that there be a nexus between a spouse’s contribution and a specific item of property in section 79 proceedings ...[57]
384 the court is required to make a holistic value judgment in the exercise of a discretionary power of a very general kind.[58] the principle was expressed succinctly by the full court in the joint judgment of bryant cj and ainslie-wallace j in fields & smith[59] at paragraph 168:
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.[60]
385 the full court has been repeatedly clear that the approach to property settlement under section 79 of the act is not an accounting exercise. here, i note the comments of the full court in grier & malphas[61] at paragraph 129, where murphy and kent jj said:
as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.[62]
386 the approach adopted by trial judges to the concept of ‘addbacks’ over the years since the commencement of the act has varied between placing back into the matrimonial asset pool no-longer existent assets as “notional assets” and giving them a value and dealing with them as if they still existed, to taking any such notional assets into account at step three of the four-step process when considering the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act and, in particular, at section 75(2)(o), “any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.”[63]
387 in ajo v gro (2005) 191 flr 317,[64] at paragraphs [30] to [31], the full court identified three types of addbacks that are commonly encountered in property settlement decisions:
[30] to date, three clear categories of cases have emerged where the court has determined that it is appropriate to notionally add back to the pool of assets, that is, assets that no longer exist. they are: (a) where the parties have expended money on legal fees. in djm v jlm [1998] famca 97, (1998) 23 fam lr 396 the full court said (at 410-411):
11.6 for reasons set out in farnell, s 117 provides that each party to proceedings under the family law act shall bear their own costs unless the court otherwise orders. failing to add back monies expended by parties on costs frequently has the effect of defeating the policy of s 117 by permitting the pool of available assets for distribution between the parties to be diminished by any monies that either of the parties have managed to spend on their costs up to the date of trial. we are of the view that the normal approach ought be to add costs already paid back into the pool. whilst there may be cases where that approach is inappropriate, the reasons why it is not taken ought normally be spelt out. where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets. in in marriage of townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505 nicholson cj as he then was with whom fogarty and jordan jj agreed, said (at 509):
in my view, what occurred in this case, as i said during the course of argument was, in fact, a premature distribution of a proportion of the matrimonial assets. what the husband did was to distribute to himself an asset in which the wife had a legitimate interest. in such circumstances i consider that it would be unjust in the extreme to simply treat such conduct by the husband as a matter to which regard should be had under section 75(2). it seems to me that the husband has had the benefit of that money. had he retained, for example, the taxi licence instead of selling it, that would have been brought into account as an item of property which would have been dealt with in the same way as the remaining items of property in this case. accordingly, i am of the view that the correct way in which to deal with the husband’s receipt of those moneys is to bring them into the pool of assets on a notional basis and make a distribution accordingly. in the circumstances outlined by baker j in in marriage of kowaliw [1981] famca 70, [1981] flc 91-092 at 76,644: as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value. conduct of the kind referred to in para. (a) and (b) above having economic consequences is clearly in my view relevant under sec 75(2)(o) to applications for settlement of property instituted under the provisions of sec 79. [31] as the full court said in browne v green [1999] famca 1483, [1999] flc 92-873 at 86,360:
[44] we agree with her honour that the principles stated by baker j in kowaliw certainly do not constitute any form of fixed code. they are no more than guidelines for use in the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction conferred by s 79 of the family law act 1975. nevertheless, they have over the considerable period of time since they were enunciated, become a well accepted guideline in this jurisdiction — a guideline the use of which assists in the achievement of the important goal of consistency within the jurisdiction.[65]
388 in ajo & gro, the full court was careful to point out the difference between a “premature distribution” and expenditure on reasonable day-to-day expenses and, in particular, expenditure on reasonable self-support.[66]
389 in talbot & talbot [2015] famcafc 132, the full court said:
where one party unilaterally distributes to themselves property which no longer exists and which, but for that premature distribution, would be susceptible to section 79 orders, justice and equity may require the court to take account of the dissipated property by adding it back as against the dissipating party (townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569). whether that should occur, or whether the dissipation should be taken into account pursuant to section 75(2)(o), or indeed at all, are all matters requiring the exercise of a trial judge’s discretion (in the marriage of ad and ac townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569, omacini & omacini, cerini & cerini [1998] famca 143).[67]
390 in vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51, the full court said the following at paragraphs 137 to 139:
[137] at [50] to [65] of the first reasons under the heading “add-backs,” the trial judge held that $25,000 withdrawn by the husband from the parties’ bank accounts post-separation should be added back into the pool of assets, and further concluded that $50,000 which the husband had, post-separation, paid to his parents, purportedly in repayment of a loan from them, should also be added back. [138] there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 – or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108 - is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered. [139] the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.[68]
391 the reference in the full court’s decision in vass to the full court’s decision in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) 279 flr 1 was to the comments made in obiter by bryant cj and thackray j:
[79] we observe that “notional property”, which is sometimes “added back” to a list of assets to account for the unilateral disposal of assets, is unlikely to constitute “property of the parties to the marriage or either of them”, and thus is not amenable to alteration under section 79. it is important to deal with such disposals carefully, recognising the assets no longer exist, but that the disposal of them forms part of the history of the marriage – and potentially an important part. as the question does not arise here, we need say nothing more on this topic, save to note that section 79(4) and in particular section 75(2)(o) gives ample scope to ensure a just and equitable outcome when dealing with the unilateral disposal of property.[69]
392 the question of addbacks was again considered by the full court in masoud & masoud [2016] famcafc 24 in paragraphs 90 to 99 of that judgment, and in particular at paragraph 97 where the court said:
[97] ... the way in which non-existent property is to be treated remains a matter for judicial discretion (see townsend & townsend flc 92-569) ... the provision of an agreed balance sheet providing for the inclusion of notional property would not mandate his honour’s acceptance of it or that he would treat the notional property in the same way as had the parties.[70]
393 in that case, the full court held that it was open to the trial judge in the exercise of discretion to deal with asserted addbacks in a manner different to that proposed by either of the parties, or indeed by the parties jointly, as reflected in that case by the treatment of addbacks in an agreed balance sheet.
394 in shan & prasad [2018] famcafc 12, the full court, in dealing with the issue of ‘addbacks’ said at paragraphs 130 and 131:
[130] ... a court cannot create property for the purposes of alteration. section 79 empowers a court to alter interests of the parties to the proceedings in property. property is defined in section 4 of the act to mean:
... [in] relation to the parties to a marriage or either of them – means property to which those parties are, or that party is, as the case may be, entitled, whether in possession or reversion.
[131] as french cj said in kennon & spry [2008] hca 56, (2008) 238 clr 366 at 390, “‘property’ in section 79 is to be read as part of the collocation ‘property of the parties to the marriage’”. it is to be read widely and conformably with the purposes of the act. gummow and hayne jj said at 397 that “the term ‘property’ is not a term of art with one specific and precise meaning”. the purpose of the act as set out in section 79(1) is to alter interests in property to which a party has an interest in possession or reversion.[71]
395 the full court of the family court of australia has provided useful guidelines for adding back to the property available at trial in paragraphs 27 to 42 and 46 and 47 of trevi & trevi,[72] which i find it of assistance to quote in full, with original footnotes:
guidelines for adding back to the property available at trial (a) dissipation of property and expenditure other than on legal fees [27] the full court held in omacini and omacini[73] that addbacks fall into “three clear categories”: where the parties have expended money on legal fees, where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.[74] [28] however, the full court also made it clear that an addback does not necessarily occur whenever “a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation”, the full court describing such a proposition as “unduly simplistic”.[75] an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is “the exception rather than the rule”.[76] [29] the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it”[77] at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation.[78] thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. [30] two fundamental premises emerge from omacini and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property.[79] (b) expenditure on legal fees [31] to the considerations just discussed must be added the propositions emerging from authority that paid legal fees as a category of addback is imbued with considerations specific to that expenditure. the full court said in chorn:
[56] in summary, we consider that the above mentioned decisions of the full court establish that, while the treatment of funds used to pay legal costs remains ultimately a matter for the discretion of the trial judge, in determining how to exercise that discretion, regard should be had to the source of the funds. [57] if the funds used existed at separation, and are such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them (on account, for example, of contributions), then such funds should be added back as a notional asset of the party, who has had the benefit of them. [58] if funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post‑separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance), they would generally not be added back as a notional asset, nor would any borrowing undertaken by a party post-separation to pay legal fees be taken into account as a liability in the calculation of the net property of the parties. funds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement may need to be looked at differently from other post‑separation income or acquisitions.
[32] those passages can be seen as an attempt to establish “guidelines”,[80] undertaken after a detailed examination of earlier authorities,[81] for the treatment of paid legal fees within s 79 proceedings. there can be little doubt that the statements made in that case have been applied by trial judges ever since. [33] the word “guidelines” is used advisedly so as to distinguish the same from “binding principles of law”.[82] the distinction is important. failure to follow a binding principle of law is an error of law. by contrast, the failure of a trial judge to follow a guideline:[83]
...does not of itself amount to error, for it may appear that the case is one in which it is inappropriate to invoke the guideline or that, notwithstanding the failure to apply it, the decision is the product of sound discretionary judgment. [however] [t]he failure to apply a legitimate guideline to a situation to which it is applicable may ... throw a question mark over the trial judge’s decision and ease the appellant’s burden of showing that it is wrong...
[34] the guidelines emerging from chorn should be read together and read conformably with the full court authorities upon which they are based. that being so, the delineations there referred to — “the funds used existed at separation ... such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them”, or “funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours” or received by a party “in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)” - cannot be seen as determinative of the exercise of discretion but, rather, as informing it. [35] again, the matters just referred to have important ramifications in an appellate context. they may ease the appellant’s burden of showing that “although the nature of the error may not be discoverable ... a substantial wrong has in fact occurred”,[84] or that the decision is “plainly wrong, [the] decision being no proper exercise of [the] judicial discretion”.[85] equally, they may ease the burden of establishing that irrelevant considerations have been taken into account or that relevant considerations have not been taken into account. [36] paid legal fees occupy a particular position in the consideration of addbacks by reason of s 117(1) of the act, a matter not relevant to any other form of expenditure or dissipation of property the subject of an addback claim. [37] an order failing to addback legal costs is a pre-emptive decision about one party paying the other’s legal costs. the statutorily prescribed default position is that neither party pays all or some of the other party’s costs.[86] [38] if, contrary to the demands of that section, there is to be a payment of costs, the award is dependent upon a finding of justifying circumstances which, in turn, is dependent upon (non-exhaustive) considerations all of which are informed by antecedent events - for example, whether one party has been “wholly unsuccessful” and “the conduct of the parties to the proceedings”.[87] an award of the costs of trial, if any, is in the usual run of events made after the respective entitlements of the parties to a settlement of property have been assessed and, importantly, any awarded costs are paid from the assessed entitlement to property received by the paying party. [39] as has been said, legitimate guidelines “guide the exercise of a discretion”, they do not replace it.[88] guidelines, must “[preserve], so far as it is possible to do so, the capacity ... to do justice according to the needs of the individual case”.[89] the decision to addback or not addback paid legal fees remains a matter of discretion. but, a finding that it is just and equitable to not addback an amount of legal fees so paid is a finding that it is just and equitable for the other party to contribute to the costs of the first party in that proportion as part of an overall assessment of the justice and equity governing their property division. [40] the considerations just referred to are plainly always important and central to the exercise of that discretion in respect of paid legal fees. [41] the passages from chorn, quoted above, draw a distinction between legal costs met from property that would otherwise be available at trial and legal costs met from funds “generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)”. the proposition there advanced, that such expenditure “would generally not be added back”, also needs to be seen as a guideline informing the relevant discretion rather than determining it. a further distinction is suggested in chorn between funds generated in that manner and “[f]unds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement”. [42] the latter suggestion recognises the discretion inherent in the task and also, perhaps, that in the particular circumstances of a case, adding back sums generated post-separation in the different manners suggested might create injustice as much as it might cure it.[90] ... [46] in stanford v stanford,[91] the high court emphasised as fundamental that a consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order begins by “identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property”.[92] [47] the essence of a claim for addbacks is that the asserted sum/s should be added to the value of the existing property interests of the parties and, subsequent to the assessment of contributions, credited to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements. doing so does not offend what was emphasised by the high court. adding back does not seek to create property interests that do not exist. rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements of ss 79(2) and (4) of the act to do justice and equity can require an “accounting” or “balance sheet” exercise for the purposes of s 79(2) and (4), so as to include the value of the dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties’ existing interests in property, and to credit the value of same against the assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending party.[93]
the matrimonial asset pool
396 before making a determination as to whether it is just and equitable to make an adjustive order under section 79 of the act in relation to the interests of the parties in the property, i must identify, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property.[94]
397 i have the parties’ joint balance sheet (exhibit a7) and that indicates agreement between the parties in relation to what constitutes the assets of the parties, though with disagreement as to the value of the husband’s motor vehicle and the jointly owned household contents.
398 there are differences of opinion between the parties in relation to some of the asserted addbacks, and how they should be treated, and in relation to which liabilities of the parties should be considered in formulating the net matrimonial asset pool and, therefore “the property” to be considered in determining whether it is just and equitable to proceed with an adjustive order, and if it considered it just and equitable to proceed, what adjustive order should be made.
399 the wife contends that the husband’s motor vehicle is valued at $15,000. the husband contends that it is valued at $7000. the court has no expert evidence as to value. the husband’s contention is contained in item 40 in his financial statement, where he asserts the value of the vehicle as $7,000. this evidence is lay opinion and could have been objected to and excluded under section 76 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (there having been no consent between the parties to division 12a of part 7 of the act applying to the property aspect of the proceedings), but the husband’s evidence was not objected to, it is relevant and i consider it.
400 the wife does give some evidence in relation to the value of the vehicle in paragraph 257 of her trial affidavit. she asserts that at the time of hearing of the matter the motor vehicle had a value estimated to be $15,000. that evidence is also a lay opinion and is not admissible under section 76 of the evidence act 1995 (cth). once again, no objection was made to that opinion, it is relevant and i consider it.
401 accordingly, i have conflicting lay evidence from each party. it is improper in such circumstances for the court to merely ‘pick a mid-point’, as that would be based on convenience, rather than proper legal principles. accordingly, as the car is in the possession of the husband and he asserts a definite value, whereas the wife asserts an estimated value, i find that the husband’s motor vehicle is valued at $7000.
402 in relation to the jointly owned household contents, i have the wife’s assertion that the same are valued at $2000 according to the balance sheet (exhibit a7) or as “nominal” according to paragraph 257 of her trial affidavit and item 42 in part i of her financial statement. the husband contends that such contents are valued at $1000 according to his entry on the balance sheet and item 42 in part i of his financial statement.
403 the wife provides some evidence in paragraph 49 of her trial affidavit and the copies of correspondence found at exhibit tab 3 to that affidavit of the post-separation negotiations relating to the wife attempting to obtain her share of the contents of the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g, but i have no evidence of what is held by the husband and what is held by the wife from the jointly owned contents or the relative values of such holdings. in order 38 in the wife’s minute of orders she seeks certain personal property be passed from the husband to her, but without presenting evidence as to values.
404 the same problems as to opinion evidence apply to the evidence i have recited about the jointly owned household contents. i intend to deal with this issue by disregarding the jointly owned household contents from the matrimonial asset pool on the basis that i have evidence from the wife of each of the parties having some share of them, but no expert evidence as to value.
405 it is common between the parties, on the balance sheet and in submissions, that the interim distributions to each of the parties from the sale proceeds made on an informal basis as to $10,000 each on 31 october 2018 and $12,000 each on 10 february 2020 should be added back and considered as components of the property of the parties for consideration under section 79 of the act.
406 it is also common between the parties that the interim distribution to the wife pursuant to the consent orders made on 7 february 2018 of $95,000 should be considered as property of the parties under section 79 of the act, but only as to $57,000, being the initial sum of $95,000 less the $38,000 expended by her on part-repayment of the vv finance debt relating to her motor vehicle.
407 i have the evidence of the wife in paragraph 249 of her affidavit as to how she expended the $95,000. it was conceded by the husband in submissions (and based on my calculation) that, after the expenditure referred to in that paragraph, a sum of $4853 would have remained. there was no evidence from either party that the bank accounts of the wife reflected at items 4, 10 and 11 on the balance sheet contain any of those excess moneys.
408 accordingly, i find that the excess sum of $4853 has been expended by the wife on living expenses and not relating to repayment of debt, purchase of property, or payment of legal fees.
409 accordingly, i find that the appropriate sum to be added back as property for the purpose of section 79 of the act is $52,147.
410 the wife asserts that the husband’s expenditure on legal fees in the sum of $218,000 should be added back to the balance sheet as property of the husband. to be clear, her submission is that such should be added back not on the basis that such was paid from any item of a pre-existing property or any capital sum, but on the basis that such was paid from the husband’s post-separation income in circumstances where: (1) he enjoyed cost-free accommodation in the former matrimonial home up to its sale in january 2018, (2) consequent upon that, the loan accounts secured by way of mortgage on the property were in a position where redraw on those accounts covered the required payments during that time, with the consequence that the debit balance of the loan account increased by $36,672 during his sole occupation, and (3) the husband made no contributions to superannuation, which further freed up his income for payment of legal fees.  he enjoyed cost-free accommodation in the former matrimonial home up to its sale in january 2018, (2) consequent upon that, the loan accounts secured by way of mortgage on the property were in a position where redraw on those accounts covered the required payments during that time, with the consequence that the debit balance of the loan account increased by $36,672 during his sole occupation, and (3) the husband made no contributions to superannuation, which further freed up his income for payment of legal fees.
411 i find that the husband’s occupation of the matrimonial home without cost to him for the period from august 2015 until january 2018 should be dealt with in my consideration of the contributions of the parties in terms of section 79(4)(a) to (c) or under section 75(2)(o), but not both, and in consequence i will not add back any sum for the husband’s payment of legal fees.
412 in a similar vein, the wife proposes that there be an add back of the amount she had paid for legal fees being $41,647 prior to the hearing. she contends that the amount of $41,647 should be the amount added back instead of the $95,000 proposed by the husband in relation to the interim property distribution to her under the orders of 7 february 2018.
413 i have already determined that an appropriate sum to be included as property for the purpose of section 79 in relation to the interim distribution to the wife of $95,000 is $52,147. that sum includes the $41,647 paid by the wife for her legal fees. it is appropriate that that payment of legal fees remain in the added back sum, as otherwise it imposes a de facto costs order under section 117 of the act upon the husband without it being imposed on the basis of the proper considerations under that section.
414 it was submitted by the husband’s counsel that the only liability that should be considered when assessing the property of the parties for the purpose of section 79 is the wife’s car loan debt to vv finance in the sum of $2855. that would eliminate from consideration the credit card or line of credit debts of the parties (the wife’s zip money at $786 and the husband’s mastercard debts of $1197 and $503). i agree with that submission and i will not take into consideration those credit card and line of credit debts that the parties each acquired post-separation.
415 in relation to the wife’s debt to the state debt recovery authorities in the sum of $1743, on the evidence that was accumulated by the wife in consequence of receiving parking and/or motor traffic fines. i find that it is not appropriate that that debt be included in the calculation of the property of the parties for the purposes of section 79, but should be left as the responsibility of the wife without being considered under section 79, including in relation to any adjustment on consideration of the matters in section 75(2) of the act.
416 the wife’s debt for legal fees, placed on the balance sheet by her as $142,000, will also not be considered as a debt when ascertaining the property of the parties for the purpose of section 79 on the basis that, to do so, would also be to make a de facto section 117 order as discussed above.
417 accordingly, for the purpose of “identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interest of the parties in the property”, i have identified that property (not including my findings as to how various asserted assets, add backs and liabilities should be treated).
418 on the basis of the findings made above, i find the property of the parties forming the matrimonial asset pool for the purpose of any orders altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property under section 79 is as follows:assets
1.
joint
proceeds of sale of f street, suburb g (in trust)
$560,908.00
2.
husband
commonwealth bank account – ...48
$18,421.00
3.
wife
credit union account – ...26
$967.00
4.
axi trader fx trading account
$1664.00
5.
motor vehicle 1
$7000.00
6.
motor vehicle 2
$36,500.00
7.
company h
$9000.00
8.
credit union account
$1000.00
9.
joint account with new de facto partner
$386.00
10.
gold and silver bullion
$2000.00
total
$637,846.00
add backs
11.
interim distribution – orders 7 february 2018
$52,147.00
12.
interim distribution of sale proceeds, 31 october 2018
$10,000.00
13.
interim distribution of sale proceeds, 10 february 2020
$12,000.00
14.
15.
$96,147.00
liabilities
16.
car loan – vv finance
$2855.00
superannuation
17.
super fund j – accumulation fund
$90,796.00
419 the net matrimonial assets without superannuation are $731,138.00
420 the net matrimonial assets with superannuation are $821,934.00
421 is it just and equitable to proceed with considering and making an adjustive order under section 79 of the act?
422 as in most cases, and as referred to by the high court in stanford, this husband and wife are no longer living their marital relationship and there is and will be no common use of property by them.
423 their marital relationship has ended, including by a final divorce order. both parties seek that an adjustive order under section 79 of the act be made. there is a sum of money in solicitor’s trust account being the net proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g and that amount is in the joint names of the parties. the parties present different contentions as to how that sum should be divided between them. it must remain there until they reach agreement or until an order is made under section 79 of the act.
424 on all of those bases, i find it is just and equitable to make an order under section 79 of the act in the interest of the parties in the property.
section 79(4)(a)(ii)(c)
425 the husband made a significantly greater initial contribution than that made by the wife at the commencement of their cohabitation by reason of his equity in the suburb rr unit, being, on the evidence, an equity at the commencement of cohabitation of at least $56,428, which by february 2013 provided the parties with a substantial sum to apply to a purchase of the f street, suburb g property. on the evidence, that sum was certainly no less than $246,530 and on the husband’s evidence, the sum was about $300,000.
426 that increase in value of the husband’s equity occurred during a period of time when the parties were cohabiting and both were making contributions of a financial and non-financial nature, and were contributing to the welfare of the family unit.
427 further, the husband made an initial contribution by his ownership as a sole trader of the company h business that had been trading for a period of about nine years at the commencement of cohabitation and which generated the husband’s income throughout the period of the relationship and after separation.
428 there is conflicting evidence between the parties as to the wife’s financial position at the commencement of cohabitation. the wife asserts that she had savings of about $5000, home contents and furniture, some superannuation, and a motor vehicle. the husband contends that the wife had no assets of any significance at the start of the relationship, but did have liabilities being a personal loan and a car loan.
429 i do not have any evidence to resolve that competing evidence, but the wife gave her evidence of specific items of contribution – savings, contents, superannuation and motor vehicle, whilst the husband simply asserted that her assets were not of significance, while not denying that she held the assets the wife asserted. he asserts that she had a car loan which leads me to accept the wife’s evidence that she did own a motor vehicle.
430 the wife was in employment through the period of their cohabitation, except for the period of her maternity leave during which she did have some maternity leave income. her return to work in 2012 after maternity leave was on a part-time basis at four days per week, six and a-half hours a day and, by november 2013, she was working full-time again.
431 the husband operated a business as a sole trader throughout the relationship.
432 the wife gives evidence of her income through the relationship in paragraphs 229 and 230 of her trial affidavit, but i do not have similar evidence in relation to the husband. i have the wife’s evidence that the husband’s income, following separation for the year ended 30 june 2015 and year ended 30 june 2017 was well in excess of the wife’s income for the years during their relationship, as she reports, and that his income for the year ended 30 june 2016 was in excess of the wife’s income for each year during the relationship other than the year ended 30 june 2012.
433 i am not able to make a finding as to the precise income contribution of the husband during the relationship, as i can with the wife, but i do find that each of the parties applied the whole of their income during the cohabitation to the purchase, conservation, improvement of their property and toward the welfare of the family unit by payment of living expenses.
434 i find that it is appropriate to consider the husband’s cost-free occupation of the matrimonial home at f street, suburb g from august 2015 until january 2018 when considering any appropriate adjustment between the parties under section 75(2) of the act in consequence of such occupation without payment having the effect of the loan account debt for the parties secured on that property increasing by $36,672 over that time and that sum therefore not being available to the parties as part of the net proceeds of sale currently held in a trust account and available for distribution between them.
435 i find on the evidence that the wife made the greater contribution to the parenting of x from her birth in 2012 through to the parties’ separation in august 2015, though i find that the husband also made contribution thereto, though to a lesser degree than the wife.
436 i find that each of the parties made equal contribution to the welfare of the family unit in relation to the homemaker roles – cooking, cleaning, washing, ironing and shopping and so forth.
437 despite the wife’s allegations of family violence perpetrated against her by the husband, including allegations of serious sexual assault on a consistent basis for the final year of their relationship, the wife did not advance what is known as a kennon argument in relation to contributions, nor could i find that such argument would need to be considered, if advanced, on the basis of the available evidence, particularly in relation to any effect of such conduct on the wife’s contributions.
438 i find that the wife has made the superior post-separation contribution in consequence of her having primary responsibility for the day-to-day care and control of x.
439 i further find that post-separation the wife has made the sole contribution to the accumulation of her superannuation benefits with super fund j, whereby the value of her superannuation increased from $47,337.09 at 30 june 2015, somewhere a few months before separation, to $90,796.81 on 17 april 2020, an increase of $43,459.72. the husband has not accumulated any superannuation.
440 i am required to take a holistic view of the parties’ contributions during the relationship, including their initial contributions, contributions made during their period of cohabitation, and their post-separation contributions.
441 i find that the appropriate approach to take in this matter is a global approach to the whole of the property of the parties for the purposes of section 79 of the act. on that basis, i find that contributions favour the husband as to 55 per cent and the wife having contributed as to 45 per cent.
consideration of the matters under section 75(2) of the act – section 79(4)(e)
442 in considering what order (if any) should be made under section 79, the court must take into account the matters referred to in subsection 75(2), so far as they are relevant.
443 at hearing, both parties were 36 years of age and both in good health.
444 the wife deposed in her financial statement to a weekly income of $875, composed of paid parental leave and child support as assessed under the legislation received from the husband for x. that financial statement was completed as at 23 april 2020 and, by the time the hearing concluded on 16 december 2020, the wife’s situation would have changed by her return to work following her maternity leave. it is not known on the evidence what the wife’s income from her employment with the employer z as a professional would be on either the full-time or part-time basis.
445 the wife has the assistance in relation to household expenses of the income of her partner, mr l , and she gives evidence in her financial statement that he has an average weekly gross income of $1635 ($85,000 per year).
446 the husband deposes to a weekly income from his conduct of company h as a sole trader of $3462 or $180,000 per year. as between the parties (and not taking into account for this consideration an income of mr l) the husband is patently in a stronger financial position in relation to income than the wife.
447 i note the indication of the wife in paragraph 230 of her trial affidavit in relation to her taxable income for the years from 30 june 2009 to 30 june 2016. presuming she has followed the same course of employment, her income is likely to be around half or a little bit better than that of the husband. this finds in favour of an adjustment in favour of the wife.
448 neither party deposes to having the advantage of any financial resources, that referred to by the husband at item 57 in part l “financial resources” being the gold and silver bullion that has been taken into account in the identification of the property of the parties for the purposes of section 79 of the act.
449 each of the parties is both physically and mentally capable of engaging in appropriate gainful employment and continues to do so.
450 each of the parties has care and control of the child of the marriage, x, on a substantial and significant time basis and will continue to do so pursuant to the orders that will be made as a result of these reasons, x being in the wife’s care for a greater part of the time than she is in the father’s care during school term time, and being cared for equally between the parties during school holiday times.
451 i combine this consideration with the consideration of the provision of child support by the husband to the wife under the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth), the extra voluntary financial contributions that he makes toward x’s care, and the consideration of any need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent.
452 i find that there is a basis for a slight adjustment in favour of the wife through a combination of those three considerations, what would have been a larger basis for adjustment tempered by the consideration relating to child support and financial provision.
453 i will now consider the commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable him or herself to maintain him or herself and x and, on the wife’s part, her two children with mr l, in relation to each she has a duty to maintain pursuant to section 66c of the act.
454 the wife deposes to her personal expenditure in part g of her financial statement and in part o she sets out further information in relation to living expenses for her family unit that are paid by mr l.
455 the husband asserts that his personal expenditures, for himself alone, are $3157 per week, which includes $1329 worth of “total of all other expenditure” that cannot be identified by item as he has not completed part n of the financial statement, noting that he was not required in these proceedings to complete part n.
456 i find that there is no basis for an adjustment between the parties in relation to their commitments.
457 the wife is responsible to contribute toward the support of her child m and her other child with whom she was pregnant at the time of the hearing and shares that responsibility with mr l, whilst the husband is not responsible for the support of any other person. i find that this consideration is in favour of an adjustment in favour of the wife.
458 neither party deposes to being eligible for or receiving any pension, allowance or benefit under the law of the commonwealth or of any state or territory or other country or in relation to any superannuation fund or scheme.
459 i do not have sufficient evidence in relation to this matter to make findings in relation to the standard of living that, in all the circumstances, is reasonable other than an inference draw from the evidence that each party enjoys a standard of living that is comparable with that enjoyed by them prior to their separation. there is no basis for an adjustment between the parties on this consideration.
460 each of the parties has contributed to the income earning capacity and property of the other party during the period of the cohabitation through their mutual support and the arrangements made between them for care of x whilst both of the parties were working, principally in child care centres at no or low cost in consequence of the mother being an employee at such centres until she commenced employment with the employer z. i find that there is no basis for an adjustment between the parties under this consideration.
461 it is reasonable to assume that the duration of the marriage had some affect upon the earning capacity of the wife in consequence of the period from about june to november 2012 that she was on maternity leave around and following the birth of x, but there is no evidence to enable me to make any actual finding in the matter so as to form a basis for consideration of an adjustment.
462 the wife is cohabiting with mr l and i have noted above the wife’s evidence in relation to his income and his contribution to the payment of the family living expenses. the husband is not cohabiting with any other person. i find that there is no basis for an adjustment between the parties on this consideration.
463 i find that the circumstance of the husband enjoying occupation of the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g from separation of the parties in august 2015 until sale of the property in january 2018 without having to expend any of his income or capital on payment for that accommodation, whilst the wife was responsible for the expense of her rental accommodation through the same period, is a matter that i should take into account under section 75(2)(o).
464 the husband made a payment from his business account of company h into the loan account secured by a mortgage on the f street, suburb g property in the sum of $10,000 at about the time of the parties’ separation. however, such sum came from his accumulated income through his conduct of the business during the parties’ cohabitation and i do not take that into account as either a sole contribution by the husband or a sole payment by him toward his accommodation costs.
465 after that $10,000 payment had been made, the loan account had a debit balance of $323,876 and, as at 18 september 2017, some three to four months before the sale of the property, the loan account had a debit balance of $360,548, being an increase in the debit balance of $36,672 during the husband’s sole occupation.
466 during that time, the husband was in receipt of income and that enabled him to make substantial payments toward his legal costs in this matter, which are not being added back for the reasons given earlier herein. accordingly, the justice of the case requires that those circumstances be taken into account and i find that those circumstances ground a significant adjustment in favour of the wife, both in relation to the increase in the indebtedness of the loan account and the expenditure by the wife through the relevant period on her own accommodation costs.
467 i find that a further circumstance that the justice of the case requires that i take into account between the parties is that the husband has been able to pay the greater part of his legal fees from his post-separation income and, accordingly, does not carry a debt for those legal fees, whereas the wife has not been in a position to do that and does carry a considerable debt (asserted by her to be $142,000) for legal fees.
468 i find that this circumstance justifies an adjustment in favour of the wife.
469 in considering all of the matters referred to in section 75(2) that i find to be relevant and ground an adjustment between the parties in this matter, is 13.5 per cent in favour of the wife, and with the value of the net matrimonial asset pool inclusive of superannuation being $821,934, such an adjustment from the husband to the wife of 13.5 per cent equates to $110,961.09, being a differential between the parties on the basis of the husband receiving 41.5 per cent and the wife receiving 58.5 per cent of $139,728.78.
what order is appropriate in altering the interests of the parties in the property i have found relevant under section 79 of the act?
470 as indicated earlier, i take a global approach to the net matrimonial asset pool on a one-pool approach (inclusive of superannuation) and i find that in circumstance where each party retains the assets currently in his or her possession, power or control, the wife retains her superannuation entitlements intact, and the net proceeds of sale from the f street, suburb g property are divided equally between the parties, the appropriate division is achieved, the husband then having $340,539 worth (just under 41.5 per cent) and the wife having $481,395 worth (just above 58.5 per cent) and the wife retains sole liability as between them for the vv finance debt in her name.
471 i will make orders accordingly.
472 the parenting issues and property settlement proceedings between the parties are at an end at first instance. it is now up to the parties to do their very best to shield x from their dislike and distrust of each other so as to relieve her from the unfair burden referred to in the family report, reading about which must have caused each of these loving parents pain.
associate: dated: 17 december 2021
[1] joint practice direction no. 2 of 2020 ‘special measures in response to covid-19’.[2] see especially family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab.[3] transcript 5 may 2020, page 15, lines 30 to 41.[4] from the cops entry of 4 september 2015 in exhibit r19.[5] emphasis added.[6] transcript, 5 may 2020, page 69, line 34 to page 71, line 23.[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60b.[8] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(1). [9] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[10] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cc.[11] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.[12] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60b.[13] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[14] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[15] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[16] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21. [17] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[18] m & m [1988] famca 11; (1988) flc 91-973.[19] a & a & the child representative [1998] famca 25; (1998) 22 famlr 756, [3.23] to [3.25].[20] napier & hepburn [2006] famca 1316; (2006) flc 93-303.[21] johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344.[22] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82, [61].[23] eaby & speelman [2015] famcafc 104 (thackray, ryan, and forrest jj).[24] mazorski & albright [2008] 37 flr 518.[25] tait & densmore [2007] famca 1383.[26] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102.[27] tait & densmore [2007] famca 1383, [170].[28] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92.[29] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [122].[30] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [118].[31] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [118].[32] expert’s report [79].[33] expert’s report [83].[34] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 144.[35] a not unnatural circumstance and certainly no reflection whatsoever on learned counsel, learned senior counsel, and the solicitor-advocate for the icl.[36] amador & amador [2009] famcafc 196.[37] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[38] pavli & beffa [2013] famca 144 (watts j).[39] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79.[40] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(a).[41] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(d).[42] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(2).[43] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[44] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108; see, especially, [37].[45] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, [37].[46] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, [42].[47] hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (‘hickey’) [2003] famca 395, [39].[48] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[49] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39]. see also family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(4)(a)-(c):(4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ... the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ...; the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ... including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent; ...[50] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[51] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[52] hickey [2003] famca 395, [47].[53] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63.[54] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63, [27].[55] see, eg, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78.[56] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154.[57] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, [14]-[16].[58] in the marriage of harris [1991] famca 124; (1991) 104 flr 458, 464.[59] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57.[60] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, [168].[61] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107.[62] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107, [129].[63] family law act 1975 (cth) s 75(2)(o).[64] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317.[65] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30]-[31].[66] see especially, ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30](b).[67] talbot & talbot [2015] famcafc 132, [31].[68] vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51, [137]-[139] (emphasis in original). [69] bevan v bevan, [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) 279 flr 1, [79].[70] masoud & masoud [2016] famcafc 24, [97].[71] shan & prasad [2018] famcafc 12, [130]-[131].[72] trevi & trevi [2018] famcafc 173.[73] [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) flc 93-218 (“omacini”).[74] omacini at 79,617 [30], referencing in particular kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70; (1981) flc 91-092 (“kowaliw”); townsend and townsend [1994] famca 144; (1995) flc 92-569 (“townsend”). [75] omacini at 79,619 [39]. [76] cerini & cerini sub nom c & c [1998] famca 143 (“cerini”) at [46].[77] ascot investments pty ltd v harper (1981) 148 clr 337 at 355. see also, stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[78] marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42 at [2.11].[79] line and line [1996] famca 145; (1997) flc 92-729 at [4.72] as quoted in chorn at 79,317 [38] (noting that, at [4.71], legal fees were said, in obiter, to be different and there is reference to the “notional property” approach). it has also been said that premature expenditure might be taken up in the assessment of contributions, for example by a party making a disproportionately greater indirect contributions to the existing property by reason of other property having been dissipated (see, watson & ling [2013] famca 57; (2013) flc 93-527 at 86,924 [33]).[80] see, the comment to that effect in the earlier decision of browne v green [1999] famca 1483; (1999) flc 92-873 at 86,360 [44].[81] chorn at [32] – [55] referencing: farnell and farnell [1995] famca 140; (1996) flc 92-681; line and line; a and a (unreported, 23 december 1997, lindenmayer, kay & dessau jj); marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42; djm v jlm [1998] famca 97; (1998) flc 92-816; c v c [1998] famca 114; (1998) flc 92-824; ibrahim and beavis [1999] famca 765; gartner & gartner [2000] famca 793; clifford and lodge [2000] famca 1666; finlayson v finlayson and gillam [2002] famca 898; (2002) flc 93-121. [82] see, norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17; (1986) 161 clr 513 (“norbis”) at 520 (mason & deane jj); at 537-8 (brennan j); mallet v mallet (1984) 156 clr 605 at 608-9 (gibbs cj). see also, the discussion in hoffman & hoffman [2014] famcafc 92; (2014) flc 93-591 at [21]–[44].[83] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[84] house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 at 505 (dixon, evatt and mctiernan jj).[85] gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63; (1979) 144 clr 513 at 519 (stephen j).[86] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(1).[87] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(2a), specifically sub-paragraphs (e) and (c), respectively.[88] norbis at 537 (brennan j); 519-520 (mason & deane jj).[89] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[90] see, doolan, p., “now you see it, now you don’t: notional property and add-backs in family law”, families, broken, blended, mended: conference handbook: 13th national family law conference, p 255 at [2.3]ff. the paper itself provides examples of the potential injustice and inequity that can occur by a strict adherence to the “source of funds” distinction referred to in chorn.[91] [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”). [92] stanford at 120 [37] (emphasis in original) (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[93] see, eg, bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) flc 93-545 at [79]; vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51; (2015) 53 fam lr 373 and pre‑stanford statements to similar effect in milankov & milankov [2002] famca 195; (2002) flc 93-095.[94] stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.