last updated: 24 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ewing & ewing [2022] fedcfamc2f 160
orders
the court orders that:
spend time with arrangements
provision of information
restraints
the court notes:
reasons for judgment
judge boyle:
applications
documents relied on  affidavit of maternal grandmother filed 2 june 2021. (b) affidavit of mr m filed 17 june 2021. (c) initiating application filed 18 april 2018. (d) maternal grandmother’s proposed minute of orders.   affidavit of mr m filed 17 june 2021. (c) initiating application filed 18 april 2018. (d) maternal grandmother’s proposed minute of orders.   initiating application filed 18 april 2018. (d) maternal grandmother’s proposed minute of orders.   maternal grandmother’s proposed minute of orders.   response of maternal great aunt filed 27 june 2018. (b) affidavit of maternal great aunt filed 20 may 2021. (c) affidavit of mr f filed 20 may 2021.   affidavit of maternal great aunt filed 20 may 2021. (c) affidavit of mr f filed 20 may 2021.   affidavit of mr f filed 20 may 2021.
the law
issues  the risks for x in being separated from his maternal great aunt and uncle, other than during holidays and a few weekends in school terms. (f) the risks for x in growing up separated from his siblings y and g other than during holidays and a few weekends in school terms. (g) the risks for x from potential exposure to conflict, violence and drug use within his extended family, and the community in town c.   the risks for x in growing up separated from his siblings y and g other than during holidays and a few weekends in school terms. (g) the risks for x from potential exposure to conflict, violence and drug use within his extended family, and the community in town c.   the risks for x from potential exposure to conflict, violence and drug use within his extended family, and the community in town c.
primary considerations
section 60cc(2) the primary considerations are:(a) benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parentsand(b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
additional considerations
section 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views.
section 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child's parents, and(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),and section 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents
section 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:(i) to participate in making decisions about long-term issues in relation to the child, (ii) to spend time with the child, and(iii) to communicate with the child.
section 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligation to maintain the child
section 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:(i) either of his parents, or(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he has been living,
section 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
section 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
section 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
section 60cc(3)(h) if the child is an aboriginal or torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
section 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the children or a member of the child’s family.section 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:(i) the nature of the order,(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made,(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order,(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,(v) any other relevant matter,
section 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
parental responsibility
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 february 2022
dated: 21 february 2022
[1] exhibit r2, letter from family & community services dated 3 october 2017.[2] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346.[3] report of mr q p26