last updated: 28 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cassidy & pallante [2022] fedcfamc2f 678
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
procedural history
these proceedings
the court orders that: by consent: the matter be adjourned for interim defended hearing on 22 march 2022 at 9.30am. paragraph 3 of the orders made on 7 july 2021 be amended in so far as that the father will attend upon [dr k] on 16 november 2021. 3. the orders made on 7 july 2021 otherwise remain in full force and effect. that the mother within 30 days of this order, and the father between 14 january 2022 and 28 january 2022, make an appointment and attend for hair collection at an australian workplace drug testing services (awdts) clinic or nominee for hair drug testing purposes (‘the testing facility’). collection is to be conducted by a qualified and certified collector. chain of-custody procedure is to be applied to the sample. testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory. either head or body hair may be collected for testing. to give effect to this order:   the father and the mother are required to maintain his/her head hair at a length of not less than four (4) centimetres, neither head hair nor body hair is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of these orders, the father and the mother are required to make an appointment with the testing facility by telephoning 1300 37 84 83 for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug testing purposes, (c) each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the testing facility with a copy of these orders, (d) the father and the mother are to attend at a testing facility and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the father and the mother at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father and the mother or his/her legal representatives, (e) the father and the mother are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to both parties, their legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer (if applicable) upon receipt of such test results, (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of these orders, the father and the mother are required to make an appointment with the testing facility by telephoning 1300 37 84 83 for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug testing purposes, (c) each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the testing facility with a copy of these orders, (d) the father and the mother are to attend at a testing facility and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the father and the mother at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father and the mother or his/her legal representatives, (e) the father and the mother are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to both parties, their legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer (if applicable) upon receipt of such test results, (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the testing facility with a copy of these orders, (d) the father and the mother are to attend at a testing facility and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the father and the mother at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father and the mother or his/her legal representatives, (e) the father and the mother are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to both parties, their legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer (if applicable) upon receipt of such test results, (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the father and the mother are to attend at a testing facility and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the father and the mother at the earliest available appointment time within seven (7) days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father and the mother or his/her legal representatives, (e) the father and the mother are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to both parties, their legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer (if applicable) upon receipt of such test results, (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the father and the mother are to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to both parties, their legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer (if applicable) upon receipt of such test results, (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (g) the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the testing facility is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard 6 iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (h) the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the mother and father each will bear the cost of their own test. (i) the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   the testing facility be requested to provide a test as to the previous 3 months or such shorter period as is possible. (j) each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.   each party provide the testing facility with a copy of the order.
by the court: the costs of the mother of this day be fixed in the sum of $3,300 for counsel and $825 for solicitor (both inc. gst) and those costs be reserved.
this is a final order made on 05/11/2021 this order extends the order made by the [place 1] magistrates’ court ... on 23/8/2021 the court made the following order against you [the father] if you do not obey all these conditions below it is a crime and you may be arrested and charged. the court orders that the [ father] must not: 1. commit family violence against the protected person(s). note: the family violence protection act 2008 defines family violence as behaviour by a person towards a family member of that person that is physically or sexually abusive, emotionally or psychologically abusive, economically abusive, threatening, coercive, or in any other way controls or dominates a family member and causes that family member to feel fear for the safety or wellbeing of that family member or another person. family violence includes behaviour that causes a child to hear or witness or otherwise be exposed to the effects of these behaviours. 2. intentionally damage any property of the protected person(s) or threaten to do so. 3. attempt to locate, follow the protected person(s) or keep him/her/them under surveillance 4. publish on the internet, by email or other electronic communication any material about the protected person(s). 5. contact or communicate with a protected person by any means. 6. approach or remain within 5 metres of a protected person. 7. go to or remain within 200 metres of any other place where a protected person lives, works or attends school/childcare. 8. get another person to do anything the respondent must not do under this order. 9. the respondent may: (a) do anything that is permitted by a family law act order, a child protection order or a written agreement about child arrangements, or (c) communicate with a protected person through a lawyer or mediator. but only if the respondent does not commit family violence while doing so. by the court
we wish to put the court on notice that it is our client's intention, as per notation (d) of the orders dated 13 october 2021 to seek leave on an undefended basis at the hearing tomorrow. the icl and [the father] have been advised of our client's intentions in this regard.
the respondent has a serious drug addiction and becomes extremely violent, aggressive and abuse when he is under the influence of drugs. his behaviour is irrational and frightening and he is liable to act out against the child as a form of punishment to the applicant.
we refer to [the father’s] appointment with [dr k] on 16 november 2021. as [the father] is self-represented, he may be unfamiliar with the obligation to provide [dr k] with all relevant material to assist him with the interview. could you please advise if the icl will provide [dr k] with the relevant material to assist [the father].
i confirm that our office will provide [dr k] with the relevant materials to assist [the father].
hi. after much thought and money, i have decided it will be best for [the child] not to have time with me. i'm willing to allow [the mother] full custody, but only if she does not change his last name. please call me to discuss further.
good evening, [father], thank you for your email. i will give you a call tomorrow afternoon to discuss further. we will prepare a minute of consent to finalise the matter and this can then be forwarded to the icl for signing and filing with the court.
i'm going to continue to fight for [the child]. sorry for the inconvenience.  ther], it is disappointing that you have changed your mind. we confirm that our client will continue to vigorously prosecute the matter and take any and all steps necessary to ensure [the child’s] best interests are served into the future.
well, i'm disappointed and concerned that anybody would even think that taking a child away from his father is even acceptable. no matter the outcome, i will not stop until i get access to my son. i also would like to organise a meeting with you to discuss some evidence i have associated with your client. i hope to hear from you soon.
undefended final orders when listed as an interim hearing? ] an undefended hearing is a difficult matter. it means that there is no assistance obtained from the other side. all important aspects of the matter must be proved on admissible evidence. ordinarily in an undefended hearing it is expected and assumed that the other side that is not participating in the hearing will have had the opportunity to look at such evidence as has been provided to them. then the court can more readily proceed on the basis of the non appearing party has been provided with all of the evidence and draw the inference that (the absent) party has chosen not to participate in the proceedings or to make any application.  ] the term undefended proceedings was also referred to in lanceley and lanceley [1994] famca 94, (1994) flc 92-491. the full court considered the position of a respondent who took no active part in proceedings. barblett dcj, frederico and lindenmayer jj said at 81,104:
...unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a ‘judgment by default’ in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief...
conclusion as to final or interim basis
the mother’s case
... the verbal abuse i endured escalated within one month of co-habitation with this developing into physical abuse. he would start arguments and keep on with common themes which would usually be about cheating, my whereabouts or money. this verbal abusive tirade would often go on for 24 hours or more and end up with him forcing me up against a wall and him punching me in my legs or arms. he knew these were places where the bruises would not be noticed. this scenario was repeated numerous times over the course of the relationship, perhaps as many as 12 or more times. i cannot recall the exact number of times as i have blocked it out of my mind as best i can. ... his anger was so great towards me that during one argument he shoved me so hard fell and i hit the back of my head on the toilet pan. even after hitting my head he continued to scream verbal abuse at me insisting i was sleeping around. his reasoning for his behaviour towards me was, "who else am i going to take my anger out on?". ... in or about 2017 i found out i was pregnant which was unplanned and i was immediately accused of it not being his and he demanded a dna test for paternity. i was devastated and emotionally torn at his reaction and was extremely concerned for the baby due to the environment it would be born into. during my pregnancy the physical abuse i had previously encountered ceased but the psychological and verbal abuse did not. ... in 2017, my son ... was born 6 weeks prematurely as i had developed help syndrome due to excessive stress associated with my relationship with [the father] and the lack of rest and good nutrition. the abusive and toxic relationship had taken its toll on my body and my unborn baby and he had stopped growing at 31 weeks' gestation. ... despite having just had a caesarean, i was forced to arrange the move and physically pack up the rental property the day after my release from hospital. most of it was left for me to do by myself, [the father] just simply expected me to do it. my stitches broke and i needed to attend emergency to have this repaired. as a result i had further complications of infection of the wound and ongoing pain and discomfort. i was not supposed to do any physical lifting for the first 6-8 weeks after leaving hospital but [the father] showed no emotion towards my injuries, acting like it was an inconvenience to him and his plans, with complete disdain of the pain i was in. he was now in control and felt he could manipulate me in his home environment. ... due to the volatile and repetitive nature of the abuse i was armed with the knowledge that things would escalate to the point he would hit me when we argued so it got to a point i ran away and tried to lock myself in the bathroom, crouching down in one corner to avoid the punching. unfortunately, this did not work as he would burst the door open and continue to rain punches down on my arms. ... [the father] was still in and out of work at that stage and he was angry, frustrated and very emotionally, verbally and physically abusive towards me which was fuelled by his excessive drug use at this time. he used drugs in our home and while around [the child]. the constant checking of my phone records, would occur nightly whilst i was asleep. he would drag me out of bed and abuse me and go through phone numbers and look through facebook to see whom i spoken with and demand answers if there was anything he did not like. on one occasion, [the father] became so annoyed that he couldn’t find any new numbers on my phone he then accused me of covering my tracks. he then threw the phone in an absolute rage at my face which resulted in a severe black eye which was painful, swollen and dis-coloured for 10 days. exhibited hereto and marked "...1" are true copies of photos of my black eye. i did not report this or any incident to police as i truly believed that the outcome for me would be far worse than it was to put up with the abuse. ... i was at breaking point and terrified of being in the house (it was not a home to me) and so i planned to leave him taking [the child] with me. i packed my documents and dropped them off to friends on saturday 7th january 2019 and then went and stayed with a friend. [the father] kept calling and texting and on facebook, verbally abusing me via messages. i turned off the phone. i was absolutely petrified of him finding me and what he might do it he did. [the father] sent me a video of him threatening to burn down the house if i did not return to him. this was extremely concerning and so i returned to the house two days later on the monday and was immediately physically abused. i was dragged by my hair, punched and kicked in the back. my head was slammed into the floor and was held captive as he removed the keys from the front door. he proceeded to systematically go through all my personal possessions, smashing and destroying anything of value. throwing all my clothing onto the floor. he smashed holes in walls of the bedroom in his rage and continuously threatened to kill me. i had attempted to escape to get help and failed as he trapped me in the garage, as he pulled the garage door cord which i couldn't reach. the physical altercation continued in the garage and i was pushed to the floor, [the father] threatened to duct tape my mouth and cable tie my hands to keep me from leaving and to quiet down my screams and crying as he was afraid the neighbour's might hear me. he let me back in the house after some time even though the abuse continued i resorted to wrapping a doona around my son and myself and hid on the floor of my son's bedroom to try and keep him safe and so [the father] would not carry out his threat to take him away from me. eventually when i heard [the father] had fallen asleep i crept out and i fled in my car with [the child] and went straight to the police station as i was terrified for my son and my life. ...
... between 19 january 2019 and 9 february 2019, you made contact from prison with friends and family, requesting that they contact [ms b] and prevent her from attending court in relation to the intervention order hearing. by way of example, on 19 january 2019, you telephoned your sister... urging her to contact [ms b] and convince her to revoke the interim intervention order. you told you sister where [ms b]’s mother lived and worked, and suggested that someone go and find out how your family is going, and requested that a message be passed on to [ms b] that she “shouldn’t do it on 21 february”, referring to the intervention order hearing, as you would not be able to see your child for two years. later that day, you contacted a friend, [mr c], also asking him to contact [ms b] to revoke the order and to make sure she did not go to the magistrates’ court on 21 february 2019. in the days following 20 january 2019, you made similar requests of both friends and your family. your conduct in this regard forms the basis of charge 9 on the indictment, attempting to pervert the course of justice. between 17 january 2019 and 6 february 2019, on more than three occasions you contravened the family violence intervention order which had been issued by the [suburb 2] magistrates’ court on 10 january 2019, by requesting family and friends to attend at the property where you had resided with [ms b], notwithstanding the prohibition in the intervention order from doing so. on 17 january 2019, you telephoned your mother and asked her to get a friend to break into the property. on 4 february 2019, you again telephoned your mother and told her that you needed your friend, [mr c], to go to the property. on 6 february 2019, you again telephoned your mother and told her to go to the property to get your stuff. your conduct in this regard forms the basis of charge 10 on the indictment, persistent contravention of a family violence intervention order. [ms b] obtained a variation of the family violence intervention order at [suburb 2] magistrates’ court on 8 february 2019. the conditions of the varied order included additional conditions that you not intentionally damage any property of hers or threaten to do so, that you not attempt to locate, follow or keep under surveillance [ms b], that you not publish on the internet, by email, or other electronic communication any material about [ms b], and that you not contact or communicate with [ms b] by any means. this varied intervention order was served on you on 12 february 2019. between 12 february 2019 and 25 february 2019, you again repeatedly breached this varied intervention order, by requesting family members to attend at the property where you had resided together, and to attempt to keep [ms b] and [child 2] under surveillance. by way of example, on 19 february 2019, you telephoned your aunt and discussed that your uncle had located [ms b]’s vehicle in [suburb 1]. you gave directions to your aunt to locate the vehicle and drive past it that night. in that conversation, you referred to making your son, [child 2], hate [ms b], and you encouraged your aunt to go to [suburb 1] and speak to [ms b]. on that same day, you telephoned your mother and requested that your uncle and a friend confirm that they had observed [ms b]’s vehicle at the address in [suburb 1]. a short time later, you again telephoned your mother, although the call was answered by a friend. you discussed whether your uncle had located [ms b] in [suburb 1]. you then called your uncle and said that they should organise to go and collect your belongings from the [town 1] address. you also later encouraged others to go and approach [ms b] on your behalf. similar conversations took place over the following days. your conduct in this regard forms the basis of charge 11 on the indictment, persistent contravention of a family violence intervention order.
father’s drug use
i have complied with all directions from my corrections officer and have done all of my drug screens.
on 22 may 2021 the father's supervised urine drug screens pathology result detected some substantial amounts of amphetamine. ... the community corrections officer explained that pathology results prior to this have detected methylamphetamines. ... the father's explanation to the positive result due to sitting with someone smoking amphetamines.
conclusion as to father’s continuing drug use
psychological assessments of the parties
... in terms of [the mother’s] current functioning, it would appear that she is functioning significantly better. she has not used drugs since ceasing them during the relationship with the father. additionally, she drinks rarely. there is no evidence of historical emotional, physical or sexual abuse. she has not had criminal offending or other charges. her son ... is going well. in terms of psychological evaluation, [the mother] presented with significant leftover traumatic symptoms. it is unlikely that she presents with a formal post-traumatic stress disorder, however, there are clear dimensions of ptsd in her presentation. there is no evidence of pre-existing personality issues. [the mother] presents as functioning appropriately and at least in the high average cognitive range, based on estimates. [the mother’s] symptoms present as genuine. she does not present with a picture of amplifying or exaggerating her issues. ... on the pds, this a valid profile. there is no particular elevation on self-deceptive enhancement or impression management, considering family law responses. ... there is no evidence of difficulties in negative or positive impression management or any other aspect of validity. this presents as a valid profile. ... [the mother’s] history would suggest that there were no significant psychological difficulties in her early life or in her later life, nevertheless, there is evidence of a lack of direction in her life and a tendency for her to be in relationships where the others set the agenda. as indicated, there is no evidence of pre-existing psychological difficulties. there is no evidence from collateral, clinical or psychometric material of the amplifying or exaggerating of the issues contained. in this respect, there appears to be some personality vulnerabilities associated with lack of assertion, and possibly low self-esteem. nevertheless, the relationship over several years presents as problematic and traumatic, if it can be identified that [the mother’s] presentation of the history fits with the basic facts of the matter. ... these symptoms appear to have recovered to the extent that [the mother] is functioning relatively well through not having contact with her ex-partner, based on the fact that he was incarcerated for more than two years due to the charges against the mother. in this case, there are serious concerns about any further contact with her or with the child. it is highly likely that any contact with the mother would lead to significant deterioration in her mental health functioning and therefore her parenting. i would consider that any contact with her ex-partner and father of the child is inappropriate. in this case, additionally, for the father to have contact with [the child] presents as questionable, considering the fact that there has been what appears to be significant family violence including threats to kill. this history raises serious questions about the viability of time between the father and the child, primarily based on the fact that deterioration of the mother’s mental health will lead to significant negative effects on the child ..., and the re-traumatisation of the child. ... the evaluation revealed the mother [is] traumatised and fearful of the father, considering the previously family violence events. ... if it can be determined that time between the father and [the child] can occur with these negative effects and be supervised, as such, time in the future may be possible. there are concerns based on the father’s history regarding his ability to adhere to court orders. as such, in this matter there are significant concerns associated with future time arrangements for [the child] with the father.
... [the father] presented as unshaven, his eyes appeared dark and his language and his pronunciation was slightly slurred, raising questions about substance use and/or withdrawal. ... [the father] has been in jail and upon coming out of jail, moved in with parents. he grew up suburb d and left home at age 23 but has been in and out of home four times, suggesting a lack of establishing himself independently. ... [the father] has a brother aged 26 years and a sister aged 30 years, both of whom live relatively close to the family. his mother was born in country e and his father was born in australia. [the father] described a large family who were close to each other. his description would suggest he was active as a younger man and continued to play competitive sport until recently. additionally, he worked from a young age doing deliveries from age 12 onwards. ... despite statements that life was positive as a child, it would appear there was significant physical punishment at home and possibly therefore, physical abuse in childhood. being the oldest in the family he would seek attention and was physically “belted” if he played up, about once per week. [the father] denied any other significant issues. ... [the father] was incarcerated in 2019 because of threats to kill. he had previously been incarcerated in 2014 due to breaches of intervention orders for family violence related to an ex-partner, whom he had a relatively short relationship with (approximately six months). [the father]’s account is that he was charged with threats to kill of the mother, the mother was away for three days, he was very angry and smashed up the house and threatened to burn the house down and he was subsequently charged with threat to kill. [the father] indicated that he grabbed the mother by the throat and threatened to kill her. there was minimisation and shifting of responsibility in [the father]’s explanation. he was then subsequently arrested and charged with a series of matters, incarcerated between 2019 and 2021. he pled guilty ultimately to two assaults with damage of property, persistent breaches of intervention orders, extortion and other charges such as perverting the course of justice, associated with trying to get people to find her, indicating that he did not trust her. ... there was marked minimisation of family violence / offences throughout this discussion. [the father]’s account is that he was wrongly done by, that somethings happened but there were other issues where there was exaggeration. [the father] spoke of unfairness of what occurred. reportedly he had three criminal assessments in 2019 and 2020 as part of his legal matters. ... [the father] first used drugs at age 19, using amphetamines and then began using methamphetamines at age 23 years. he used cannabis from age 16-25 irregularly and then used methamphetamines consistently from age 23-31 up until 2019 and he used daily for a period of a year. additionally, at age 19 or 20 he used pills such as ecstasy on limited occasions. ... subsequently in 2017-2019, [the father]’s account is he used methamphetamines monthly and the mother about the same. in the last three months before he went to jail he was using methamphetamines five times per week. the mother’s allegation is that he was trafficking methamphetamines. his account is that [the mother] would buy the drugs off [the father’s] cousin and they would buy in a group and then share and does not see it as trafficking. ... in 2013-2014, [the father] was charged with family violence incidents. he described being very angry at the time, connected to his father being away. his account is that when he knows that he is right and no-one is listening to him, he gets very angry. his family took out an intervention order against him for a period of year and he breached this and was given two community corrections orders. in 2014 [the father] spent a year in jail because of breaches and then had an eighteen month community corrections order. in 2019 he was given two years in prison for family violence matters and came out in 2021 and began working soon after. ... additionally, [the father] has had a drug use disorder related to methamphetamines over a substantial period of time. his account is that this is in partial remission. there is no external validation. ... on the pds, self-deceptive enhancement is suppressed and impression management is in the average range. neither present the individual as showing themselves in naïvely positive light. there is no positive self-presentation in this aspect of the testing. ... the pai is a gold standard self-administered psychological instrument that assesses personality functioning and psychopathology in clinical contexts and psycho-legal contexts, assesses psychological syndromes and provides information relevant for clinical diagnosis, treatment planning, and screening for psychological disorders....... ... the profile shows elevation in positive impression management, configural distortion shows that that positive distortion was effortful and as such the individual is intentionally attempting to present themselves in an unrealistically positive light. normally in such matters the profile clinical scales are suppressed. in this matter this is less obvious. nevertheless, the profile suggests that the individual did not answer in a forthright fashion but nevertheless, there are elevations in a series of areas. these difficulties include a tendency towards grandiosity, a sense of persecution, odd mental experiences, psychological symptoms of depression, anti-social behaviour, physical aggression and elevation in drug related issues. the individual’s tendency at an interpersonal level is to be comfortable in the domain where he feels in charge. he is also externally orientated and very focused on approval from the outside world. the profile raises concerns about the individual’s level of suspiciousness and a tendency towards grandiosity and risk taking. additionally, there is a negative affectivity tendency towards disinhibition and antagonism. drug related and unusual mental activities are likely to be related. ... overall, this suggests that the individual will require support and intervention around parenting. ... psychological evaluation assessed [the father’s] general parental risk at high, largely due to a combination of a personality disorder with borderline and anti-social features, exposure of the child to family violence, use of methamphetamines over time and the historical issues to do with the family violence in his previous relationships. ... despite the significant period of incarceration until recently, [the father] has returned to using methamphetamines to some degree in 2021, despite the obvious implications of returning to the drug. similarly, [the father] presents with little insight or a set of strategies to address what appears to be problems with impulsivity when he becomes emotionally heightened in relationships. [the father] requires ongoing assistance around anger management, both at a group and an individual level over the next 2-3 years. additionally, he needs to be more fully involved around substance abuse rehabilitation, possibly at an in-patient level. [the father] requires substantial psychological assistance, addressing personality difficulties with schema or dialectical behaviour therapy treatment approaches over at least two years. [the father’s] prognosis is uncertain. the evaluation raises concerns about [the father’s] ability to engage with the mother of [the child] appropriately as he remains at risk for engaging in family violence, based on his history alone. ... the evaluation with the father shows him at ongoing risk for family violence with the presence of a personality disorder with borderline and anti-social features and long standing methamphetamine abuse and dependency problems. ... if it can be determined that time between the father and [the child] can occur with these negative effects and be supervised, as such, time in the future may be possible. there are concerns based on the father’s history regarding his ability to adhere to court orders. as such, in this matter there are significant concerns associated with future time arrangements for [the child] with the father. [emphasis added]
the law to be applied
section 60ca child’s best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... section 60cc how the court determines what is in the child’s best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
note: section 68p also limits the effect of this section on a court making decisions under that section about limiting, or not providing, an explanation to a child of an order or injunction that is inconsistent with a family violence order. primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are:   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b). (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are:   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child's parents, and  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child,  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   either of his or her parents, or  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs,   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  i) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant. ............ section 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa).   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
10.13 varying or setting aside orders (1) the court may at any time vary or set aside an order, if: (a) it was made in the absence of a party, or (b) it was obtained by fraud, or (c) it is interlocutory, or (d) it is an injunction or for the appointment of a receiver, or (e) it does not reflect the intention of the court, or (f) the party in whose favour it was made consents, or (g) there is a clerical mistake in the order, or   there is an error arising in the order from an accidental slip or omission. (2) subrule (1) does not affect the power of the court to vary or terminate the operation of an order by a further order.   subrule (1) does not affect the power of the court to vary or terminate the operation of an order by a further order.
associate: dated: 26 may 2022
dated: 26 may 2022