last updated: 4 november 2021
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
barret & barret [2021] fedcfamc2f 14
orders
upon noting that:
the court orders that:
1. the mother, ms barret (hereinafter referred to as ‘the mother’) have sole parental responsibility for the children x born in 2008, y born in 2009 and z born in 2012 (collectively referred to as ‘the children’).
2. the mother advise the father, mr barret (hereinafter referred to as ‘the father’ and collectively referred to as ‘the parties’) in writing of any significant issues relating to the children’s welfare, health and education as soon as she is reasonably able to do so, including in the event that one of the children suffers a serious injury or illness or is admitted to hospital.
3. the children live with the mother.
4. the appointment of the independent children’s lawyer be extended for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of these orders.
5. the children, x, y and z engage in a therapeutic intervention with the father, with a suitably qualified therapist, other than dr c, with the therapist to be as agreed between the parties, in writing, within twenty-eight (28) days of the date of these orders, and failing agreement to be as nominated by the independent children’s lawyer, with the mother to take part in such therapy as the therapist concerned deems appropriate and subject to the mother’s agreement to take part in the therapy.
6. the father and x engage in therapeutic intervention with the therapist nominated pursuant to order (5) hereof at such times and such intervals considered necessary by the therapist, and subject to x’s willingness to attend.
7. within seven (7) days of the date of a therapist being appointed, the independent children’s lawyer is to provide the therapist with copies of the following documents for consideration in conducting the therapeutic intervention with the parties and the children: these reasons for judgment dated 24 september 2021, (b) the family report prepared by ms d dated 12 september 2019, and (c) the family report prepared by ms d dated 29 april 2021.
8. z and y spend time with the father as follows: each alternate saturday commencing 9 october 2021 from 8:30 am to 4:00 pm. (b) following the completion of three (3) therapy sessions between y and the father and z and the father, the therapist, as referred to in order (5) hereof, provide a report to the independent children’s lawyer (who is directed to convey the therapist’s report to the parties) in respect of whether the time that y and z spend with the father be varied to each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 3:00 pm if a non-school day until saturday at 4:00 pm, or if such an extension of time is deemed inappropriate, how y and z’s time with the father should progress. (c) if either y and/or z notify the father that they wish to contact or be returned to the mother during the time they spend with the father, the father is to facilitate any communication and/or return the children to the mother as soon as reasonably practicable.
9. x do spend time with the father subject to his own wishes.
10. all handovers of the children are to occur inside the e shop located at f street, suburb g.
11. the father be at liberty to send cards and gifts to the children on their birthdays and at christmas and in order to facilitate the delivery of such items, the mother, through her solicitor, provide to the father’s solicitor within fourteen (14) days a postal address to where such cards and gifts may be sent by the father.
12. within seven (7) days of the date of these orders, the father, through his solicitor, provide to the mother’s solicitor the account details (including but not limited to any username and passwords) for any gaming accounts (including but not limited to any playstation and xbox accounts) that the children access noting that the father is not permitted to change the passwords without notifying and gaining the permission of the children, and in the event that the passwords to the gaming accounts are changed, or the children request or are required to change their passwords to these gaming accounts, the parties exchange details of these changes to the other by text message to the other’s mobile telephone within twenty-four (24) hours.
13. the parties be restrained and injunctions be granted restraining each of them and their respective partners and agents from:  abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or denigrating the other in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing any other person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings, or any other proceedings that involve either party, including but not limited to any criminal proceedings and allegations thereof, in the presence of the children, or allowing any other person to do so.
14. the father be restrained and injunctions be granted restraining him, and/or any agent acting on his behalf, from:  attempting to have contact with or communicate with the children (save and except for the occasions listed in order (11) hereof) including but not limited to, letters, emails, telephone, text message, xbox, playstation, or by any social media application or other means, (b) contacting or communicating with the mother, save and except in relation to the children’s welfare and/or development, (c) attending within five hundred (500) metres of the children’s school, (d) attending within five hundred (500) metres of the children’s extracurricular activities, including but not limited to, c sports, b sports, b sports trainings and games, (e) attending within one hundred (100) metres of any place where the children and/or the mother may be residing or working, (f) following, observing or approaching within one hundred (100) metres of the children and/or the mother, (g) keeping the mother under surveillance, (h) physically disciplining the children, verbally abusing or swearing at the children, or allowing any other person to do so, (i) publishing on the internet, by email, sms, or any other electronic means any material about the mother.
15. the independent children’s lawyer is granted liberty to relist the matter on an urgent basis upon fourteen (14) days written notice to address any issues that arise in respect of the therapeutic intervention undertaken by the children and the parties, as well as any further applications relevant to these proceedings.
16. all outstanding applications are dismissed and the proceedings are finalised.
reasons for judgment
judge brown:
introduction
1 the current case centres on issues to do with family violence and the implications for the children concerned if it is found they have been exposed to such conduct. these are the specific terms utilised by the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’).
2 however, as will become apparent, the issues arising in this case are complex and multi-faceted and essentially deal with issues of control, both before and after the parties ended their relationship and the implications, of this control, for the children involved.
3 the parties to the proceedings are ms barret (“the mother”) and mr barret (“the father”). they are the parents of x, born in 2008, y, born 8 in 2009, and z, born in 2012.
4 the parties met in late-2006 and married in 2008. they finally separated, in highly contentious and emotionally charged circumstances, on 29 september 2018, which necessitated the involvement of police.
5 the police were called to the parties’ former home, at suburb h on this occasion, by the mother. the father was subsequently charged with assaulting the mother and, as a consequence became the subject of a family violence order, which prevented him approaching the mother and, initially, the children of the relationship.
6 the incident occurred in 2018. x, y and z were each at home at the time and were present when police arrived and arrested their father. at the outset of proceedings, it was the father’s position that this was an isolated incident and he was subject to some level of provocation, in that the mother threw a ceramic candle holder at him.
7 it is the mother’s case that the father was consistently physically violent and controlling of her during their marriage and the level of his violence and control was escalating. as this violence and behaviour occurred within the home, it is her position that the children have each been exposed to it, and this has had significant implications for their psychological functioning, as well as for her own capacity to parent them to the full extent of her ability.
8 the mother further alleges that the father has continued to subject her and the children to a significant level of coercion and control, since the parties separated and notwithstanding the fact that she is a protected person, in a final intervention order granted on 23 april 2019, when the father pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated assault against her and one count of breaching bail.
9 it is a significant aspect of the mother’s case that, following separation, the father has followed her and the children, arrived at the extra-curricular activities, without invitation, has denigrated her to the children, and engaged other members of his family to act, as his proxies, in his surveillance of her and the children. in essence, it is the mother’s case that, notwithstanding the parties’ separation, the father continues to subject her to his coercion and control.
10 for his part, the father disputes the gravity of the allegations made against him. it is his case that he is a devoted and caring father, who only wants to pursue a meaningful level of relationship with his children. he acknowledges that he has attended the children’s sporting activities but asserts that he has located himself well away from the mother and has only done so because of his interest in the children.
11 in this context, the father disputes he has issues with controlling his anger in the most facets of his life, but concedes, in the past, that he has been subject to stress relating to marital conflict. the father has consulted a psychologist, dr j. dr j has deposed that the father does not suffer from any serious mental health disorder and is well motivated generally. in these circumstances, he has opined as follows:
i see the prognosis as very favourable if certain new arrangements and goals can be achieved. i believe that the conclusion of legal proceedings, and the minimising of further contact between ms barret and mr barret, should diffuse the hostility between them. if continuing hostility is well managed or contained, i believe the children’s relationship with their father can improve.[1]
12 it is the father’s position that each of the parties were responsible, to some degree, for the conflict in their relationship and with its cessation. as a result, the father outlines there should be no barrier to him and the children enjoying extended periods of time in each other’s company. underpinning his position is his assertion that the mother is disinclined to support such a level of relationship because of her antipathy for him.
13 on the other hand, it is the mother’s case that the father is essentially in denial about the nature of his behaviour and its emotional consequences for her and the children, or lacks sufficient insight about its implications, notwithstanding his consultation with dr j. she alleges that the children are frightened of their father’s volatile and reactive behaviour because they have each, particularly x, been subject to it in the past.
14 in these circumstances, she contends that mr barret is an inappropriate role model for the children, who have exhibited problems in emotional regulation, which she believes derive from their exposure to their father’s behaviour.
15 the mother commenced these proceedings in 2018, seeking final orders in respect of both property and parenting arrangements. for a variety of reasons, the case has taken some time to be finalised.
16 the property aspects were concluded in 2019. issues relating to children were fixed for final hearing in october 2020. the three days allocated for this hearing proved insufficient and a further five days, in may 2021, were required to complete the trial process.
17 over this lengthy period of time, the respective positions of the parties have become more, rather than less, polarised. this state of affairs had implications for the extent of time the children, particularly x, have spent with their father, since separation.
18 initially, in the immediate aftermath of the parties’ separation, all three children spent 5 hours, with their father, on alternate sundays, subject to the supervision of the mother’s father, mr k.[2] the requirement for supervision was dropped on 5 april 2019. at which stage, all three children spent alternate saturdays, from 8.30am to 4.00pm, with their father.[3]
19 in between these times, the father used the xbox to engage with the children electronically, while gaming with them. over time, this mode of communication has become more and more controversial. it is the mother’s case that, during this period, the father has consistently denigrated her to the children and utilised xbox inappropriately. it is also her case that the father’s behaviour continues to be reactive and unpredictable, which has caused the children to be more frightened of him.
20 in this context, the mother arranged, via a gp mental health care plan for initially x and then later for y and z to consult with dr c, a therapist, who certifies herself as having specialised qualifications in treating traumatised children.
21 dr c first saw x in february 2019 and, from june 2019, began to consult with y and z. in this context, it is important to note that both x and y have been diagnosed with dyslexia and learning needs. as such, their progress at school has not been without problems, from time to time.
22 more significantly, x and y have also been each diagnosed with behavioural issues, which have included episodes of significant emotional dysregulation. in 2020, y was sent home from school for bullying another student. in late-2017, y’s general medical practitioner referred him to a psychologist, ms l for assistance in behavioural management.
23 it is the mother’s position, supported by dr c that the children are influenced in their behaviour by exposure to their father’s coercive conduct and denigrating attitude, as demonstrated towards her. this causes them, from time to time, to be oppositional and defiant in their behaviour.
24 on the other hand, it is the father’s position that the mother and dr c have placed insufficient emphasis on the children’s behaviour and what he would he would characterise as the mother’s inadequate response to it. in their shared assumptions as to why x and y behave in the way that they do. he refutes any suggestion that they can be considered to be the survivors of trauma. to paraphrase his counsel, mr bowler, they are just “naughty children” who need to be disciplined.
25 an incident occurred on 14 december 2019, while the children and their father were on a bicycle excursion together, which ended in x running away. he has not spent any time with his father, in the period since. in this context, the father has provided text messages passing between him and x, from mid-may 2020, in which x has referred to his father as an arsehole and a fat loser.[4]
26 the father is highly critical that the mother has apparently acquiesced to the sending of these highly inappropriate text messages to him, which he asserts are emblematic of her inability to support x’s relationship with his father and, if appropriate, direct the child to desist with such behaviour and attend upon his father.
27 on the other hand, it is the mother’s position that x has justifiable reasons, independent of her feelings, for not wanting to spend time with his father. essentially, he has become fed up with his father’s conduct, as demonstrated to both him and his mother, over very many years. in these circumstances, it is her case that she has done nothing to influence x against his father.
28 it is also been the mother, disputed by the father, that he continues to subject her to his surveillance, either directly or through the agency of the paternal grandmother, ms o. what all concerned agree upon is that relations between the paternal and maternal aspects of the children’s family can only be described as poisonous and are demonstrably becoming more so. sadly, these vitriolic and highly adversarial proceedings have done nothing to reduce the tensions in the family.
29 it is the father’s case that the mother has consciously exaggerated and misreported the incidents of conflict that have occurred between them, and has made a concerted attempt to align the children with her position, in order to ensure that they have no proper level of relationship with him. he is unclear what the mother’s motivation is for this conduct other than it is explicable by the personal antipathy she currently feels for him. it is his case that the mother is either actively or tacitly supporting the children in their dysregulated behaviour because she is incapable of exercising a proper level of parental discipline over them.
30 essentially, at the outset of his case, it was the father’s position that the mother had concocted or exaggerated the various instances of coercion and control, which she has detailed in her affidavit material, and is therefore unable to discharge the obligations of a competent parent, which require them to facilitate a proper relationship between any relevant child and the other parent concerned.
31 the mother’s trial affidavit,[5] is one of some 62 pages in length, to which are attached some 30 exhibits. in addition, during the course of the 7 days of evidence, a further 21 exhibits were tendered, a large proportion of which consisted of contemporaneous text messages passing between the parties.
32 the father responded to the mother’s affidavit paragraph by paragraph,[6] as such, issue was joined between the parties in respect of the central issue in this case, namely whether the father subjected the mother to coercive and controlling family violence and whether the children have been exposed to this behaviour and what have been its psychological consequences for them.
33 in his affidavit, the father deposed as follows:
i deny being controlling, having angry outbursts and mood swings. i did not engage in coercive and controlling domestic violence. i admit the violence to the applicant mother of which i was convicted.[7]
in my view, this was a carefully considered and calibrated position on his part. he acknowledged the conduct, to which he had pleaded guilty in the magistrates’ court and which he was not in a position to disabuse in the current proceedings. otherwise, he formally denied the allegations made against him, knowing it was his word against that of ms barret.
34 counsel for the wife, ms lewis, when she began her cross-examination of the father, prefaced her examination of him on the basis that, as set out above, mr barret’s position was that he had not behaved in a consistently controlling manner towards ms barret and had not been violent towards her to the extent to which she had alleged. mr barret indicated that this assumption, on ms lewis’ part, was correct.
35 in particular, mr barret denied verbal abuse or being physically aggressive towards ms barret, denied calling her names, denied spitting on her, and alleged that the incident of 29 september 2019 had been exaggerated by the mother in order to get him evicted from his home. it was his position that the children had no rational reason to be fearful of him.
36 these denials were consistent with the opening written submissions of his counsel, mr bowler. in particular, it was submitted that the “father denies the assertions made by the mother in respect to such violence and asserts the mother also perpetrated acts of violence towards him during the parties’ relationship”.
37 in this context, it is asserted that the therapeutic intervention of dr c has been totally ineffective in supporting the children’s, particularly x’s, relationship with their father, as it has resulted in the complete alienation of x with the significant risk that the two other children will follow his lead. in this context, mr bowler submitted as follows:
the father further asserts that in circumstances where he has spent several hours a fortnight with the children for now 2 years, that his impact on the children’s current functioning has been minimal and that any such dysfunction is as a consequence of the mother’s parenting.
38 essentially, it is the father’s position that the only logical conclusion, which can be drawn from this state of affairs, is that it is the actions of the mother, in concert with dr c, which have resulted in the children’s extremely limited relationship with their father and, in the case of x, the extinction of that relationship.
39 given this background, the positions of the parties, in terms of the orders which each seeks from the court, can only be described as being polarised. the mother’s position is that x should only spend time, with his father, if he expresses a desire to do so. insofar as y and z are concerned, she proposes that they should spend a reduced amount of time, with their father from the current regime. she proposes that the children spend time, with their father, on one occasion per month, on saturday, from 8.30am until 4.00pm.
40 implicit in her position is the recognition that such a regime is extremely limited in nature, omitting as they do any arrangements for special occasions and school holidays. however, she does not wish the proceedings to be extended further.
41 rather it is her position that the father should be restrained from making any further application, for a period of at least a year, during which period he undergoes a course of psychiatric treatment directed towards changing what she asserts are the aggressive and controlling aspects of his personality. only when he has provided a report from the provider of this treatment, which is positive in its prognosis, should he be allowed to institute further proceedings. in these circumstances, it is contended that the children will be spared the deleterious effects of further litigation.
42 ms barret also seeks a comprehensive raft of injunctive orders, which would restrain the father from communicating with her and the children, including via xbox and playstation and other social media and come anywhere near her or the children, particularly at their school or sporting activities. she seeks to be conferred with sole parental responsibility for the children.[8]
43 on the other hand, the father seeks that the parties be conferred with equal shared parental responsibility for the children. in respect of y and z, he seeks to spend time with the children for half of each school holiday period and for the children to initially spend time with him on 6 nights per fortnight, to be extended to a week about basis, in due course. he conceded that x should spend time and communicate with him as he expressed the desire to do so.
44 due to the significant and controversial issues of family violence arising in the case, it was ordered on 7 april 2020 that x, y and z should be represented independently of their parents, in the proceedings. the children’s representative is robert seymour, an experienced family lawyer employed by the legal services commission of south australia. mr seymour is to be regarded as a party of equal importance, in the case, to each of the parties.
45 pursuant to section 68la of the act, mr seymour is under a statutory duty to gather and examine all relevant evidence and then advocate the outcome, which he believes will best serve the interests of the children, whom he represents.
46 in this context, initially the parties and then mr seymour, have engaged a psychologist and family consultant, ms d, to prepare two family assessment reports, dated 12 september 2019 and 29 april 2021 respectively.
47 at the conclusion of her first report, ms d recommended that mr barret spend alternate weekends, from the conclusion of school friday until 5.00pm saturday, with all three children. she also recommended that the children continue to engage in therapeutic intervention (potentially with dr c) to assist them to resolve their past experiences of conflict within their family.
48 at the date of the completion of the first tranche of evidence, in the case, ms d’s report was approximately 1 year old. at this stage, dr c had already provided some evidence to the court. as previously indicated, in contrast to ms d’s recommendations, the mother sought to reduce y and z’s time with their father. in this context, it was the father’s position that dr c’s involvement had been detrimental to the children. in these circumstances, the parties agreed that it would be beneficial for ms d to revisit the family and prepare a new report.
49 on the basis of evidence available to her, at the time of her second report, ms d concluded that the children’s development, particularly at school, had improved since the time of her first report. however, ms d remained concerned that the children’s relationship, with their father, had been impacted by their past experience of him. x, in particular, was reported to remain fearful of his father.
50 in this context, ms d described the father’s attempts to repair his relationship with the children as appearing minimal. at the same time, ms d was also concerned that the children had been exposed to their mother’s negative attitudes towards the father and his current partner, ms ff. z reported to ms d that his mother had referred to ms ff as ugly and called his father an arsehole. from ms d’s perspective, these comments were inappropriate and placed pressure on the children to align with their mother.
51 in these circumstances, ms d reported as follows:
at the completion of the updated family assessment, the writer remained concerned about x, y and z’s relationship with mr barret and their experiences within his care. it was the view of the writer that mr barret continued to minimise the impact of his behaviours on the children and he struggled to appreciate the children’s perspective. given this, the writer could not support mr barret’s request for a significant increase in his time with z and y. whilst the writer did not support a significant increase in time, it was considered that z and y may benefit from one overnight period with mr barret. however, for this to be successful z and y would need to feel safe in their father’s care and that their relationship needs were understood. as such, it was considered that once mr barret had started to address his relationship issues with z and y (through at least 3 joint therapy sessions with them), his time with the children could be increased to include an overnight period. given x’s perspectives of mr barret and ongoing fears towards his father, the writer considered that mr barret’s relationship with x would need to be appropriately repaired, prior to time between them resuming. as previously discussed, given the acrimonious nature of the parties’ relationship, their limited communication, the current intervention order and the concerns raised about the children’s experiences with mr barret, the writer questioned the appropriateness of shared parental responsibility between the parties. as such, the writer continued to recommend that ms barret should have sole parental responsibility.[9]
52 mr seymour has briefed a barrister, ms lee, to appear on his behalf during the trial. following the evidence, ms lee submits that the court should make orders in terms of ms d’s recommendations. she supports the children engaging in some form of reunification therapy, with their father, but submits that such therapy should not be provided by dr c, given mr barret’s mistrust of her.
53 these reasons for judgment are directed to resolving the entrenched and highly controversial factual issues arising between the parties but more importantly determining what parenting relationship will be in x, y and z’s best interests, both in the short and medium term, but also in the long run.
54 in resolving these factual issues, the court’s duty is to address the best interests of the children concerned.[10] the case does not turn on any perceptions, held by the parties, as to their respective rights as parents.
the issues in dispute
55 after this introduction, and before turning to the legal principals applicable, and the various aspects of the evidence, which must be traversed in more detail, it is useful to summarise the issues, which the case throws up. they can be encapsulated as follows: what, if any, is the nature of the coercive and controlling behaviour to which the mother and children have been subject by the father. this will entail an analysis of the provisions contained in section 4ab(1), have any of the children experienced the effects of family violence emanating from within their family. this will entail an analysis of the provisions contained in section 4ab(3) of the act, if so, has this caused any of the children to suffer some form of physical or psychological harm as a consequence of such exposure and what has been the extent of this harm, in particular, what are the consequences of this exposure in prospective terms. essentially, this entails the court making an assessment of risk arising for the children of having been exposed to family violence, both now and in future, what are the benefits likely to accrue to the children of having a meaningful level of relationship with their father in the future, as a corollary of this, what are the potential negative consequences, for the children, arising from not being able to interact extensively with their father and wider paternal family, what are the factors influencing x’s apparently strong negative views about his father, do those factors emanate from the mother and/or dr c and, if so, are they likely to impact upon y and z in the future, is the mother open to criticism in this regard and is there evidence to enable the court to conclude that she lacks parental capacity in some aspect(s) of her care of the children, if the father has behaved in a coercive and controlling way in the past, has he demonstrated that he has modified his behaviour or is capable of so doing in the future and is he, and those associated with him, sufficiently insightful about this issue, is it appropriate for the court to make the wide-ranging injunctive orders sought by the mother. this will require consideration of the provisions of section 68b of the act. should the court be involved in directing what therapy, if any, should be provided to the children, what is the best mechanism to ensure that the children are not the subject of unnecessary litigation, how should parental authority and responsibility for making major long term decisions concerning the children be allocated between the parties, fundamentally, what is the best outcome for the children given the issues raised in the case and the polarised nature of their family. this will entail a consideration of the various criteria delineated in section 60cc(2) and (3) of the act, viewed through the lens provided by section 60b which contains the objects and principles underlying the law relating to children.
standard of proof
56 in these reasons for judgment, findings of fact are made on the balance of probabilities, from my observation of the demeanour of each of the witnesses concerned.[11] i have tried to reach my conclusions on credibility and reliability ‘on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and importantly, on the apparent logic of events’.[12]
57 in addition, i bear in mind section 140(2) of the evidence act, which indicates that in applying this standard of proof, i am entitled to consider the nature of the subject-matter of the proceedings and the gravity of the matters alleged.
background
58 ms barret was born in adelaide in 1973. she left school in 1989. she does not have a strong academic background. she concedes that she struggles with comprehension and spelling. currently, she is employed as a finance officer, at an organisation, earning $45,000.00 per annum. she works 4 days per week.
59 ms barret describes herself as being temperamentally an anxious person. she was diagnosed with ptsd and depression in the late 1990’s. her evidence is that the factor precipitating this diagnosis was her being the victim of an armed robbery at a shop s, which involved guns. she was prescribed anti-depressant medication and received counselling through the victims of crime service.
60 she does not currently take any medication for depression and deposed that she deals with her mental health issues through exercise and diet. however, more recently, since the beginning of 2020, she has begun to see a counsellor, whom she refers to as miss t, who ms barret described as a healer. ms barret was not able to provide any evidence regarding her qualifications, if any, to provide psychological support. ms barret said she talked, to miss t, about how she was feeling.
61 mr barret was born in adelaide, in 1977. he joined armed forces as a young person. he was discharged, from the armed forces in 2008. he is a qualifdonalied tradesperson. he has worked for company u, in town v, on a fly-in/fly-out basis for the last 10 years. he earns approximately $140,000.00 per annum. he has re-partnered. the mother has not.
62 mr barret indicated that he did not have a relationship with his own father. he had elected to sever this relationship because of his perception that his own father had nothing to offer him because of the aggressive behaviour he had demonstrated towards him, whilst he was an adolescent. mr barret did not appear to consider that his own experience, as a person growing up, had influenced his own behaviour, as an adult.
63 the parties met in 2006, in suburban adelaide. at the time, the father was based in perth. ms barret fell pregnant, with x, in 2007. mr barret moved back to adelaide and the two began to live together in early-2008. they married in 2008, shortly prior to x’s birth.
64 in 2009, the parties purchased a block of land, at m street, suburb h. they subsequently constructed a home, on the land. one of the consequences of the final property orders, made on 10 september 2019, was that mr barret retained the m street property, which he continues to occupy. ms barret lives in a property owned by her father, located at q street, suburb n.
65 suburb h and suburb n are adjoining suburbs. the parties’ two homes are approximately 2 kilometres apart. the paternal grandmother, ms o also lives in suburb h, on her calculations. the children each attend suburb n primary school. in addition, y and z attend c sports classes at the suburb n, r centre.
66 from time to time, mr barret must attend at the post office in suburb n to collect his parcels. the post office is reasonably close to the children’s school. ms o has a dog, which she walks regularly. the children play sport at ovals in the area.
67 as is evident, the parties and those related to them, live in a closely bounded area, within a suburban setting. necessarily, they must each drive and walk through it from time to time. one of the central issues in the case is whether the parties come into proximity, with one another, inadvertently or whether the contact is designed and premediated to cause discomfort and distress.
68 these issues, for obvious reasons, have application to one of the issues identified in the case, namely whether it is appropriate to make the wide raft of injunctive orders sought by the mother. it is her case that the father has engaged in stalking her throughout her neighbourhood, which is, in itself, an incident of coercive control. in addition, she asserts that ms o has acted as mr barret’s proxy, by attending at the children’s c sports classes and walking down the laneway behind her house, on the occasion of z’s recent birthday.
69 for their part, the father and ms o deny the gravamen of the mother’s allegations. however, mr barret is not in a position to deny that he has not been present at some of the children’s sporting occasions, as the mother has been able to photograph him. rather he has kept within the terms of the applicable family violence order, which prevents him from coming within 50 metres of the mother or any place where she lives or work or within 100 metres of a number of specified locations, which include the children’s school. the order does not extend to ms o or explicitly include any of the children.
70 the effect of mr barret’s evidence is that he has felt frustrated by what he regards as the mother’s unreasonable and controlling attitude towards him and his desire to remain in touch with the children’s everyday lives and activities. as such, he has felt drawn to attend their sporting fixtures and has remained distant from the mother and children, but has merely watched them playing.
71 ms o and the father’s sister, ms p have also attended the children’s sporting activities. it is their position that the mother assaulted ms p, when ms p was taking a photograph of z’s b sports team, at the last game of the season. this incident was reported to police.
72 it is the evidence of ms o that she and ms p were only doing what interested relatives do on such an occasion, namely taking a photo of their loved ones. as such, it is ms o’s position that it was the mother, who was the provocative one, not them.
73 in addition, it is ms o’s position that, prior to the parties’ separation, she was closely involved in the day to day lives of all three children. it is her position that the mother has overreacted to the separation and has now unreasonably prevented her from having a proper level of relationship with her grandchildren, whom she can now only see, whilst they are in their father’s care.
74 in these circumstances, she regularly attends all of the children’s c sports lessons, so that she can see y and z, in particular, whilst they are playing their sport. she watches from the side. it is her position that she is entitled to do so. for her part, ms barret finds this behaviour intrusive and threatening.
witnesses and material before the court
75 the following witnesses filed affidavits and gave evidence before the court:
the mother
76 ms barret was vigorously cross-examined at significant length. the thrust of the examination was that she was a highly anxious person, who was a lax parent and one who was emotionally over-involved with the children. essentially, it was put to her, on a prolonged and forceful basis that the children’s behavioural issues emanated from her parenting. i do not accept this characterisation.
77 in this context, it was asserted that she continued to suffer the emotional sequellae of being involved in an armed robbery and was herself in need of expert psychological support, which she was disinclined to seek out. the thrust of this questioning was that she lacked insight into her own psychological make-up and its implications for the children.
78 in addition, it was put to her that she was the one driving the conflict between the two sides of the children’s family by her encouraging the children to have a negative view of their father and those associated with him by denigrating him to the children. the most striking example of this being that x was given his mother’s apparent imprimatur to refer to his father as an arsehole.
79 ms barret is not a robust person. in my assessment, the pressure under which she has lived, both before and after the parties had separated, has been intense. she did not strike me as being a vindictive person. as such, although she may have responded, from time to time, to what she perceived to be the provocative actions of others. i do not consider that she is likely to be the primary instigator of the highly regrettable family dynamic surrounding the children.
80 i agree with ms d that it is highly regrettable that x has corresponded, with his father, in the manner described. however, it is simplistic, in my view, to ascribe this conduct to ms barret alone. rather, in my assessment, x has reacted idiosyncratically to his own experience of his father, particularly given his perception that mr barret has behaved in a bullying fashion to both him and his mother.
81 ms barret was clearly shaken by the cross-examination and its insinuation that it was she who was the manipulative and disingenuous partner in the parties’ relationship. however, notwithstanding this robust cross-examination, in my assessment, she remained consistent in her position that she wanted the children to have a close relationship with their father but not at the price of her being undermined and the children themselves being exposed to controlling and reactive aspects of their father’s personality.
82 in this context, it is the mother’s evidence that x and y’s behaviour and emotional functioning have improved markedly since their exposure to their father and his conduct have been reduced. i do not accept that the mother has fabricated this evidence or has actively engaged in a process of alienating the children from their father. rather, in my assessment, she has behaved in a protective manner throughout. this is a most significant finding.
83 the more significant forensic task required in reaching judgment in this case is whether the father exposed the mother to coercive and controlling behaviour during the parties’ relationship. i will return to this issue in greater depth in due course. however, at this stage, it is sufficient to make the general finding that the mother was a credible witness in respect of these matters, whilst the father was not.
84 in my view, the most eloquent example of the mother’s protective attitude, both insofar as her own emotional functioning and that of the children is concerned, is contained in a personal letter, which she sent to mr barret in november 2017, which was prior to the parties’ final separation, but while the relationship between them was becoming increasingly problematic. given the date of its writing, it cannot be considering to be self-serving in any way. it reads as follows:
i understand you’re sorry but this can’t go on anymore, the trust is broken and the boys are suffering. x is angry and living in fear of you and the boys are imitating your aggressive behaviour and think it’s normal. it will be a long road but you can’t expect me to take this on your word, as actions speak loud [sic] than words. until i see positive change it will be difficult for me to move forward. i’m so confused as to how you say you love me but can treat with such disrespect. i don’t know how i feel about us as the trust/ respect that i had for you is broken. we both would benefit from counselling, individually and together as we need to sort out our own feelings and you need to address you [sic] anger management problems in order for us to see if we are going to move forward. i don’t want to be pressured into anything i don’t feel comfortable in. we need to trial taking baby steps, in conjunction with help and in the promise that this will be between our family (you me and the boys) to sort out and no outside influences. i will try and communicate with you more and show you the respect that you are after, like you will for me. i want to make myself very clear that i’m not going to keep living in fear, or stand for putting up with negative comment or actions anymore or that will be it will end of us.[13]
85 in my opinion, the views in this letter are expressed in a calm and considered manner. the mother’s essential complaint is that she wishes to be respected in the parties’ marriage and is concerned that the children are starting to mimic their father behaviour. the tone of the letter is sincere. it indicates that ms barret has had concerns in respect of mr barret’s anger management for a significant period of time. as such, i do not think it can be said that she has embellished her claim or fabricated them to gain advantage in these proceedings.
86 another significant aspect of ms barret’s evidence is that mr barret has excessively disciplined y by striking him with a wooden spoon on the back of his leg and when he has become angry with x, again in the context of discipline he had grabbed him causing inflammation to the child’s neck.
87 i found ms barret to be a witness of truth, who did not exaggerate or embellish her evidence but one who remained consistent throughout. i prefer her evidence to that of the father in these proceedings, particularly in respect of the nature of the parties’ relationship with one another. on the other hand, mr barret attempted to deflect responsibility for his poor conduct onto others. he did this with the police and, in my view, also to dr j.
88 in her evidence, ms barret has provided information about each of the children. both x and y have been diagnosed with special learning needs. it is the father’s position that it is these needs, which lead each of the children to struggle in the classroom setting, which provide a more logical explanation for their dysregulated behaviour than what has or has not occurred at home. in addition, it is mr barret’s position that the mother struggles to manage this behaviour, which can be extremely challenging at times, particularly so far as y is concerned. in the past, y has been referred to a psychologist, ms l, by his general medical practitioner.
89 x was diagnosed as dyslexic in mid-2015, as was y in september 2016. later y was diagnosed with developmental delays in language, memory, coordination, visual acuity, motor skills and sensory issues. he was described as being restless and fidgety. autism was ruled out but he was found to have qualitative impairments in respect of socialisation, communication and his behaviour.
90 it is the effect of the mother’s evidence that the children have also each displayed behavioural issues, the more serious aspects of which have been emotional dysregulation, characterised by tantrums and aggressive behaviour directed towards siblings and their school peers. both x and y have been provided with psychological support.
91 it is the mother’s evidence that she did not find the involvement of ms l, with y, between may 2018 and march 2019 to be particularly helpful. ms l saw y over a course of twelve sessions, which spanned the period before and after the parties separated. counsel for the father cross-examined ms barret about the content of ms l’s treatment notes, although she herself was not called to give evidence.
92 the thrust of this cross-examination was that ms barret was not able to manage y’s, at times, extremely dysregulated behaviour. this behaviour included swearing, violent behaviour and breaking objects. it was ms barret’s evidence that this behaviour became more extreme after the parties separated.
93 it was ms barret who was responsible for taking y to see ms l and it was she who provided the history and background to her. in the first consultation of may 2018, she reported that y had witnessed significant conflict between her and mr barret. y expressed positive feelings for both his father and mother.
94 at a subsequent consultation, the mother and y discussed when y had a brain flip when the mother declined to buy him some lego. other similar incidents were also outlined, in other consultation, including one in which y had urinated on the floor. his on-going poor behaviour, at school, was also a flavour of the various consultations. in the context of these various matters, in the mother’s cross-examination, it was suggested to her that she had a manifest inability to manage the child’s behaviour within appropriate boundaries. essentially, the child’s problems emanated with his mother.
95 significantly, y also reported to ms l, in his sessions with her on 9 october 2018, that things at had been not so good at home as there had been a fight, in which dad tried to strangle mum. interestingly, ms l described y’s mood, in the majority of their consultations as being euthymic, consistent with how each of his parents describe him generally.
96 at the end of her ten sessions with y, ms l’s diagnosis of him was anxiety disorder, unspecified. again, prior to this last session, y reported having got into trouble, at school, which resulted in him being sent home after fighting with another student.[14]
97 the effect of all this evidence is that y, in particular, presents significant challenges, arising from his special needs, as a child to parent. as such, in my view, ms barret is not open to criticism for any alleged deficits in her parenting. at times, she has reacted inappropriately to the pressures of her situation and her perception that she is the subject of undeserved aggression and criticism from the father’s family.
98 in my view, the pressure she has been under, since the parties separated, has been extremely intense, particularly given the fact that she lives in close suburban proximity to mr barret and his family, who regretfully, i find, are not disinclined to make their presence felt, knowing full well ms barret’s potential fragility. as i have already indicated, i do not consider her to be an emotionally robust person. in my view, it is to her credit that she has remained as resilient as she has and has not snapped emotionally.
99 i accept her evidence that she has done her best, including seeking out appropriate support, to assist the children, with their behavioural issues. mr barret himself acknowledged that ms barret was a good mum, albeit that this indication was made towards the end of his own extensive cross-examination, when he had come to the realisation that his credibility had been significantly undermined.
100 in this context, in my view, it is unduly reductionist to attribute one factor or factors as being the precipitating issue in regard to the children’s behaviour, which can be attributable solely to the action of one or other of their parents. x and y are challenging children, with complex special needs. however, it is also, in my view, equally simplistic not to acknowledge exposure to the conflict between the parties as playing a large part in the children’s dysregulated behaviour.
101 one significant evidentiary issue in the case is whether the children are continuing to be exposed to this type of conflict and its implications for their behaviour at the present time. it is the mother’s evidence that she perceives the father has an extremely negative view of her, which he conveys to the children, referring to her, to them, as a fucking moron, fucking idiot, a retard and a bitch. it is also her case that he has spoken disparagingly of her home and expressed resentment at the level of his expenditure on legal fees.
102 in answer, the father has admitted making inappropriate comments about the mother, in the latter part of the parties’ relationship. however, he asserts that he has refrained from doing so for the last twelve months or so. on any view, the relationship between the parties can only be described as being tense and difficult. there is no effective communication and, in my view, whatever communications do occur, have the significant potential to miscarry and boil over into recrimination.
103 it is the mother’s evidence that y and z are, at times, defiant and hostile towards her, after spending time with their father. one aspect of the conflict between the parties is that the father (and ms o) are resentful that ms barret has retained her married name. as a consequence, mr barret refers to ms barret by her maiden name of ms k. the children are aware of this. it is a practice which is not likely to be helpful to them.
104 in my assessment, there remains a very real risk that the father does continue to disparage the mother to the children (y and z), perhaps in a tacit manner, because of the general ill-will he holds for her. i would be naïve, i think, not to consider that this has had a detrimental effect on the children. z has referred to his mother as a liar. when his behaviour is challenged, he refers to his mother as ms k.
105 y has asked questions about the fairness of the parties’ property proceedings. both y and z are reported to have said to their mother that they don’t have to listen to her. in my view, these incidents are examples of the children being involved in the conflict between their parents. in contrast, x’s behaviour is reported, by his mother, to have improved of late.
dr c
106 dr c has a phd conferred in the discipline of social work. in her evidence, she presented more as an advocate for a cause rather than as a dispassionate treating therapist. as such, i have reservations about some aspects of her evidence. although mr bowler was critical of dr c’s evidence, he did not elect to seriously challenge her expertise and qualifications and was not in a position to call expert evidence in rebuttal.
107 the main criticism mr barret has of dr c is that her involvement with the children, particularly x, has resulted in their estrangement with him becoming more profound rather than less so. in short, mr barret asserts her therapy has not served any useful purpose – certainly not so far as he is concerned. as such, he sees no point in it continuing. from the mother’s point of view, the children appear to be more stable in their moods and happier, which she attributes to the counselling offered and the fact that the children are being listened to.
108 given the dichotomy and mistrust between the parties and the father’s identification of dr c with the mother, it seems improbable that dr c would be able to work effectively, with mr barret, in any process of reunification counselling, given that he is likely to mistrust her, on the basis that he believes that she has pre-judged him and been negatively influenced by the mother. in these circumstances, it is apparent that there it is unlikely that any rapport will ever be developed between them. in my view, there is some substance to the father’s view that dr c has reached a negative view about him before even meeting him.[15]
109 dr c does not advocate x having any further involvement with his father because of the danger that such involvement will reawaken malignant memories within the child. she has a similar view in respect of both y and z. mr barret’s view is this is an extreme and unhelpful position, when it is considered in the context of all aspects of the children’s best interests, particularly any benefits they are likely to derive from having some on-going level of relationship with him. mr bowler, in his cross-examination challenged the concept of malignant memories.
110 in these circumstances it is the father’s position that the children’s involvement, with dr c, has the air of a self-fulfilling prophecy, which will inevitably end in the extinction of any viable paternal relationship being maintained between him and the children, if she continues to be extensively involved. in this context, it is the submission of mr bowler that dr c’s therapy for x and y has been spectacularly unsuccessful, as the children’s relationship, with their father, has become more rather than less fractured.
111 the thrust of much of dr c’s evidence was that she felt her professional relationship was posited on the basis of listening to and protecting the children. it is her opinion that x and y may have suffered some physiological damage, as a consequence of their exposure to their father’s conduct. it is the submission of mr bowler that dr c is to be regarded as a partisan in her evidence and straying into areas of expertise, in which she is not qualified and so must be regarded as an unreliable witness.
112 in this context, mr bowler argues that the mother has co-opted dr c to advance her agenda directed towards securing the complete alienation of the children from their father. ms barret’s evidence is that she was referred to dr c by her general medical practitioner, whom she consulted to obtain assistance in respect of x’s dysregulated behaviour, which he has largely attributed to mr barret.
113 ms barret is not likely to be a sophisticated person in respect of her selection of a therapist for the children. accordingly, i reject any suggestion that she had any ulterior motive in selecting dr c. certainly, in my view, there is no substance to the assertion that the mother and dr c are colluding with one another, to alienate the children from their father. from the mother’s perspective, she took the children to see dr c because she was recommended to her by a general medical practitioner.
114 however, in my assessment, it remains the case that there is a risk, whether inadvertently or not, that dr c will act more as a reinforcer than as a corrective of the children’s adverse attitude towards their father. clearly, this is a significant issue in the case. for various reasons, ms barret has an extremely negative view of mr barret, as does dr c. the children are likely to be aware of this state of affairs, which may have some influence on their own view, which are also likely to be shaped by their own direct experience of their father.
115 certainly, i do not consider dr c is likely to be inclined to lead the children to reconsider their views of their father or contemplate any positive aspects of his personality or any happier times, which they have spent with him in the past. ms d has recommended a modest increase, to overnight time, in respect of the two younger children. however, her position is posited on the basis that mr barret and the children address their relationship issues through a minimum of three joint therapy sessions.
116 in these circumstances, any therapist for the children has the potential to be extremely influential in shaping the ultimate outcome of the case, particularly in respect of the children’s attitude for their father, which implicitly ms d assesses to be reparable. this is an important recommendation, which needs, in my view, to be earnestly considered by the court, particularly to avoid the possibility of any such counselling miscarrying. given her attitude in the case and the manner in which she has hitherto interacted with the children, i do not consider that dr c would bring a sufficient level of either impartiality or proactivity to the therapeutic task envisaged by ms d.
117 however, the fact remains, and i find so, that the most significant factor in the current matter, regarding what has shaped the children’s views, is their direct experience of their father. as such, important though it is, the involvement of dr c in the matter to date should be regarded as more peripheral to it than influential. the most cogent factor in shaping the children’s views of their father is mr barret himself and what he has done.
118 it is ms barret’s evidence that dr c visits the children in their home. counsel for the father, mr bowler is critical of this approach, which is in his submission demonstrates a lack of professional boundaries between dr c and the children. in this context, he further submits that this is demonstrative of dr c’s potential to deepen rather than reduce the rift between the children and their father.
119 i appreciate the powerful reactions precipitated by the issues created in this case (and others like it) in those who are involved in them. however, i share the father’s concerns, which are also shared by the independent children’s lawyer.
120 however, at the same time i accept ms barret’s evidence that the children benefit from consulting with dr c and this is reflected in their improved emotional functioning, particularly insofar as x and y are concerned. this is also the view of ms d, who wrote as follows in her second family report:
with regard to the children's relationships, the writer appreciated that x, y and z shared a close attachment with ms barret and referenced her as their main care relationship. whilst this primary care relationship should continue, the writer also appreciated the importance of the children developing a relationship with mr barret in a safe and supported manner. to help facilitate this relationship and in wishing to limit the number of professionals involved in the children's lives (should dr c be agreeable), the writer would encourage mr barret to engage in the children's therapeutic intervention with dr c to help repair their relationship with him.[16]
121 this recommendation raises difficult issues given the assessment i have made of dr c. for the reasons outlined above, i am not as sanguine as ms d in regards to her providing the required therapy. to the contrary, i consider that dr c is not equipped to provide the therapeutic intervention, notwithstanding the obvious appeal of limiting the number of professionals involved with the family.
122 i concede that it may be difficult for dr c to remain involved with the family, if another therapist is engaged. i also accept that it is likely to be highly doubtful that the parties themselves will be able to agree on another therapist. in such circumstances, the only potential honest broker available to appoint such a person is the independent children’s lawyer.
ms q
123 ms q is the allied health worker at suburb n primary school. she has a graduate and postgraduate qualifications in psychology. she is the school healthcare professional and in this capacity has had regular sessions with y and x from 2016 onwards. primarily, she has seen the two children due to behavioural problems they have exhibited at school. she has had only limited involvement with z.
124 y has been seeing ms q on a weekly basis. his main behavioural problems have involved difficulties with class mates, which y has attempted to resolve, in the past, by pushing, punching and kicking them. it would seem to be the case that y has been picked on, by some of his peers, and reacts to this treatment violently.
125 between early-2017 and 2019, y has made concerning reports regarding his father’s behaviour. these have included ruminating about things happening between mum and dad,[17] his father choking his mother and the police coming,[18] his father upsetting his mother and talking badly about his mother and sending her nasty text messages,[19] and his mother crying, whilst on the phone to his father.[20]
126 x has complained about his father targeting and yelling at him. overall, ms q’s evidence was of two children who had significant social and home issues, in which conflict with their dad loomed large. in these circumstances, the major effect of ms q’s evidence is that x and y have been exposed to family violence, at home and this appears to have had consequences for their behaviour in the school setting.
127 ms q conceded that she had attended a meeting, with dr c and two of x’s teachers, which the mother had organised. the inference being that ms q had been influenced, in assessing the reasons for x’s misbehaviour, by dr c. the relevant meeting took place in 2019.
128 i found ms q to be a conscientious and professional person, who had the interest of her two students to the forefront of her mind. in this context, i found her evidence illuminating, particularly in respect of the reports made by y, which pre-dated ms q meeting with dr c. given these reports, i am not in a position to dismiss dr c’s view that both y and x are displaying some symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.
the father
129 as previously indicated, ms lewis set the scope of her cross-examination of the father from the outset, when she invited him to provide his assent to the proposition that he was the victim of the mother’s deception and behaviour rather than vice versa. mr barret provided this assent, in my view, without equivocation.
130 thereafter, incident by incident, in my view, ms lewis forensically demolished his position to such an extent that, in his closing submissions, his counsel conceded that his client had been guilty of appalling behaviour during the parties’ relationship. this is both the central factual and legal issue in the case and i accept mr bowler’s description of his client’s behaviour.
131 in my view, this forensic cross-examination resulted in a fatal blow to the father’s credibility, which he himself recognised at it drew to its conclusion. as such, i do not accept the manner in which he attempted to recreate the nature of the parties’ past relationship with one another, in his affidavit material and through the manner in which his counsel cross examined ms barret.
132 throughout his evidence, as it developed issue by issue, the father was compelled to make frequent concessions about his conduct, as described by him in his affidavit, which were extracted in the face of incontrovertible evidence and his own earlier denials. sadly, he was not an impressive witness.
133 at the end of his cross-examination, the father apologised to the mother for his conduct towards her. in this context, he indicated that he wanted to change his behaviour and become a better person. he conceded that ms barret had been a very good mother. he also indicated a willingness to take advice on board and said that he regarded his life at present as being a work in progress. he also indicated a willingness to keep his distance from the mother and refrain from denigrating her in future.
134 one of the forensic tasks, which confronts the court, is assessing the sincerity of these comments and whether the father has sufficient insight to do what he has said he is prepared to. my impression of mr barret is that he is a person who finds it extremely difficult to curb his anger, when he feels affronted. to some extent, mr barret has had an awareness of this personality trait for a significant period of time.
135 prior to the parties’ separation, they took part in a process of counselling, a part of which involved each of them writing a letter of personal reflection. in his letter to himself, mr barret wrote as follows:
when you get angry it is doing more harm than good. you know you can control it so why do you let it get the better of you? i am sure you do stuff that frustrates and pisses off your family but they don’t react the same as you. you’re the only one who can change it. you really need to stop and think about it before it consumes you. i really want you to try even harder to control your anger. i know you can do it. how did you feel when your father did it. that’s right, not good and that’s how you make ms barret and the boys feel. you have to stop![21]
136 mr barret is a large and powerfully built person, who has obviously worked out at the gym for a significant period of time. he concedes that, from his appearance alone, he has the potential to be quite frightening. for obvious reasons, this propensity is likely to be enhanced, when he is angry. the evidence available to me indicates that mr barret has often lost his temper. as previously indicated, it is the mother’s view that the children are frightened of their father.
137 sadly, however, due to one incident in particular, i also have grave concerns that mr barret has significant difficulties in regard to empathising with the feelings of others or indeed contemplating how his aggressive behaviour impacts upon them.
138 the origins of the incident lie in a series of text message which passed between mr barret and ms barret, on 20 december 2017.[22] the father sent a photograph of a note, which he had left on a vehicle parked next to his in a carpark. the note read as follows:
park closer next time fuckwit. hope you die of cancer, nice and slow and painful.
139 the father had sent that message, with some pride to ms barret, who had responded with “don’t do that’. to which mr barret had responded “why not?” to which, in turn, ms barret had responded, as follows, you don’t need to, it could be an old lady or man.
140 when the issue was raised with him, mr barret evinced the view that he was entitled to respond in this way because he had recently purchased a new motor vehicle and was concerned about it being damaged. he expressed some incredulity that, if as ms barret had conjectured, the other driver concerned had been a frail person and had seen him they would have been petrified.
141 the note, in my view was the action of a bully, with an overweening sense of entitlement and no capacity for empathy. i concede that, in the greater scheme of things, this is likely to be a minor matter, but in my view, it gives some indication of mr barret’s view of the world and how he approaches it, particularly if he considers that his actions are not likely to be subject to outside scrutiny.
142 in my view, this is particularly telling in respect of how an individual choses to behave within the private confines of the home. the mother’s view of the father is that he is a domineering bully, who threatens anyone who crosses him. the note confirms this characterisation. it is not the action of an empathetic person.
dr j
143 dr j has practiced as a psychologist since 1979. he prepared two reports in respect of mr barret, dated 6 may and 25 october 2020 respectively. he presented as a thoughtful and experienced professional person, who made appropriate concessions regarding the nature of the therapeutic relationship between psychologist and patient, namely, in order for such relationships to be effective, they had to be based on mutual trust and full and frank disclosure.
144 dr j described how he saw his role with mr barret as being fundamentally to help him, particularly in terms of assisting him to improve his behaviour. dr j also acknowledged that he had an obligation to keep everyone safe and work in ways which assisted the parties to have a better co-parenting relationship.
145 the thrust of ms lewis’ cross-examination of dr j was that mr barret had not been completely frank about his behaviour and dr j had, to some extent, had the wool pulled over his eyes by mr barret, who had minimised the gravity of his conduct towards the mother. in this context, dr j had been presented with all the relevant affidavit material on the court file and read the first family assessment report of ms d.
146 in addition, he has consulted with mr barret on approximately twelve occasions between december 2017 and september 2020. the initial reason for the consultation, on mr barret’s part, appears to have been in respect of anger management issues, in the context of criminal proceedings.
147 dr j administered a number of psychometric tests directed towards measuring a subject’s susceptibility to anger and provocation. dr j also wrote a letter to ms barret, at the father’s request, providing his opinion about his patient’s mental health. ms barret took exception to this opinion.
148 in his oral evidence to the court, dr j indicated that was not currently engaged on an on-going therapeutic relationship with mr barret, who had elected to see him on a needs basis. in this context, dr j indicated that he would welcome mr barret back, if he wished to consult with him again.
149 as such, i do not consider that dr j was unduly naïve about the issues in the case but i am concerned that mr barret has not been completely frank with dr j and has only consulted with him on an opportunistic basis rather than with any desire to change his behaviour or more importantly with a significant level of insight as to why he should change his behaviour.
150 as one would expect of a therapist, dr j was sympathetic to his patient’s situation and his point of view. this led dr j to opine, in his first report, that mr barret’s primary issue was “his experience of betrayal and disrespect from his estranged partner despite what he has contributed, and sacrificed for their family”. in these circumstances, he further opined that mr barret’s problematic conduct was attributable to the “conflict between the estranged parents” and “his anger [was] an expression of [his] hurt and betrayal”.
151 this is clearly mr barret’s view also – he attributes the conflict in the parties’ relationship as much to ms barret as to him and has essentially denied that it is reflective of any power imbalance between the two as demonstrated by elements of coercion and control. in this context, i am concerned that in his evidence to the court, provided prior to his subsequent significant recantation of it, mr barret’s view is that it is he who is the victim of unfairness in the case, rather than ms barret.
152 i am also concerned that this is the view of other members of his family. i hold a radically different view of the evidence. in this context, i am concerned that, either to himself (and his family) or to dr j, mr barret has not been frank and insightful about his previous behaviour but has either dismissed it or excused it.
153 dr j further opined that the various incidents of family violence, of which he was aware in this case, were not likely to be reflective of a mental health issue for mr barret and, as such, “need not be a long-term ongoing phenomenon” for him. this conclusion, on his part, was buttressed by the following opinion:
people with a general trait of problem anger typically display this across most if not all settings of their lives (i.e. the workplace, family of origin and social settings, not just one like their primary couple relationship as is the case here). there have not been any indication that mr barret has had a problem with anger in other contexts, e.g. work or family of origin.[23]
154 in these circumstances, including the fact that mr barret had formed a new relationship, dr j considered once the “negative dynamic” had been resolved between the parties, through the resolution of the current proceedings, the children’s relationship with their father was likely to improve. this opinion was predicated on the basis of mr barret being able to “gain some affirmation and respect for his past parenting and family contributions, (especially if that can come from the current judicial process), the prospect of anger reduction is very real”.
155 ms barret views this as a simplistic and erroneous analysis and she takes exception to it. it is her case that a proper analysis of the evidence indicates that, at best, mr barret’s hostility to her remains at the same level, in the period since separation, and has been problematic in other aspects of his life, for a significant period of time. she does not accept dr j’s view that mr barret’s life has moved on. she does not accept that issue to do with anger have not played a role in other aspects of mr barret’s life.
156 in his second report, dr j concedes tangentially that his patient continues to harbour some level of resentment for ms barret when he refers to mr barret’s interactions with ms barret as being a consistent trigger of anger for mr barret. this led dr j to conclude as follows:
when something reminds him of how the family he invested so much in (time, emotional energy, career decisions over so many years) is largely gone, this can re-activate an intense sense of loss and unfairness. as the initiator of separation, ms barret can become a focus of these feelings, so his communications towards her may on times reflect that trauma-reaction flavour (i.e. angry). another kind of impact is depression of his mood. sadly, all this can result in further negative interactions which only compound his difficult feelings.[24]f
157 i accept that mr barret has perceived that he is the victim of some level of injustice wreaked upon him by ms barret. this has characterised the manner in which he has approached the case, at least until the stage when his cross-examination revealed that this stance was not likely to be helpful to him and he made a volte face in respect of his evidence.
158 more significantly, in my view, dr j’s analysis fails to consider, in any meaningful way, that mr barret’s own conduct towards ms barret, has resulted in the loss of family, rather than vice versa. this, in my view, may render the trauma counselling recommended for mr barret unhelpful as an aid to assist him in changing his behaviour, particularly if he continues to think that it is not he who needs to change because it is he who is the victim of circumstance.
159 in this context, i am concerned that dr j may have reinforced mr barret’s view that it is ms barret, rather than his own behaviour, which need to change and it she, rather than he, who is the factor giving rise to his current predicament. in addition, i am also concerned that in his empathy for his patient, dr j has failed to grapple with issues of coercive and controlling family violence, which are characterised by one spouse trying to limit and dictate the behaviour of the other.
160 as such, although dr j’s analysis of his patient’s perception of his situation may be correct, i do not consider his evidence advanced mr barret’s case a great deal, particularly in terms of demonstrating whether mr barret had developed any insight into the consequences of his behaviour.
161 in his evidence, when he said to the court that he regarded his life as being a work in progress mr barret indicated a willingness to run to dr j. prior to the hearing, he did not have such a commitment. in this context, i am concerned that he sees attending upon dr j as being some form of panacea to solve his problems and this is an unrealistic expectation. in this context, i remain concerned that many of mr barret’s issues, so far as anger management is concerned, are far from resolved.
ms o
162 ms o’s evidence was characterised by feelings of hurt and anger. she is fiercely loyal to her son and feels bitterly disposed toward ms barret, whom she believes has shamelessly exaggerated the nature of the problems in the marriage with her son. in ms o’s own words, it is her perception that: “ms barret has taken it too far”. it is her evidence that she has never see mr barret behave in a violent or angry way.
163 the more significant aspect of her evidence is the previous degree of her involvement in the lives of x, y and z. i unequivocally accept that she has spent a great deal of time caring for each of them, in the past, but this time came to an abrupt halt around the time of the parties’ separation. in her affidavit, ms o deposed as follows:
...if the boys were playing up or fighting and giving ms barret a hard time, i would take them for the day just to give her a break. i babysat the children for their parents whenever i was asked to do so.[25]
164 in these circumstances, i can appreciate why she is so bitterly disposed towards ms barret. in her oral evidence, she expressed her indignation of her perception of the injustice done to her in the following terms: “after all i have done, looked after the children so she could have a stress free time”. ms o appeared to be dismissive of many aspects of both ms barret’s personality and parenting capacity.
165 the effect of seeing and hearing ms o’s evidence was to reinforce the pain and depth of the rift which is at the heart of the family and demonstrates each sides inability to find ways to mitigate it other than through confrontation. the most severe examples of this confrontation are demonstrated by what happens at the children’s sporting activities.
166 in the past, ms o regularly took the two younger children to their c sports lessons. this no longer occurs and ms barret undertakes this duty. however, ms o always attends at the lessons and watches from the side of the pool. from her perspective, she is doing nothing wrong but is demonstrating her commitment to the children.
167 from ms barret’s perspective, this is an unwanted and provocative intrusion into her and the children’s autonomy and represents stalking. as a consequence, she has changed the c sports times, which in turn has had implications for others involved with the administration of the c sports centre. clearly, they have nothing to do with the issues surrounding the family and are entitled to go about their business unmolested.
168 in late december 2020, mr barret attended at the centre demanded to know what the children’s new c sports times were. it was explained to him that there were privacy issues involved. in an incident report, the staff member involved wrote as follows:
mr barret came into the c sports centre demanding information in relation on times their two children swam. miss e and i explained to mr barret that due to privacy laws we unable to provide this information. mr barret was not happy with our response and got very aggressive to miss e and i he threatened both of us that he would get his lawyer on to both of us and we would both lose our jobs. i didn’t appreciate mr barret’s threatening behaviour.[26]
169 i appreciate this, in the greater scheme of things, is a minor matter. but in my view, it is axiomatic of how the respective components of the children’s family deal with conflict. ms barret deals with it by avoidance. the father and his family with aggression. sadly, i can see no end to this dichotomy. in addition, each actor is of the view that the behaviour in question is entirely justified.
170 similar issues have arisen at the children’s b sports games and there has been an altercation between ms barret and ms p when the latter wanted to take a photograph of the team involved. a complaint was made to police. ms o concedes that the children are well aware of the conflict but in her view it is “bilateral”.
171 finally there was an incident at z’s last birthday. ms o lives close to ms barret. she was walking her dog down the lane at the rear of ms barret’s home during z’s party. she called out to him “happy birthday z” across the fence, knowing what was happening and who was there.
172 in one sense, this was an anodyne gesture – a grandmother calling out a birthday greeting to her grandson. but in the context of the endemic conflict between the two sides of the children’s family, ms barret sees it differently. from her perspective, it was an act of provocation and aggression. she feels constantly monitored by the father or his proxies, even in her own home. on any view, this cannot be a healthy emotional environment for the children concerned.
ms ff
173 ms ff and mr barret have been in a relationship since november 2019. they do not live together. ms ff has met y and z but not x. ms ff has been employed as both a healthcare worker and a public servant during her working life. in this context, she deposes she has extensive knowledge regarding “domestic violence situations”.
174 the effect of her evidence is that she would neither herself tolerate being in a relationship characterised by family violence nor expose any child to such a situation but would report it to the appropriate authority. it is her further evidence that she has never seen mr barret behave in a violent manner towards anyone, certainly not either to her or y and z and she has only observed mr barret to be a loving and solicitous parent. she further deposes that she is aware that mr barret has a conviction for assaulting ms barret and that mr barret disclosed this fact to her at an early stage of their involvement. this conviction is not congruent with her own experience of mr barret.
175 ms ff first met y and z in 2020 and has seen the children, with their father, on alternate saturdays since. she describes mr barret as a loving father and deposes that the children enjoy being in his company and comfortable in his home. i have no reason to doubt her evidence.
176 as i will elaborate in due course, in the second family report, the children spoke positively of ms ff and her stabilising influence on mr barret. however, y expressed continuing concern about interacting with his father including whilst ms ff was present and z expressed his view that his father had unfairly treated him in respect of getting texta on his shirt, whilst she was there.
177 i accept that ms ff would not tolerate being herself the subject of any violent behaviour or would in any way condone the children being subject to such conduct. i wish her and mr barret well with their relationship but it remains at an early stage. as the children demonstrated to ms d they remain wary of their father and it would seem not fully trusting of ms ff. in addition, due to her regard for mr barret, she is not likely to be inclined to accept easily any negative accounts of his behaviour and is likely to align herself, with him, in this particularly bitter dispute.
178 in the course of her oral evidence, it was apparent that ms ff shares mr barret’s antipathy for ms barret and views him as the victim of her conduct rather than vice versa. she is, of course, entitled to her own opinion of the parties’ relationship in the past but i doubt that she can be regarded as being completely objective about it.
179 her evidence encapsulates the central issue in the case, which can be summarised in the following terms. it is the position of the father, supported by his mother, partner and dr j that any incidents of regrettable behaviour demonstrated by him towards ms barret are the consequence of the toxic relationship between the two and, if mr barret is removed from this toxicity, in respect of which he cannot be regarded as the sole generator, he is otherwise unexceptional and non-violent in his behaviour. in effect, it is ms barret who precipitates his adverse behavioural reactions.
180 as a consequence of this analysis, it is mr barret’s position that it cannot be said that his past conduct represents any ongoing risk for the emotional well-being of any of the children or that he is anything other than an acceptable role model for the children. ms barret’s view is fundamentally different. it is her position that mr barret is a bully, not only towards her but others, and, as such, represents a risk to the children. she accepts that mr barret can be caring and loving but that has not been her more recent experience of him.
181 in order to resolve this issue, it will be necessary for the court to analyse, in some detail, the evidence regarding the various episodes of family violence delineated by ms barret, within the matrix of the legal considerations relating to family violence. in respect of these matters, mr barret was extensively cross examined and after his initial denials, made significant concessions in respect of them.
legal principles applicable
182 part vii of the act deals with orders relating to children. before making any particular parenting order, the court must regard the best interests of any child concerned as the paramount consideration.[27]
183 part vii is subject to a number of principles and objects set out in section 60b. these, if you like, provide the philosophical underpinning of the act as it relates to decision-making so far as children are concerned. the court is obliged to ensure that a child’s best interests are served by ensuring it considers various fundamental principles. i will provide each of them verbatim: ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
the principles, which underpin these objects, are set out in section 60b(2) and are as follows: children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
184 what is interesting to note about these various principles and objects is the fact that it is children who have rights under the legislation and parents who have obligations and duties. in particular, the benefits likely to accrue to a child of having a meaningful involvement with a parent must be viewed within the context of the child’s overall best interests, which consist of a number of considerations and factors.
185 the act, picking up on section 60b, provides a specific list of matters, which the court must take into account in determining how a child’s best interests are to be served in the making of any parenting order. they are contained in section 60cc.
186 section 60cc creates two classes of considerations, which apply to the court’s determination of how a child’s interests will be best served in proceedings before it. they are designated as primary considerations of which there are two and additional considerations, of which there are some fourteen in number.
187 in general terms, given their close connection to the objects and principles contained in section 60b the primary considerations are to be given more weight in the court’s deliberations. however, given the idiosyncratic issues arising in any particular case, one or more of the additional considerations may come to the fore.
188 the two primary considerations, set out in section 60cc(2)(a) and (b), are as follows:  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
189 in the past, these considerations were not formally ranked in regards to one another. they are now. as a result of the insertion of section 60cc(2a) into the act, the court is now directed, in applying the primary considerations, to give greater weight to section 60cc(2)(b), which is the primary consideration relating to the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to neglect, abuse or family violence.
190 in the words of the relevant explanatory memorandum “where child safety is a concern, this new provision will provide the court with clear legislative guidance that protecting the child from harm is the priority consideration.” future protective issues for a child are the court’s priority.
191 accordingly, the legislature has directed the court, in respect of how a child’s best interests are to be secured, to give pre-eminence to protective concerns raised in respect of the child’s exposure to abuse, neglect and family violence. although the court cannot overlook the benefits likely to accrue to a child from meaningfully interacting with a parent, it must give greater weight to protecting children. necessarily, how this balance is to be achieved, to secure an outcome consistent, to the maximum extent, with the best interests of the child, must depend on the idiosyncratic circumstances of each case.
192 the central theme of mr barret’s case is that the benefits likely to accrue to the children of having a meaningful level of relationship with him are likely to be significant for a number of inter-related reasons. firstly and primarily, he is the children’s father and loves them deeply. as such, he has a central role in their lives, which must be considered fundamental to their best interests. secondly, up until the date of the parties’ separation, he interacted with the children on a perennial basis. he shared their home. he went on holiday with them. he hung out with them, as often as he could.
193 in this context, it is his position that the time he currently spends with y and z cannot be regarded as enabling the children to have a meaningful level of relationship with him and, on this basis, the outcome proposed by ms barret, is even more inadequate. essentially, it is his case that the children cannot have a meaningful level of relationship, with him (and indeed with the paternal aspects of their family) through day time periods, on one day of alternate weekends, an arrangement which he considers to be highly artificial in nature.
194 the aspects of a child’s life, in which a parent can be meaningfully involved, are, for obvious reasons, potentially multifarious. they include “fun” activities on holidays and weekends – essentially interacting with their parents in a relaxed setting – as well as the day to day reality of the child’s life, such as supervising homework and bedtimes, imposing day to day discipline, and collection and delivery to school and b sports training – essentially spending time with parents in a more mundane set of situations.
195 in this way, the child concerned is likely to have a more balanced and so richer relationship with each of his or her parents. it is these types of interactions, which add significance and value to parent/child relationships and so add meaning to them. in this context, mr barret contends that the current regime, in which he interacts with only with y and z, can only be considered one dimensional and limited. he wishes to extend it to an equal time regime which, over the passage of time, will add value, weight and significance to the children’s relationship with him, which presently is artificially truncated.
196 the question of beneficial relationships is not to be considered in a retrospective sense. rather, the court must look to future benefits, which will come to the child concerned, if his or her parental relationships are enhanced. i accept that to be meaningful, parental relationships require both sufficient temporal quantity and quality of shared time to sustain them.
197 a relationship does not necessarily become better, if a parent spends more time with a child but, for obvious reasons, a parent must spend sufficient time with the child concerned for the relationship between the two to become and remain “meaningful”. otherwise, there is a risk of a parental relationship becoming token in nature. in mazorski v albright,[28] brown j indicated that a meaningful parental relationship is one which is “important, significant and valuable to the child” concerned.
198 however, as the full court has also noted:
[h]aving a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.[29]
199 it is ms barret’s position that the issues raised by her, regarding family violence, should be given particular pre-eminence in the process through which the court arrives at the care arrangements which will best serve x, y and z’s interests. necessarily, in my view, the court must carefully balance the two primary considerations. in this context, the evidence of ms d is likely to be central.
200 family violence is defined by section 4ab(1) of the act. it means:
[v]iolent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family, or causes the family member to be fearful.
201 the legislature has provided a list of examples of behaviour which may constitute family violence in section 4ab(2) of the act. some of these examples are: an assault, a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, stalking, repeated derogatory taunts, the killing of an animal, preventing the maintenance of family ties, intentionally damaging or destroying property, and the withholding of financial support.
202 the above incidents are not, in themselves, definitional of family violence. rather they are examples of conduct which may constitute family violence. the definition to be applied is contained in sub-section (1). the essential elements of the definition are that the behaviour in question, to amount to family violence must coerce or control another family member. the behaviour need not be violent, in itself, or cause fear in the person to whom it is directed. it is a definition directed towards coercion.
203 the impugned conduct is centred on power in relationships and the use of such power to control another family member. thus restricting access to money, though not intrinsically violent, can amount to family violence if the person who is its object feels controlled by the person withholding such support.
204 accordingly, family violence means not only violence, which causes a family member to be fearful, such as a direct assault to the person, but also encompasses behaviour that unreasonably coerces or controls that person. as such, in the present matter, it will be necessary for the court to examine the nature of the parties’ relationship, with one another, particularly in its latter stages, to determine whether the various incidents of which ms barret complains fall within the rubric of family violence.
205 in assessing cases involving family violence, the court needs to be aware of the nature of family violence, in general terms. family violence, by definition, occurs most usually within the family and as such is not open to outside scrutiny. most usually, it occurs behind closed doors within the private confines of a family home.
206 its victims may feel a variety of emotions once they have been subject to it. they may feel shame or embarrassment and, as a consequence, feel disinclined to report it or even talk about it to others. for obvious reasons, its perpetrators are unlikely to disclose their behaviour to others or provide full details of the extent of their conduct. both the perpetrator of violence and its victim may be inclined to minimise the severity of what has occurred or excuse it in some way.
207 accordingly, it is very often difficult, if not impossible, for there to be independent verification that family violence has occurred for protracted periods, during a relationship, if relevant authorities have only been involved in one extreme event, which cannot be concealed. however, “the absence of corroborating evidence does not necessarily undermine a person’s evidence on that topic.[30]”
208 accordingly, the fact that a person behaves in one way in one context does not, of itself, negate an allegation of family violence or absolve the court of its responsibility to assess, in a comprehensive fashion, all relevant incidents of family violence arising in the case coming before it.
209 family violence is not homogenous in its qualities and can arise in a variety of contexts. as outlined above, it is centred on issues of power and control in intimate relationships and the implication of such behaviour for children and their carers. in this context, it is well recognised, including by the legislature through the provisions of the act, that family violence is prevalent in all works of australian society and represents a great threat to the wellbeing of children.
210 family violence can range in character from impulsive behaviour that arises as a result of a stressful situation, such as a relationship breakdown, and is instantly regretted, or it can be more systematic and deliberate, arising from a clear power imbalance between the parties concerned. obviously the latter behaviour is the more damaging so far as children are concerned.[31] not all incidents of family violence will be necessarily damaging for a child.
211 where family violence is endemic in a parental relationship it has the potential to be damaging for children in a variety of ways. most obviously they may be directly injured by an episode of violence or frightened by it. more subtly, children learn their behaviour from their parents. parents who use violence to resolve disputes or who inflict force on the other of a child's parents are not appropriate psychological role models for children.[32]
212 there is a real danger that children, who are exposed to family violence, will perceive that abuse is part of life for females (in particular) and become accepting of such behaviour. as a consequence, children may learn that violence is an appropriate way to resolve disputes and thus will follow in the footsteps of a violent parent, when they become parents themselves, thus entrenching a cycle of violence between familial generations.[33] this is equally damaging for boys as it is for girls.
213 boys may follow in the footsteps of violent fathers and become violent parents in turn. girls may mirror the behaviour of their mothers and return to dangerous and unsatisfactory relationships, when they are mature, exposing their own children to danger. in the shorter term, children who are exposed to aggression are likely to behave aggressively themselves. accordingly, children of violent parents are at real risk of forming disturbed interpersonal relationships, both as children and adults.
214 in t & n,[34] moore j, after reference to social science research, identified the highly detrimental consequences, to the wellbeing of children, of being exposed to family violence. her honour said as follows:
they are terrified and simultaneously come to accept it as an expected part of life, they may learn that violence is acceptable behaviour and an integral part of intimate relationships, or that violence and fear can be used to exert control over family members, they may suffer significant emotional trauma from fear, anxiety, confusion, anger, helplessness and disruption in their lives, they may have higher levels of aggression than children who do not have that exposure, and they may suffer from higher anxiety, more behaviour problems and lower self-esteem than children not exposed to violence. clinical profiles for children who witness domestic violence include post-traumatic play, diminished ability to regulate affect in the forms of hyper-arousal, numbness, emotional constriction, a low frustration threshold, nightmares and other sleep disturbances, aggressive behaviours, intense and multiple fears, regression in developmental achievements, and disturbances in peer relations.[35]
215 pursuant to section 4ab(3) of the act, a child is exposed to family violence if he or she “sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence”.
216 again, in section 4ab(4), the legislature has included examples of conduct which may amount to such exposure, which include: overhearing threats, seeing or hearing an assault, comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family, following an assault, cleaning up after property has been damaged, and being present when police attend an incident involving an assault.
217 again, these examples are not definitional of whether a child has or has not been exposed to family violence. what is pivotal is that the child concerned experiences its consequences. in the current matter, it is ms barret’s case that the children have long lived with the consequences of their father’s domineering and bullying attitude towards her, as well as having been directly involved in the sequellae of mr barret’s assault of her, in 2019, when the police came to their home and they witnessed their father’s arrest and what preceded it.
218 in garrod & davenort,[36] bennett j indicated as follows:
there are severe consequences for children who are placed into the care or under the supervision of parents who have been violent. the consequences are no less serious when the violence is not physical.[37]
219 as the various authorities outlined above demonstrate, the court is required to consider any psychological risks, arising for a child, of being exposed to a violent caregiver. these can include the detrimental consequences of having a much loved parent denigrated or undermined or exposure to a person whose mode of interaction with the world at large has the potential to be corrosive for an immature child. such consequences may be ‘far reaching’.[38]
220 it is not the role of this court to punish a party or parties for past failings arising from their relationship. rather its task is prospective in nature, involving an assessment of the risk arising for any particular child of the future occurrence of some particular event, including the possibility of exposure to family violence or some other form of abuse. one of the central tasks, for the court, in applying the jurisdiction conferred upon it, by the act is assessing risk for children.
221 necessarily, this must be an imperfect task. no individual’s life can be rendered completely risk free. in addition, well-meaning attempts to negate risk may, of themselves, have harmful consequences. the court must be aware of the perils of depriving children of worthwhile relationships on the basis of inchoate fears of harm. as such, risk must be objectively rather than subjectively evaluated. in this court, as with life, it is a question of balancing and assessing the degree of risk arising in any particular situation, in an objective and methodical basis.
222 in deiter & deiter,[39] the full court has directed that, in assessing the degree of risk incumbent in any particular parenting scenario, the court must look to the degree of probability that a harmful event will occur in future and what will be its severity, to any individual, particularly any child, who will be potentially affected by it.[40]
223 the full court in slater & light expressed the task of assessing risk in the following terms:
the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.[41]
224 given the contents of section 60cc(2)(b) the assessment of risk entails the assessment of the possibility that a child will suffer some form of psychological harm in the context of potential exposure to family violence. again, in my view, the evidence of ms d is likely to be influential in this regard.
225 as indicated above, the additional considerations are set out in section 60cc(3), which include, pursuant to section 60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance which the court considers relevant. this is to ensure that the infinite variety of circumstances, arising in the life of each individual child who will be affected by the court’s order, may be adequately addressed.
226 although the court is directed to consider many factors, in discharging its duties under part vii of the act, the best interests of the children concerned remain paramount.[42] the court’s duty is to deliver individual justice, for the child affected, in every case.[43] in this sense, the court’s inquiry is a “positive one tailored to the best interests of the particular children and not children in general”.[44] as such the various factors, in section 60cc, are inclusive but not exclusive of one another.[45]
227 in the current matter, the following additional considerations set out in sub-paragraphs (a), (b),(d),(f),(g),(i) &(m) are likely to be central. these sub-paragraphs deal with the following issues: the views of the children. these issues are discussed in the family report. the children’s view are not congruent. it is the father’s position that the mother has malignly influenced the children against him. the nature of the children’s relationship with each of their parents and other family members. x is currently estranged from his father. z is more positive about him. y is somewhere in between. the children have each previously had a positive relationship with their paternal grandmother and aunt. each party proposes a change in current care arrangements. the mother seeks a reduction in time, whilst the father seeks an incremental increase in his time with y and z. the capacity of the parties to provide for the emotional needs of the children concerned is a central issue. the father points to z’s report to ms d that the mother refers to him as an arsehole as evidence of the mother’s compromised attitude to the children having some form of relationship with him in tandem with her negative comments about ms ff. on the other hand, it is the mother’s position that it the father who has had a consistently denigratory view of her, which he has expressed to the children. each party asserts that the other is a flawed parent, who has enmeshed the children in the endemic conflict between them. each asserts that the other has a compromised understanding of what is entailed in being a responsible parent. in garrod & davenort,[46] bennett j utilised sub-paragraph (m) to take into account the fact that a person, against whom allegations of family violence had been made, consistently denied them throughout proceedings making concession only when placed under the compulsion of the witness box causing delay and emotional dislocation to the other parent concerned. she characterised such conduct as being, in itself, an incident of coercive control.[47]
228 the fundamental task for the court is to determine, bearing in mind all the considerations contained in section 60cc and bearing in mind the goals and principles contained in section 60b, what is the best outcome for any child concerned, both now and in the future.
229 because of the importance the legislature places on both parents being closely involved in their child’s life, the starting point for any parenting order is to consider whether the parents concerned should have equal shared parental responsibility for their child.[48]
230 the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the allocation of time which a child spends with each of his or her parents.
231 the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted if it is found, on reasonable grounds, that one of the child’s parents has abused the child concerned or exposed him or her to family violence.[49]
232 the presumption is also rebutted if evidence is provided which satisfies the court that it would not be in the child’s interests for his or her parents to have such equal shared parental responsibility for the child concerned.[50]
233 the family law legislation emphasises the importance of parents being actively involved in their children’s lives – in their schooling, sporting activities and recreation, and their daily routine, as well as special occasions, – so long as this involvement is commensurate with protecting the children concerned from harm.
234 section 61da deals with the allocation of parental responsibility in respect of a child, particularly the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility. it does not deal directly with more practical aspects of a child’s life, particularly the amount and type of time a child spends with his or her parents or where a child is to live. such matters are dealt with by section 65daa.
235 by application of section 65daa(1), if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility applies in respect of a child, the court is required to consider firstly whether the child concerned should spend equal periods of time with both his or her parents, provided such an outcome is both likely to be in the child’s best interests and reasonably practicable.
236 if the court rejects equal time, it is then required to consider the child spending “substantial and significant” periods of time with each of his or her parents. again, this outcome is subject to consideration of the child’s best interests and reasonable practicality.
237 the expression “substantial and significant time” is defined in the act.[51] it means time that allows a child to spend time with a parent on both weekends and holidays, and days during the working or school week.
238 more significantly, it is time which enables a parent to be involved in a child’s daily routine as well as occasions and events, which are of particular significance to the child concerned. again, the aim of the legislation is to enhance the parent/child relationship concerned, through mechanisms which enable the child to spend time with a parent in a variety of settings.
239 issues of practicality are dealt with by section 65daa(5). the court is required to consider how far apart are the parties’ homes, the parties’ current and future capacity to implement shared care type arrangements, the parties’ ability to communicate with one another and solve parenting problems consensually, and most importantly, the likely impact of such an arrangement on the child concerned.
240 the high court has considered the interplay between the question of whether it is in a child’s best interests to spend equal time with each parent (and substantial and significant time) and the question of whether such outcomes are reasonably practicable, which arises from section 65daa(1) and (2) of the act. it has determined that both questions must be answered in the affirmative before an equal time order may be made (and with equal effect a substantial and significant time order).[52]
241 the high court has held that it is a statutory pre-condition of the making of an equal time order that it is reasonably practicable for such an order to be made. this is because section 65daa(1) and (2) are expressed in “imperative terms” and oblige the court to consider both questions. the affirmative answer to both being an essential jurisdictional fact before an equal time or substantial and significant time order is made.[53]
242 accordingly courts such as this one are directed to consider the reality of the situation which confronts parents and children and not merely whether it is desirable, in the sense of facilitative of the child’s best interests alone, that an order be made for equal time to be spent by the child with each parent. essentially, a consideration of what is feasible for a child is of equal importance to what is desirable for that child.[54] as a consequence, a proper consideration of what is feasible requires the court to consider the circumstances of each of the parties concerned.
243 the legislative pathway to determine a child’s best interests, which was delineated by the full court in goode & goode,[55] can be summarised as follows: the court is to consider the section 60cc matters relevant, then decide whether the presumption in section 61da should be applied or, if it is rebutted because: there are reasonable grounds to believe abuse or family violence has occurred, or in an interim matter only, it is not considered “appropriate” for it to be applied, if the presumption is rebutted or found not to apply, then make the orders considered to be in the best interests of the child, again as a result of applying the relevant section 60cc matters, if the presumption does apply, decide whether it should be rebutted because it would not be in the child's best interests, if the presumption applies, consider first making an order that the children spend equal time with each parent, then second, an order that the child spend substantial and significant time with each parent unless it is contrary to the children's best interests as a result of the consideration of any relevant section 60cc matter, or is impracticable in the terms specified by section 65daa(5), if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time are considered to be in the best interests of the child, then make the orders which are considered to be in the best interests of the child when considering applicable matters in section 60cc. even in this latter situation, it is open to the court to make an order for equal time or substantial and significant time, if the court considers it to be in the best interests of the child concerned.[56]
244 in the current matter, the parties fundamentally disagree about the allocation of parental responsibility between them. the mother seeks to be conferred with sole parental responsibility, subject to a proviso that she advise the father of any significant issue relating to the children’s health or education.[57] the father seeks the application of the presumption arising under section 61da and for y and z to spend equal time with him.[58]
245 how responsibility for the parenting of a child is formally conferred upon a person, in proceedings conducted under the act, is through the making of a parenting order. parental responsibility, ‘in relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children’.[59]
246 the court has authority conferred upon it, through the provisions of part vii of the act, to alter the conferral of parental responsibility on any parent or parents, which arises by reason of their status as parents of any child concerned. this is done through the mechanism of a parenting order.
247 a parenting order is an order which deals with such issues as the persons with whom a child should live, spend time and communicate with, and the persons who should have responsibility for making decisions, both significant and otherwise, about a child and the degree of consultation necessary to implement such decisions.[60]
248 pursuant to section 65c of the act, a child’s parents, the child, a child’s grandparents, or any other person concerned with the child’s care, welfare or development, may apply for a parenting order. accordingly, the applicants have legislative authority to seek the orders, which they do.
249 in addition, as a consequence of the provisions of section 65d, the court is empowered to make whatever parenting order it considers “proper”. pursuant to section 64b parental responsibility can be allocated to two or more persons. clearly this provision, when considered in the light of the objects and principles underlying part vii, contained in 60b, is supportive of the concept of parents sharing parental responsibility and meeting their responsibilities concerning their children’s care, welfare and development.
250 an order which provides for shared parental responsibility requires that the parties to it consult with one another and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about major long-term issues to do with the child or children concerned.[61]
251 major long-term issues is defined in section 4 of the act and includes issues to do with a child’s education, religious and cultural upbringing, the child’s health, the child’s name, and changes to the child’s living arrangements that would make it significantly more difficult for the child concerned to spend time with a parent.
252 pursuant to section 65dae, parents (or other relevant persons) do not have to consult on matters, which are not concerned with long term issues, when the child is spending time with one or the other of them.
253 this is to ensure that the myriad of decisions, which have no long term significance concerning a child and which need to be made on a day to day basis, by both of the child’s parents, can be made.
254 as is evident in the current matter, although each of the parties is quite clearly and fervently interested in all issues to do with the long term parenting of x, y and z, their capacity to communicate effectively is extremely limited. as such, each of them can only be described as interested in the care, welfare and development of their children.
255 clearly, the viability of the parties’ on-going parenting relationship must be a relevant consideration as to how parental responsibility is conferred between them. in bartel & schmucker (no 3), cronin j said as follows regarding the nature of parental responsibility:
whilst parental responsibility is vaguely defined, some insight into what is needed from a parent can be seen in s 65dac(3) which provides that if both parents have that responsibility, they are taken to be required to consult about parenting issues and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision. it will again be remembered that the focus of the objects and principles in this act is on joint parenting.[62]
256 cronin j further said of the concept of parental responsibility that it:
[i]s a broad concept as described in s 61b and that task covers many things. parents are expected jointly to endeavour to promote their children’s development by ensuring they have the greatest potential in adulthood whilst at the same time enjoying the security of childhood they deserve.[63]
257 the mother seeks a wide range of injunctive orders against the father. the law relating to such injunctions is contained in section 68b of the act. the court is authorised to make any injunction it considers appropriate for the welfare of any child concerned in proceedings before it. it may make an injunction for the personal protection of a child or a child’s carer.
findings regarding family violence
258 the marriage between the parties was at least a period of ten years. clearly, there must have been happy times, one of which was when the family travelled to country hh in connection with b sports tournament, in which x took part. in addition, i accept there were pressures arising in the family as a consequence of mr barret having to work away from home, on a regular basis, at town v, due to his fly in fly out employment. arrangements, such as these, inevitably places stresses on the happiest of marriages.
259 in these circumstances, i accept that there are inherent risks arising from the extrapolation of isolated incidents which lead to an assumption that these alone characterised the entirety of the parties’ relationship. i also appreciate the inherent artificiality of the court attempting to reconstruct what were the salient features of the parties’ relationship through the mechanism of cross-examination, in a court room, which is far removed from the incidents themselves. individuals are more inclined to remember negative episodes, rather than positive ones, when they are called upon to provide a picture of their relationship to the court, particularly when much is at stake in the proceedings concerned.
260 however, as previously indicated, i had the opportunity to observe the parties at close quarters over a lengthy period of time. in addition, i had access to some of their text messages and their personal unvarnished reflections on the relationship. in this context, i accept that both wished to salvage their relationship, and it was for this reason they sought relationship counselling. as a consequence of this exposure, whilst i accept that there was love in the parties’ relationship, i significantly find that there was also a significant controlling and coercive aspect to it, which was characterised by the following types of behaviour exhibited by mr barret to ms barret: throwing items and food, breaking items, hiding her belongings, locking her out of her home, verbally abusing and belittling her, spitting on her or near her, pulling her hair, choking her, holding her down and pushing her.
261 ms barret’s mother’s maiden name is ms r. as previously indicated, ms barret is not able to read with any great facility. it is her evidence that from the earliest stages of the parties’ relationship mr barret referred to her as dumb, stupid and retarded. x and y share their mother’s learning issues. i am satisfied that the father has also indicated to them, on a relatively frequent basis that they are “fucking dumb” as they have inherited the “mr r gene”.[64] i do not accept that this can be characterised as harmless badinage. x, in particular, has been distressed by this conduct.
262 the effect of the mother’s evidence is that whenever the parties argued, which was frequent, the father would mock her poor spelling and difficulties with enunciation. i also accept that the children were regularly exposed to this type of conduct. in my assessment, it falls within the descriptor of family violence as defined by the act. it can only be described as denigration. it is intended to humiliate and belittle her.
263 this behaviour, in my view, is an inappropriate form of role modelling for pre-adolescent boys. although, it is not possible to make a definitive connection between the children’s exposure to this type of behaviour, it is concerning that y was sent home for bullying a female student at his school, at time which coincides with the parties’ final separation.
264 i appreciate that it is unwise for me to place undue weight on the text messages, which have been tendered into evidence, given the obvious spontaneity and brevity of such messages and the fact that is difficult to gauge the emotional quotient of such texts from the words used alone. in addition, such messages are private and by their nature are designed to be terse and somewhat impersonal, conveying the bare bones of any necessary communication.
265 due to the wonders of technology it is possible for every text message, passing between the parties, to be downloaded and so subject to scrutiny. there are apparently some 1748 pages of these text messages. in these circumstances, those advising the mother have selected only those messages which assist her case. by necessary implication, there must be literally hundreds of other commonplace messages, which passed between the parties, dealing with unexceptional domestic matters and perhaps even containing some endearments – i know not, as these have not been provided.
266 what i have been given indicates that on at least one occasion, the mother requested to the father that she be able to have her hair done, which he queried.[65] it is the mother’s evidence that she habitually had to obtain the father’s permission to have her hair done and she would be subject to criticism on the basis that she was spending money on herself. i accept her evidence in this regard.
267 in another round of text messages dated 25 october 2017, the father rails against the mother for perceived inadequacies in her housekeeping, which include the message “dont (sic) come home cause i (sic) will (sic) hit u (sic)”.[66] again i concede that it may be the case that a text message is intrinsically less threatening than actual spoken words. however, there is nothing light hearted about this message and the use of capitals is alarming.
268 the parties seem to have been reliant on text messages as the medium in which to conduct many of their arguments. in some ways i acknowledge that this is a more benign way of arguing, occurring as it does at some remove and in circumstances where only words are involved and the possibility of physical escalation is avoided.
269 i also appreciate that what is said in text messages is invariably both self-serving and both pre-emptory and ill-considered in nature. however, whatever hurtful things are said, due to the technology involved, becomes forever captured in digital form, and so capable of being revisited. in contrast, what is said in private can disappear into the ether and is difficult to reconstruct. clearly, i have to be careful about placing undue weight on throw away comments, punched into a mobile phone, without a great deal of thought, and certainly with no conception that they would be subsequently subject to outside scrutiny.
270 in text messages in 2018, mr barret complains, as he has subsequently done to dr j, of being unappreciated. he indicates that the parties’ biggest problem is ms barret and her propensity to find fault with him. ms barret asks to be left alone and to be respected. the text message chain ends with mr barret metaphorically inviting ms barret to drive into a tree but to do it properly as he does not want to look after a vegetable and he will in any event turn off ms barret’s life support.[67]
271 again, in my view, there is nothing jocular about the messages. it is mr barret who needles ms barret, who is more measured in her tone. neither correspondent is perfect but it is the father who is more consistently aggressive and aggrieved. his tone towards her is one of contempt and distain.
272 the mother has further deposed that, if the father was angry with her, for any reason, he would not allow her to have dinner. he would also not allow her to drive to work but directed that she take the train.[68] in my view, these are the actions of a controlling and bullying person. they can be either justified or explained as being a reaction to an emotionally reactive situation. rather, in my view, they are demonstrative of one spouse controlling the actions of another.
273 the mother’s evidence is that the father began to be physically violent towards her in 2014 and the level of his violence escalated until the time of the parties’ separation. she complains of having her hair pulled, being yelled at and being kneed. she also alleges that the father destroyed the children’s stuffed toys and locked her out of the house or in a room. i accept this evidence, which is corroborated, to some degree, by the father’s reflective letter, in which mr barret confirmed that x was “just copying his role model” in his behaviour.[69]
274 in her affidavit evidence, the mother summarises the father’s behaviour in the following terms:
i was unable to predict when the father would get angry and have one of his outburst. one minute he would be acting completely normal and the next minute he would become angry and violent. i lived in constant fear that me or the children would do or say something that one would trigger one of the father’s angry outbursts. when i tried to diffuse (sic) the situation by staying silent or walking away, the father would accuse me of not communicating with him and would start throwing/breaking objects or lock me out of the house.[70]
275 the picture the mother paints is of a family constantly walking on egg shells fearful of being subject to an unpredictable and violent outburst. i accept that this is an accurate characterisation of the situation in the family home. ms barret and indeed the children were regularly in a state of heightened awareness, and were fearful of what might happen next. given my acceptance of this evidence, i further find that this had the obvious potential to be psychologically damaging for the children.
276 ms barret has deposed as to some of the items of property destroyed by mr barret. they include a mop, the cutting of the cord of a vacuum cleaner, a breadboard, items of sentimental value to her, and the children’s toys. in cross-examination, the father admitted breaking the breadboard by punching it. the incident took place in late 2017. the mother and y were present.
277 when the mother went to pick up the pieces of the broken board from the floor, the father spat on the floor next to her. in my view, this was an act of humiliation. i accept y was frightened by what occurred. the mother was able to produce a photograph of the pieces of the breadboard, along with a stuffed love bear, which the father had given her and which he had ripped apart and some of her photographs, which he had ripped up.[71]
278 i would be naïve if i considered that any spousal relationships could be completely free of domestic friction. spousal partners frequently disagree about how domestic tasks are to be performed and the division of such tasks between them. i must be careful not to apply atypically utopian standards in respect of how partners respond to the inevitable frictions arising from shared domesticity.
279 obviously, each couple approaches these types of issues idiosyncratically and how they do so is private and should not ordinarily be subject to outside strictures. however, in my view, what frequently happened in the parties’ household transgressed any conception of what was normal or acceptable in the range of disputation arising between domestic partners, regarding housework and ancillary issues, in their home.
280 the parties argued about many things in their relationship. i have been provided with evidence as to how these arguments escalated and culminated in acts of extreme aggression. one such incident has been referred to by the parties as “the pizza incident”. again, it can be placed in context by text messages passing between the parties, which date it to 2018.[72] mr barret was at home, whilst ms barret was at her work.
281 mr barret asked ms barret to pick up a pizza on her way home, which he had ordered. ms barret, somewhat tartly, responded by asking if that signified mr barret had been on the playstation all day. in any event, she agreed to collect the pizza. however, mr barret clearly felt provoked by the playstation comment and the tone of his texts escalated. he referred to ms barret as a fucking mole. the text conversation between them is not edifying to read. neither party can be said to have behaved in an exemplary fashion.
282 mr barret was angry when ms barret arrived with the pizza. he acknowledges that when it was served he flicked it off the table onto the floor. he also shook bottles of soft drink so that they sprayed over the walls of the kitchen. x and y were present during the incident, which in my view was totally disproportionate to any provocation to which mr barret may have perceived himself to have been subject to by ms barret.
283 whilst i appreciate this incident occurred whilst each of the parties was clearly deeply unhappy and their marriage was almost certainly irreparably damaged and, as a consequence, each felt unheard and unacknowledged by the other, it is not in my view conduct which can be justified. in addition, it is clear that the children were each exposed to this conduct and were well aware of it. it was an issue, which was examined by ms d in each of her reports and in dr c’s opinion, each child has memories of it.
284 the most significant episode of family violence and the one which reverberates most strongly for the children is that which precipitated their parents’ separation in 2018. again, an episode of unexceptional domesticity, particularly in a household containing children, was the precipitating factor for the conflict arising.
285 in 2018, x suffered a bout of diarrhoea. ms barret requested that mr barret change his sheets. he thought this was unnecessary. when she got home from work, ms barret stripped the bed and changed the sheets. the father took umbrage at what he took to be an unspoken criticism of him and indicated his view that it was impossible for him to meet the mother’s expectations of him. the conflict simmered between the parties overnight and resumed in text messages the next day.[73]
286 mr barret complained that he was being treated like shit because he could not meet ms barret’s expectations of him. ms barret responded, when she did, in measured tones. mr barret escalates the dispute. he indicates that he is close to losing it again. the parties exchange some expletives but ms barret only in response to the father’s comments. he refers to her as retarded. he demands the return of his wedding ring and refers to ms barret as the biggest mistake of his life and a stupid unreasonable hore (sic). in my assessment, it is mr barret who does the majority of the needling of the other rather than vice versa. ms barret blandly replies to the insult that she is a whore with the comment fine mr barret.
287 thereafter, whilst the two were still living in their former home and in the presence of the children, mr barret began to hide various items of ms barret’s property, including her hair care things, her bra, personal photographs and some ceramic ornaments of emotional significance to her. the mother deposes that she considered leaving the home but did not know where she could go.
288 thereafter the tone of the text messages is, in my view, chilling. mr barret indicates that he will start breaking shit, including ms barret’s fluffy toys. he demands his ring back. ms barret asks him to stop playing games. to which mr barret replies u want to fuck with me. things have already gone missing. i’m not playing. the next day, mr barret texted ms barret with the question, i wonder what has gone missing today. on the one hand, this is puerile but bullying conduct but, in the light of what happened later, i find it sinister in its tone.
289 in 2018, the father smashed a photograph of him and the mother. the mother cleaned up the broken glass. later that night, the father pushed all of the items off her bedside table and threw her clothes into the hallway. in retaliation, ms barret threw a ceramic candle holder against the wall, which led to mr barret grabbing her arm and twisting her wrist, whilst spitting in her face. the mother spent that night, with x, in his bed. clearly, he must have been aware of his mother’s distress and the cause of it.
290 the next day, ms barret was unable to find her car keys. it was the day of a sports event. mr barret went out to watch the game at a friend’s home. ms barret hid mr barret’s phone and ipad and indicated that she would return them to him if she got her car keys back. mr barret would not relent and demanded his items. inevitably, this confrontation led to physical conflict between the two, which i am satisfied was initiated by mr barret.
291 mr barret forced ms barret out of the house, ripping her clothing. he pushed her against a wall and began to choke her. the children saw this behaviour. they were present when the police arrived. ms barret was bruised and shocked. z told a police officer that his father had choked his mum. mr barret was arrested. in my view, it must have been a very frightening event for the children.
292 mr barret was interviewed by police.[74] he made some admissions but, in my view, attempted to shift blame to ms barret for being unreasonable in her behaviour towards him. he indicated his view that ms barret was adept at playing the victim. the police officer concerned indicated to mr barret his perception that ms barret had been frightened, stressed, physically shaken and very, very scared when police had arrived at the home. mr barret also indicated an opinion that his neighbours were probably used to a lot of screaming coming from his home.
293 the interviewing officer also indicated, in the interview, that he had spoken to one of the kids who pretty much said you pushed her up (ms barret) against the wall and put your hands around her throat.” mr barret admitted spitting a chewy at ms barret because he was that wild. he also acknowledged that he has spat at her once before about five years previously. he also acknowledged that he had not been treating ms barret right.
294 the tenor of mr barret’s interview with police and the contents of his trial affidavit, along with his comments to dr j is that he feels that has been hard done by as a consequence of ms barret’s unreasonable and provocative behaviour towards him. in addition, mr barret indicated to ms d, in the first family report that he could not afford to take the police charges against him to trial and had impliedly pleaded guilty to the charge against him as a matter of expediency.
295 i do not accept that mr barret is objectively entitled to hold these perceptions. in my view, the evidence indicates that it was his conduct which escalated conflict between the parties and it was he who was more prone to needle and goad ms barret than vice versa. it was she who was bruised and spat upon not mr barret.
296 more significantly, i find that mr barret subjected ms barret to an unacceptable level of coercion and control throughout their marriage. in short, if there was a domestic tyrant in the home it was mr barret rather than ms barret. he bullied and tyrannised her with insults and derogatory comments and other conduct, which had the potential to escalate explosively.
297 perhaps the parties were temperamentally unsuited for each other. no doubt each has made some contribution towards their combined level of unhappiness. however, that cannot excuse mr barret’s conduct, in my view, or exculpate him for responsibility for exposing the children to his behaviour. i am confident in making the finding that mr barret has exposed the children to family violence in the sense envisaged by the relevant provisions of the act.[75]
ms d
298 ms d has a significant advantage, over me, in these proceedings, in the sense that she was able to interview each of the children concerned and see them interact with each of their parents. accordingly, her opinion in the case was informed not only by her professional expertise but also by her direct observation of the family involved in the preparation of two family reports spanning a period of around eighteen months.
299 ms d is a clinical psychologist, who has been qualified since 2010. she has provided family reports to this court since 2015. in my assessment, ms d approached he task in compiling the two reports conscientiously and methodically. she was at pains to be objective and fair. in this context, it is important to note that ms d is not without her criticisms of ms barret, particularly in the manner in which she has exposed her negative views of the father and his family to the children from time to time.
300 in her first interview with ms d, ms barret acknowledged that z had heard comments made by her to ms p in which she had told ms p to shut her mouth whilst referring to her as a little bitch. ms barret further indicated her acceptance that this was unacceptable behaviour, on her part and she had apologised to z for it.
301 ms barret also reported her concern to ms d, in the first report process, that mr barret continued to follow her and the children as a means of intimidation, turning up at the children’s recreational centre and at the beach. mr barret, in his first interview with ms d, indicated his view that ms barret was intent on limiting his time with the children for financial gain.
302 mr barret further alleged that it was ms barret who had subjected him to emotional abuse cutting him off in an emotional sense. he blamed ms barret for any exposure of the children to the conflict between the parties. in contrast to his statement, at the end of his cross-examination that ms barret was a good mum, he was critical of her parenting of the children to ms d, particularly in regards to her culinary skills.
303 accordingly, ms d was presented with diametrically opposing views, by the parties, in respect of the relationship between them, as was the court. in this context, although their accounts must be approached with some degree of caution, what the children have to provide about the nature of their parents’ relationship, with one another, is likely to be significant and accurate.
304 ms d described x as a polite, talkative and engaging child, who interacted easily with her. he described his mother as really nice and someone who had never called the children names or physically hurt them. this was in contrast to x’s experience of his father, who was described as being good, but scary when he became angry. in this context, ms d attempted to tease out, from x, the actual incidents when mr barret had got angry and scared him. ms d reported as follows:
x quietly recalled an incident in which his parents were fighting and ‘dad started yelling, swearing and throwing stuff at mum’. x claimed that mr barret ‘started to hit mum and scared’ both x and ms barret.[76]
305 x indicated further that this type of altercation had occurred more than once. he recalled his mother’s possessions being hidden. he recalled the incident when police had come to his home and his mother’s distress in regard to it. x also recalled the incident when he had been grabbed and pushed by his father causing red marks appearing on his neck. given the detail provided by x, its flavour of spontaneity and its connection to specific memories (which i note are also consistent with ms barret’s evidence) ms d adjudged x’s account of his father provided to her to be reliable. i agree with this assessment.
306 interestingly, notwithstanding his negative experiences of his father, x was open to spending time with his father at the time of the first family report. ms d wrote as follows:
in discussing where he would like to live, x reported that he preferred to spend "a little bit more" time with ms barret as he did not have "full trust" in mr barret "yet to live with him". x explained that mr barret had done some "mean stuff' to him and consequently he wished to limit his time with him. consequently, x asked to spend "one night" with mr barret, a slight increase in the current arrangements. in saying this however, x was quick to note that should mr barret "swear" at him again, he would "like to go home" to ms barret.[77]
307
in many ways, this is a sadly prophetic statement. regrettably, it would seem to be the case that mr barret did not take on board the child’s comments and did become angry with x causing the child to withdraw from his father in 2019. it is the father’s case that the mother has either encouraged the child to be defiant and rude towards him or has given him her tacit approval. given what the child report to ms d, i regard this as improbable.
308 y also engaged easily with ms d, who ascribed positive attributes to his mother. mr barret was described as funny...rough sometimes. as with x, y felt scared when his father was angry. y provided an account of the ‘pizza incident’ consistent with that of ms barret and described it as not being great at the time. he recalled being smacked with a wooden spoon. significantly, y provided his own view of the occasion on which the police had come to his home, which he referenced to his father choking his mother. in general terms, y saw his mother as a source of happiness and his father as a source of sadness.[78]
309 in term of y’s preferences, regarding future living arrangements, ms d reported as follows:
when asked about his care situation, y requested to live with ms barret. y remained concerned that if the children did "something not that wrong", mr barret would "hit" them, "send" the children to their room or "hit us even more". as such, y asked to spend time with mr barret for "one night every fortnight". y reiterated that he did not "feel safe after" what had occurred between his parents and he remained "scared" about the potential for this to recur in the future.[79]
310 z, who was seven years of age at the date of first interview, spoke positively about each of his parents. he was however aware that his dad had choked his mum as he had witnessed it. the incident had made him feel sad. he requested to spend more time with his father, as he missed him.
311 significantly, at the time of the first report, ms d did not have any concerns about the level of the children’s interactions with either of their parents. ms barret was able to manage the children’s dysregulation. y hugged his father. x was more diffident with him. conversation between father and children was comfortable. they played snap together.
312 the evaluation section of ms d ’s report can be summarised as follows: the children had been exposed to the father’s aggressive behaviour towards their mother, mr barret’s view was that this behaviour was initiated by ms barret and was not consistent with the children’s view of it, the children had provided significant detail in respect of verbal abuse, breaking of items and physical assault of their mother. it was a significant concern that z had witnessed his mother being choked. these concerns could not be dismissed, it was particularly concerning that each of the children had raised questions with ms d about their safety in the father’s care, x and y had each disclosed credible instances of being subject to inappropriate physical discipline by mr barret, x continued to feel aggrieved at his perception of his father’s treatment of him, the children wanted to spend time with their father but in a safe and supported environment, ms barret parented the children in a safe and predictable manner. the children were wholly positive about her, the children’s (particularly x and y) socialisation and aggressive behaviours were concerning and required ongoing therapy.[80]
313 at the end of the first report, it appears to be the case that ms d considered that the children’s relationship with their father, although subject to significant pressures was capable of being salvaged. significantly, it is abundantly clear that ms d was of the opinion that the damage which had been done to the children’s relationship with him was solely attributable to mr barret’s own behaviour, which the children regarded as scary and unpredictable. in these circumstances, she could not support mr barret’s time with the children being significantly advanced until mr barret himself had demonstrated evidence of behavioural change and insight.
314 in this context, ms d recommended that the children engage in some form of ongoing therapeutic intervention, possibly with dr c. of equal importance, mr barret himself needed:
[t]o acknowledge his behaviours towards the children and ms barret, but also meaningfully engage in some form of intervention which could help him to address his aggressive responses and develop more appropriate parenting strategies. it was further noted that mr barret would benefit from engaging in therapy with x, y and z to help repair their relationship with him and to help develop the children's trust in him as a parent.[81]
315 in lay terms, ms d’s report represented a beacon of hope for mr barret. in order to repair his relationship with the children, mr barret needed to admit his past behaviour and actively try and change it. i am concerned that, in the manner in which mr barret initially elected to pursue this proceedings and in his tokenistic engagement with dr j he has done neither of these things.
316 at the end of the first report, ms d recommended as follows: ms barret to have sole parental responsibility and care for x, y and z, x, y and z to remain in ms barret's primary care, mr barret to spend time with the children each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school friday until 5pm saturday. should the children request to leave earlier then the intended finish time, they should be allowed to contact ms barret and leave earlier, handovers which are not conducted at school remain in a public location, the children to have telephone contact with their parents as needed, mr barret to engage in therapeutic intervention to address his aggressive behaviours and to help him develop more appropriate parenting strategies which do not rely upon physical discipline or verbal denigration, x, y and z to engage in therapeutic intervention (potentially with dr c) to help resolve their past experiences. ms barret and mr barret to be involved in this therapy as needed, following mr barret's successful engagement in individual therapeutic intervention and in relationship work with the children, then consideration be given to potentially increasing his time with the children to include an extra night of time.[82]
317 due to time constraints, and as this court is busy first instance court which is ostensibly directed towards the conduct of less complex family law matters, the court not able to conclude the hearing in the time allocated. this raised the possibility of ms d being further engaged to update her report.
318 this seemed to me to be a sensible option for two major reasons. firstly, to ascertain, from ms d’s perspective, the children’s continued engagement with dr c had been useful. secondly, to see if the repair process initially envisaged by her remained a viable option. obviously this depended on both the attitude of mr barret to it and the children’s perception of their father and whether it had changed.
319 one of the saddest aspects of this case is that it is my perception that there has been no positive progress in the case between ms d’s first report and her second one. the conflict between the parties has not reduced at all. in addition, it has remained mr barret’s position, for the majority of the case, that he is the victim of the mother’s behaviour. sadly, it is the conclusion of ms d, that there has been none of the required repair work accomplished in this case. i agree with this conclusion.
320 at the time of her second report, ms d reported a continuing level of tension and disputation between the parties. these centred on issues relating to mr barret being present at sporting occasions relating to the children and her perception that he would not leave [ms barret] alone, and the alleged control, by mr barret, of x’s playstation account and the children’s xbox.
321 ms d was aware that the position vis-à-vis mr barret spending time with x had markedly deteriorated since her first report. in this context, ms d was concerned that mr barret did not seem to have assimilated the things the children had told her earlier and which had been extensively detailed in her first report, indicating to ms d’s apparent incredulity that he could not remember what had been said. as a consequence, ms d was concerned that mr barret had a limited capacity to reflect upon the children’s perception of him.
322 during the interview, x expressed to ms d his continued annoyance with his father’s conduct towards him, which centred on playstation and his perception that he continued to be rude about his mother and disparage her to other members of his family. he continued to differentiate between his parents on the basis of how angry they became with the children. of concern to me, x indicated to ms d that he had decided that he no longer wished to be near to his father as a consequence of his engagement with dr c.
323 x rejected the proposition that he had been influenced by his mother in his decision to not see his father. rather, from x’s perspective, this was a reflection of what had happened on their last bike excursion together, during which mr barret had yelled at him and pulled him off his bicycle causing him (x) to be scared. x indicated that he no longer felt welcome at his father’s home. ms d summarised x’s views in the following terms:
x was clear that he wanted to reside in ms barret's primary care. x did not wish to spend any time with mr barret and he noted that he wished to inform the court that he did not want "anything to do with him". x further requested that mr barret refrain from attending his b sports games or having "any say" in his life.[83]
324 it was ms d’s perception that y’s perception of his father remained unchanged from the time of her first assessment of the family. his attitude towards mr barret remained negative. he was positive in his description of ms ff and of her influence on mr barret but indicated that he felt kinda nervous around his father even when she was present. significantly, y reported that there was now barely any swearing and arguments going on in his life but his perception was that his father still had anger inside of him. in summary, ms d indicated as follows of her perception of y’s views:
y was clear that he wanted to remain in the primary care of ms barret and spend time with mr barret ‘one day and a sleep over one night...every second weekend’. y reported that he was ‘trying to look out for z as well’, as he was aware that z wanted to keep the times the same whereas, he was willing to increase time.[84]
325 to ms d, z reported his perception that his mother was stressed. why this was so was not elucidated. z also indicated that he did not like his father attending his b sports games, as he would stare at mum and make him feel distracted. as previously indicated, z reported his perception that his mother remained angry with his father and had described ms ff as ugly, which ms d understandably indicated had the potential to reinforce any negative opinions z had of his paternal family.
326 in the observation session with their mother all three children played happily together with one another and their mother, who set appropriate boundaries for their boisterous behaviour. x adamantly refused to engage with his father. y and z were described as being wary of their father but followed his lead in play.
327 on the basis of their school reports and what ms barret had told her, ms d concluded that the children’s behaviour at school had improved. however, in ms d’s view, after having interviewed each of them and observed y and z interact with their father was her concern that:
[a]ll three children continued to disclose experiences of verbal abuse by mr barret and remained fearful and apprehensive of his aggressive behaviours. of further note was that whilst z and y were willing to spend time with their father and recognised there were periods of time in which mr barret acted in appropriate ways towards them, they both expressed concerns about mr barret's interactions with them, particularly when he was angry.[85]
328 in this context, ms d expressed a concern at mr barret’s apparent inability to reflect on what each of the children had consistently said about his conduct. this led to her reiterating the central theme of her first assessment in the following terms:
[mr barret] struggled to consider how his behaviours had impacted upon the children or indeed empathise with their perspective. the writer considered that until this was appropriately addressed, the children were likely to continue to express hesitation about mr barret's care and x was unlikely to reconcile with his father.[86]
329 in all these circumstances, as was quoted in the introductory section of this judgment, ms d remained concerned that mr barret lacked insight into the gravity of his past conduct, and its serious emotional consequences for the children and, as such, lacked empathy or understanding for what each of them had consistently said, namely they remained frightened of their father because of his propensity to become angry and violent, particularly to their mother but also to each of them.
330 essentially none of the children feel safe in their father’s care, and this remains the case notwithstanding the stabilising presence of ms ff. ms d remained of the view that the conferral of equal shared parental responsibility was inappropriate in the case and that the way to repair the rift between the children and their father was acknowledgement, by mr barret of his conduct, in a process of joint therapy sessions with the children.
331 accordingly, ms d ended her second report, with the following formal recommendations: ms barret has sole parental responsibility for the children, the children live with their mother, mr barret spend time with y and z on alternate saturdays from 8.30 am until 4.00 pm (the current arrangement), this time to be increased to overnight from after school on friday until 4.00 pm the following saturday, after the children have had three therapy sessions with their father and be subject to the proviso that should the children request to leave earlier that they should be able to contact their mother and leave, x spend time with his father subject to his wishes, x engage in therapeutic sessions with mr barret with the aim of repairing their relationship, the children continue therapy with dr c and both parents be involved with this as needed, the parties and those associated with them refrain from denigrating the other to the children, mr barret provide access to the children’s gaming accounts to ms barret to ensure the children are able to game in both residence in private.[87]
332 accordingly, in ms d’s view, no progress has been made between her first and second report. rather matters have deteriorated, particularly so far as x’s relationship with his father is concerned. i concede that the involvement of dr c may have contributed to this retrograde situation.
333 however, in my assessment, the major factor has been the father’s continued passive/aggressive attitude towards the mother, as demonstrated by his refusal to give her and the children some breathing space and his apparent unwillingness to acknowledge the gravity of his conduct to the children personally in some process of appropriate therapy.
334 whilst i appreciate he does not trust dr c, the fact remains that neither he nor ms barret have been able to come up with any other mechanisms and each remains locked in the conflict between them, which renders each of them aggrieved and subject to the perception that they are the victim of the other. this is particularly so in respect of mr barret.
335 in these circumstances, prior to applying the relevant legal criteria to the facts as i have found them, it will be necessary for me to examine the factual controversies, which have arisen between the parties in the period since their separation, particularly the controversy centred on the mother’s perception that the father and his family are stalking her and the father’s contrasting perception that he is only pursing his legitimate entitlement to retain a slender sense of involvement in the children’s lives, in the face of the mother’s implacable hostility for him.
recent events
336 following the parties’ separation, ms barret was granted an interim intervention order, which prevented mr barret coming within 50 metres of her personally or within 100 metres of the children’s school or community centre.
337 the intervention order became final on 23 april 2019, and confirms that mr barret must not assault, threaten, harass or intimidate ms barret or keep her under surveillance. the order also specifically prohibits mr barret from coming within 50 metres of any place in which ms barret is located.
338 harass, intimidate and surveillance are ordinary english words. harass is defined to mean trouble and annoy repeatedly, intimidate means frighten or over awe, surveillance means close observation.[88] as previously indicated, i accept that the parties live in relatively close proximity, within a suburban setting. as such, it is inevitable that they will inadvertently cross paths with one another, in public places, such as at local supermarkets and the like.
339 i accept that mr barret has not assaulted ms barret since the granting of the order or consciously moved within 100 metres of her. what is more controversial is whether his actions, particularly in the context of the children’s sporting and educational activities, have been more calculated and have had the result of subjecting ms barret to harassment, intimidation or surveillance in some manner.
340 the court has also made its own orders in the nature of an injunction. on 5 april 2019, an order was made that the father be permitted to attend b sports matches in which the children participated, provided neither he nor ms o came within 50 metres of the mother. on 27 may 2020, an order was made restraining the father from following or approaching the mother or children or attending at the children’s extracurricular activities other than at suburb w, b sports centre.
341 initially, the children were to be exchanged between the parties at a service station. also, on 27 may 2020, the handover location was changed to e shop and restrictions were placed on the father’s use of xbox playstation to communicate with the children other than to engage in gaming with them. this was because it was ms barret’s perspective that mr barret was not respecting the spirit of the earlier injunctive order made in her favour.
342 in my view, the import of these various orders was clear. ms barret did not wish and was not to be subjected to any unwanted intrusions, into her life and activities, from mr barret, in order that she should feel emotionally safe and secure in her life. this was because she had been subject to a significant level of coercive and controlling behaviour from mr barret, which had frightened her. the issues she had raised, with the police and the court were not trivial.
343 essentially, ms barret wished to have some form of exclusion zone placed around her, in which she could feel free from being flustered and intimidated by mr barret. i am satisfied that ms barret does feel intimidated by being in the presence of mr barret, and this is because of the way he has treated her in past, which includes subjecting her all manner of verbal and physical humiliations, including choking and spitting on her.
344 mr barret is either being disingenuous, or in denial if he does not accept that this is the case. i am concerned that he has approached the orders in the spirit of a barrack-room lawyer, with a mindset to test the orders to their absolute limits, knowing full well that his physical presence will be unsettling to ms barret. more sinisterly, i am concerned that he still wishes to exert some form of coercive control over her, notwithstanding the injunctions applying to him and the end of the parties’ marriage.
345 obviously, this is neither solicitous nor insightful behaviour on his part. it can do nothing to reduce the currently unacceptably high level of tension and mistrust between the parties, which has not lessened during the course of these proceedings. sadly, from time to time, it is my view that ms p and ms o have adopted the same mindset.
346 whether mr barret is actively trying to exert some form of control over ms barret or is unable to control his impulses is a more difficult issue to resolve. i accept that he does feel frustrated at the manner in which the proceedings have progressed. i also accept that he loves the children and, as such, it is deeply upsetting for him that he cannot interact more freely with them and x has currently rejected him entirely.
347 however mr barret’s frustration and his failure to control his impulses has the potential to create a negative feedback loop. when mr barret feels disempowered, he reacts impulsively. if he does so in the presence of ms barret, she feels threatened and this impacts on the children. it is difficult to contemplate how the impasse can be broken and the parties concerned begin to move on in a way which is off assistance to them and their children.
348 this dynamic is not helpful to the children nor to mr barret’s aspiration to mend his relationship with the children. it can only add to the recriminations between the parties, not lessen them. it seems to have had a dramatic effect on x, in particular. mr barret’s behaviour, and to a lesser extent the behaviour of his mother and sister have ratcheted up the tension between the parties and placed the children under more, rather than less pressure.
349 in normal circumstances, the expression of a birthday greeting, attendance at b sports game or c sports centre venue, the taking of a team photograph, would not call for comment in the judgment of a court case. however the relationship between the various parties concerned is not normal, and as such each concerned needs to approach the various orders regulating the interactions between the parties with both respect and extreme caution.
350 in my assessment, the father has been cavalier in regard to the obligations placed on him under the various injunctive orders applicable and dismissive of the mother’s concerns about his behaviour. rather, he has approached matters with an apparent attitude of arrogance and overweening self-entitlement. he has done what he pleases. from his perspective, it is the mother’s problem that she is frightened of him rather than his problem, which he must address by attempting to approach her in a more respectful manner.
351 the father was charged with breaching bail on the basis that he had attended at the children’s school in breach of the interim intervention order. this was dealt with at the same time as the charge of assaulting ms barret. he was placed on a bond without conviction on the basis of his lack of previous convictions and solid employment record.
352 i accept that the father has breached both the actual injunctive orders and their spirit by engaging in the following conduct: abusing the mother, in undertones, at handovers and on other occasions, particularly at shop ss, denigrating her to the children, sending abusive text messages, attending at b sports matches and the park and watching her, driving slowly passed her, sticking his finger up at her, using the xbox in an attempt to organise meetings with the children outside of school hours.
353 in addition, i am satisfied that the father has also taken whatever opportunity is offered to him to undermine ms barret’s parenting of the children to whoever is available to him. generally, mr barret has behaved in a way which indicates that he is entirely dismissive of the mother’s concerns and has exhibited little contrition whatsoever for his past behaviour towards her. he still regards himself as a victim of circumstance.
354 when he is challenged, as at the c sports centre or the children’s b sports centre, he reacts with aggression and threat out of proportion to what has happened. he continues to attempt to control the mother’s behaviour through various forms of control, not the least of which has been his approach to these proceedings.
355 i accept that the mother’s behaviour has not always been beyond reproach. she has, from time to time, demonstrated her own antipathy for the father and ms ff to the children, each of whom has acted out the manner in which the adults have behaved. however, of the two parties concerned, i am satisfied that it is the father who is more driving of the conflict between them.
356 there is one concrete example of this. following the release of ms d’s first report, ms barret arranged a meeting with mr barret to see if they could work towards some resolution of the parenting issues between them on the basis of the report. the meeting took place at a hotel in 2019. from the mother’s perspective, this was not a constructive as the father was defensive and blamed her for the children’s poor behaviour.
357 once the meeting was finished, mr barret followed ms barret to her car and spat on the ground next to it. it is her evidence, which i accept that she felt frightened and demeaned by mr barret’s actions. no doubt mr barret felt frustrated by what he perceived to be ms barret’s unreasonable stance in regards to his time spending arrangements for the children. however, this, in my view, was not a constructive way in which to deal with such frustrations.
358 equally emblematic of the tension and mistrust between the parties are issues that centre on the control of the children’s various gaming accounts. i confess to being ignoramus in respect of such matters other than it is obvious to me that gaming is an important activity for these children. it is an activity which can take place with other individuals via the internet. such individuals can be of differing ages. it is also a means of communication and depending on the ability of the player concerned as a source of kudos.
359 it is also an activity which has commercial applications. as i understand it, participants can secure items, relevant to their online identities, which they can exchange with others or keep for themselves. these items are important to the children and those they play with. this issue seems to be particularly important to x.[89]
360 from the father’s perspective, he opened the various accounts on which the children play, from time to time and therefore he should retain access to them, which will not stop the children playing them. in these circumstances, he does not wish to give up ultimate control of his accounts, which he has paid for.
361 from the children’s perspective, this is a means of control and intrusion into their lives, which they resent. they wish to control the accounts that they have access to, which is important so far as their purchase of various items, which they use in the games they play. the mother shares this perspective and, in general terms asserts, that the father has used the gaming platforms for his own purposes.
362 from my perspective, gaming is not necessarily an anodyne process for children. the online platform is not without its perils and, as such, access to it is a matter which is amenable to the allocation of parental responsibility. in these circumstances, in my view, it is not appropriate that one parent has access to these types of platform but the other does not, particularly in the fraught circumstances of the current parties.
363 for these reasons, i propose to make the order proposed by ms d in respect of gaming accounts. in my view, such an outcome is one which will assist in repairing x’s relationship with his father. i hope it will prevent x from being logged out of his games, but will also ensure some ongoing level of parental oversight.
determining the best interests of the children – section 60cc
a) the primary considerations
364 the applicable legislation requires me to consider two criteria primarily – protective concerns relating to the exposure of a child to abuse, neglect and family violence – and the benefits of a child having a meaningful relationship with both of his or her parents. as previously indicated, the former criterion is to be given greater weight, in appropriate cases.
365 it is self-evident that each of the children concerned have been exposed to a significant level of family violence, emanating from their father, which was primarily directed towards their mother, during the parties’ lengthy marriage. i find that the atmosphere, within the household, was one which was frequently infused with apprehension and uncertainty, due to apprehension, on the part of ms barret and the children as to how mr barret would respond to commonplace situations. as such, both ms barret and the children had reasonably frequent cause to be frightened of their father and his behaviour.
366 as a consequence, i consider that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted in this case, as i have reasonable grounds for believing that mr barret has engaged in family violence as defined by the act. in these circumstances, the court must place significant emphasis on protective concerns relating to the children. at the same time, i concede that considerations relating to the benefits likely to accrue to the children, from having a meaningful level of relationship, with their father, should not be overlooked.
367 given the pre-eminence to be given by the court to protective concerns, the court is not obliged to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with each parent concerned. rather, within the matrix of the considerations contained in section 60cc, it is required to consider the benefits of a child having such parental relationships. as the full court noted:
[h]aving a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.[90]
368 in the current matter, each of the children know their father well. how could it be otherwise, given that they have each shared a home together for the majority of their respective lives, during which mr barret was their paternal focus. clearly, mr barret loves the children, shared many of their interests – gaming and b sports and c sports. in addition, notwithstanding that i have been compelled to make many negative findings about mr barret’s past conduct, i have no doubt whatsoever that there were very many happy times, within the family, involving mr barret, prior to the parties’ separation.
369 to ms d, y and z reported that their dad was frequently funny and fun to be around. what is significant, however, about each of ms d’s reports (and indeed the evidence of dr c) is that each of the children are frightened of their father. for all the reasons i have outlined above, i am satisfied that the children have objectively reasonable grounds for being frightened of him. essentially, it is because, when mr barret is frustrated, he becomes unpredictable and violent.
370 accordingly, although i accept in general terms, the children are each likely to derive benefits from being able to know and interact with their father, for this to occur safely, and for there to be a secure base established on which to build this central relationship, mr barret needs to examine his own conduct and engage in some work to rectify it. otherwise, in my assessment, there are significant risks arising for the children if the court proceeds to consider the outcome proposed by mr barret.
371 in any event, with the rebuttal of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the court is not formally obliged to consider either equal time or substantial and significant time. the question therefore arising, for the court, is the amount of time that should be ordered in order to ensure the best interests of x, y and z. this is an issue that has both current and prospective implications, given the parties’ diametrically opposed positions.
372 at this juncture, i am concerned that it would not be in y and z’s best interests for their time with their father to be reduced in the manner proposed by ms barret. it is also not congruent with ms d’s most recent recommendation, which conjectured that y and z may benefit from one overnight period with mr barret. certainly, such an outcome would enable mr barret to spend more varied and unstructured time, with the children, at his home, which, for obvious reasons, the children also know well.
373 as previously indicated, ms d ’s recommendation is posited on the basis of mr barret having started to address his relationship issues with y and z. at this juncture, mr barret has not begun any such process, apart from his indication he will return to dr j. for the reasons already outlined, i am not persuaded that dr c is an appropriate person to provide any of the joint therapy sessions advocated by ms d.
374 i accept that x, y and z do hold residual fears of their father. the most effective remedy to relieve these fears is for the children to have consistently happy, safe and predictable periods of time, with their father, free of conflict, which includes an absence of exposure to any actual or implicit denigration of their mother.
375 regrettably, i am not persuaded that it would be appropriate for the court to experiment, in this direction, at this juncture. to my mind, given the ongoing volatility of the situation between the paternal and maternal aspects of the children’s family and the lack of any concrete evidence that mr barret both accepts that some aspects of his interaction with the children have been and remain problematic and is willing to commit to correcting them through therapy with the children, such an outcome would pose a level of unacceptable risk for the children.
376 at the same time, i accept that all three children are likely to derive a significant level of benefit from having a meaningful level of relationship, with their father, in the sense envisaged by the relevant authorities. these benefits include the love of a parent and the creation of happy shared memories. pre-adolescent and adolescent boys are also likely to benefit from having an engaged father in their lives as a source of advice, and to just to do things together and receive positive approbation for their activities.
377 however, in the current dynamic, it is clear to me that there are also risks arising, for the children, of spending time with someone who has the clear potential to be a negative role model for their behaviour, particularly in regard to how conflict is managed. there are risks stemming from y and z’s anxieties about their father.
378 it is for this reason, ms d recommended three therapy sessions involving the children and their father prior to overnight time commencing. the problem arising from this is who will provide such therapy, and when this will occur. it is also clearly in the interests of all concerned that this litigation be brought to an end sooner rather than later so that if there is any prospect of repair occurring to the family, that such a process begin.
379 this is the chief difficulty facing the court at the present time. having undertaken the forensic task set for it of determining what was the nature of the parties’ marital relationship and having made the prerequisite findings in this regard, the steps needed to be undertaken to respond to those findings remain inchoate.
380 the therapy recommended by ms d appears both sensible and much needed but i do not know who should provide it. i am also loath to adjourn the proceedings or prolong them further, given the upset which they have undoubtedly caused to all who have been touched by them.
381 i am also painfully aware that the publication of these reasons for judgment will inevitably add to the tensions between the parties concerned. nonetheless, i consider it important that the children maintain a sense of connection to their father and this necessitates an ongoing regime of time. it also seems to me that some normalisation of that time would be beneficial for the children. at this juncture, i have little expert evidence regarding mr barret’s involvement with the children during school holidays and special occasions.
382 however, it also important for mr barret to recognise that such an outcome depends on him respecting the import of the court’s order, and any injunctions made which are to ensure the protection of ms barret. she is entitled to have a sense of personal autonomy and feel free from the scrutiny of mr barret.
the additional considerations
a) the children’s views
383 the applicable legislation requires me to consider any views expressed by the children concerned and any factors which may affect the weight to be given to those views, such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding. the legislation speaks of views rather than wishes. the latter is a more concrete concept, the former is more addressed to perceptions and feelings.[91]
384 accordingly, a child is not required to make a decision about what the appropriate outcome is in any particular case. nor are they required to express an explicit wish as to which parent or other significant person they want to live with or spend time with.
385 however, it seems that the court is required to explore a child’s perception of what he or she feels is likely to be best for him or her. very often these perceptions will be ambivalent and difficult to express or quantify. this is particularly so with younger children. this does not mean that a child’s view should be disregarded.
386 to the contrary, over time, there has been an increase in the judicial regard given to the rights of children in proceedings such as these. it is often said that children have a right to be heard. certainly children’s views are important and requiring of being given “proper and realistic weight” rather than token regard.[92]
387 it is also impossible to catalogue all the factors which may be at play in shaping a child’s view in any given case. matters of individual preference are idiosyncratic but no less important for that. it has been said that the process of weighing up a child’s professed view is “a process of intuitive synthesis”.[93] what is done with those views is a matter of common sense in the overall assessment of what is likely to be in a child’s best interests.
388 x has recently turned thirteen. he has not spent time with his father for an extended period. i am satisfied that his current refusal to spend time with his father is shaped by his own experiences of mr barret, which from x’s perspective are wholly negative. he made it clear to ms d, in most empathetic terms that he did not wish to engage with his father. i am satisfied that this was x’s decision alone and although he is very loyal to his mother, he is not being unduly influenced by her.
389 the only mechanism available to repair this relationship is the therapy recommended by ms d, which is subject to the willingness of x to engage in it and mr barret’s openness to attending it. regrettably, my ham-fisted efforts to utilise playstation to improve communications between x and his father have miscarried.
390 y has expressed a level of ambivalence about his father whom he loves but not when he has been annoying and angry. in this context, it is of some significance that y expressed to ms d a wish to spend one day and a sleep over every second weekend, notwithstanding his continued apprehension about his father. in my view, this is a factor that militates in favour of the court extending the father’s time with the children, at this stage, notwithstanding the uncertainty about therapeutic interventions and what should occur on special occasions.
391 z’s views seem to be strongly influenced by his perception of the ongoing tension between the parties. ms d expressed his views as follows:
z was clear that he wished to live in ms barret’s primary cared and spend limited time with mr barret (‘like every third saturday’)...when asked what he wished to inform the court, z reiterated he did not want to reside in the primary care of mr barret and did not want mr barret to have ‘control’ of the children’s xbox accounts and x’s playstation account. he also requested that mr barret stop going to the children’s ‘b sports game’ as he distracted the children.[94]
392 these seem to me to be z’s own views, which reflect his own experience. there is no evidence to indicate that either he or y have been influenced by their mother. clearly the children do not like being exposed to the conflict which is implicit in every interaction, even ones which are indirect, arising between their parents. the views of the children support the court taking a cautious approach in the case.[95]
b) the nature of the children’s relationship with each of her parents and significant others
393 the children’s most significant relationship is with their mother. the children’s relationship with their father, particularly so far as x is concerned, is under great stress. whether x’s relationship with his father is reparable is unclear to me. it would seem more likely than not that his relationship with y and z can be remedied but it will involve, most likely, some outside assistance and a willingness, on mr barret’s part to engage in such assistance.
394 sadly, the children’s relationship with other members of their paternal family is also under great pressure at present. ms o was previously close to all three children. she obviously loves the children, as one would expect. grandparents are important to children. not only are they a source of love but they are also able to provide family history to their grandchildren and give them a sense of self. the same can be said of cousins, uncles and aunts.[96]
395 with the absence of ms o, from their lives, the children can only become more aware of the fissure in their family. however, at this stage and in the absence of any specific application from her, the court’s focus must be on the children’s relationship with their father. although it is not ideal, any time mr barret has with the children is the only conduit through which the children may maintain a sense of connection to their paternal family. everyone concerned in this case needs to consider how they can reduce the conflict between them rather than exacerbate it.
c) the extent to which each of the parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to be involved in decision making and to spend time or communicate with the children ca) provision of financial support for the children
396 the two above are not strongly relevant considerations in the case and do not require individual consideration.
d) the likely effect on the children of any changes in their circumstances
397 this is not a case centred on issues of change. it appears largely axiomatic to me that the children’s best interests require them to continue to live with their mother. as is presently occurring, any attempt to predict the future would appear to suggest that the children will only spend carefully controlled periods of time with their father, at least until there has been some therapeutic or healing process, which is likely to take some time.
398 the father’s proposal for equal time appears unworkable given the current family dynamic, which seems unlikely to change in the short to medium term. i cannot see there being any significant changes in the children’s circumstances in this period other than, if the parties commit to it, there is some meaningful level of engagement with some suitable therapeutic process in which mr barret has some confidence and which proves to be useful for the children in repairing their relationship with their father. as i have already indicated, i am not persuaded that dr c fits these criteria, although she may well be of utility to the children.
e) the practical difficulties and expense of the children spending time and communicating with each of their parents
399 the parties live in close proximity to one another in adjoining suburbs. as such, there are no practical impediments to the children spending time with each of their parents. that is not to say that there are not currently other great barriers which prevent the children having the degree of relationship with their father, which the applicable legislation recognises as optimal.
400 these barriers relate to the animosity between the parties and those associated with them. if there was a lessening of tensions between the parties and ms barret felt less harassed and intimidated by the father and his family, these barriers would lessen as time unfolds. in this context, the injunctions sought by ms barret are likely to be central.
f) the capacity of each of the children’s parents and other persons to provide for the emotional and intellectual needs of the childreni) the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the parties
401 the above two considerations are closely related and, as such, it is convenient to consider them together. these have been particularly bruising and adversarial proceedings. no quarter has been given by either party to the other, each of whom has focussed on the negative aspects of the other’s parenting performance.
402 the father has asserted that the mother does not provide the children with nutritious meals and has a compulsive obsession regarding cleaning. in my view, the evidence indicates that she is the children’s primary source of emotional support. if the children are emotionally protective of their mother, it is because they have witnessed the father being violent towards her. this is particularly the case so far as x is concerned.
403 the evidence also indicates that ms barret has been involved in the children’s education and has sought out appropriate psychological support for each of them. she has also ensured that x and y have received the assistance which they each need to address their learning issues at school. i agree with ms d’s assessment that there is no cogent evidence to support the assertion that she is a compromised parent in terms of the care she has provided the children. if her parenting has ever been compromised, it has been because of issues emanating from mr barret.
404 on the other hand, in his controlling and coercive behaviour, mr barret has demonstrated that his parenting is flawed. it is not emotionally helpful to these children if they are exposed to their primary source of emotional support – their mother – being assaulted and denigrated by him. this has the potential to distort their own psychological development in a significantly detrimental and long term way.
405 in my view, the evidence available to me, on balance, indicates that x and y were mimicking their father’s violent behaviour in the school setting. this is a very significant finding and one which is central to what is the outcome, in the case, which is likely to be the best one for them. in the past, in how he has managed conflict, mr barret has not been an ideal role model. i accept the mother’s evidence that x and y’s oppositional behaviour had reduced since the parties separated and their exposure to family violence mitigated.
406 the children, in the past, have been severely frightened by their father’s behaviour. this is not emotionally supportive of them. in addition, since the parties separated, i am concerned that the children have each continued to be exposed to their father’s derogatory attitude toward the mother. the central feature of each of ms d’s reports is that the children are scared of mr barret and something needs to be done to repair their relationship with him.
407 mr barret has a negative view of the mother’s capacity to provide for the children’s emotional needs in the sense that he contends that she is not properly motivated to support an appropriate level of relationship with the children, which is exemplified by the negative comments she and the children have made about him and his partner and which ms barret herself acknowledges she has made.
408 at present ms barret undoubtedly does have a negative view of mr barret and it is inevitable, in the current circumstances, that the children will be aware of this state of affairs. however, in my view, to a very large degree, ms barret’s antipathy for mr barret stems from his behaviour towards her, to which each of the children were exposed in the past.
409 ms barret has not behaved impeccably in respect of the expression of some of her views, particularly when she has been stressed. this is understandable given the pressures to which she has been subject. in my view, of the two parties, she has been the one more open to seeking a compromise and the parent who is more in tune with the children’s emotional needs.
g) the children’s maturity, sex, lifestyle and background
410 there is no need for the court to address these matters on any individual basis. in my view, i have considered the salient features of the children’s background in these reasons as a whole.
h) aboriginal heritage
411 this is not a relevant consideration in the case.
j) family violencek) any family violence order
412 family violence and the various orders made to protect ms barret are amongst the central issues in this case. i am satisfied that mr barret has consistently defied the spirit of these orders. ms barret is entitled to lead her life free from harassment from mr barret. in these circumstances, issues to do with ms barret’s personal protection are important matters for the court, which needs to emphasise to mr barret that ms barret is not to be subject to low-level harassment or surveillance.
l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
413 finality is generally preferable in children’s cases. litigation is expensive in both financial and emotional terms and does little to encourage an easy parenting relationship between the parties concerned. in addition, so far as children are concerned, it is usually desirable that arrangements for their care are stable and constant and not subject to the threat of further litigation.
414 the evident problem in this case is that, after the conclusion of a lengthy hearing, it is apparent that further interventions are needed to repair the relationship between the children and their father. i am satisfied that, if it is possible and practicable to implement, such repair is likely to be in the best interests of the children, as it is likely to be the best mechanism for each of them, including x, to have a meaningful level of relationship with their father.
415 the problem is compounded by the widely divergent final orders each party seeks, which do not seem to be in accord with the recommendations of ms d. the mother proposes that y and z spend one day a month with their father and he be able to send cards and gifts to them on special occasions.
416 on any view, given the extremely limited and infrequent time proposed, this will create an extremely truncated relationship and i have difficulty in accepting that it will be in the children’s long term best interests, particularly in the context of the views expressed by y.
417 occasions, such as birthdays and the celebration of christmas are important to parents and children alike. they provide the opportunity for them to exchange gifts and well wishes, which may reinforce an appropriate sense of relationship.
418 in these circumstances, it is important, in my view, if there is any prospect of the father’s relationship with x being improved and his relationship with the two younger children being sustained, that mr barret be given an opportunity to send cards and gifts to the children on such occasions.
419 to her credit, ms barret agrees that this should occur. however, she does not wish this mode of communication to be abused. in these circumstances, i will make the orders as proposed, by the mother, with the safeguards they contain.
420 a further aspect of the mother’s position is that the father should be restrained from bringing further proceedings, for at least a period of a year, until he has undertaken a course of treatment, with a psychiatrist, directed towards correcting his aggressive behaviours, which will ultimately involving him acknowledging his past violent behaviours and inappropriate parenting.
421 who that psychiatrist should be is unclear and whether mr barret would consult such a person. the treatment would not involve any of the children and so would not be in line with what ms d recommended. in addition, by necessary implication, whether the court should entertain any further application from the father would depend on the prognosis of the psychiatrist concerned. i am concerned at the nebulous aspects of this proposal, the main advantage of which is that it would prevent further litigation for a period of twelve months.
422 on the other hand, the father proposes the immediate introduction of an extensive regime of substantial and significant time during the school year, half of school holidays, and a number of designated special occasions. in my view this is not reflective of the reality of the children’s family situation. as such it is not a feasible outcome at this stage and, given what has occurred to date, may never be.
423 what the parties do agree upon is that x should be given time and space to determine for himself if, and when he will interact with his father. neither party has sought any specific order in respect of how the children’s relationship, with their father, can be repaired. essentially, at this stage, neither party, notwithstanding ms d’s second report has been available for some time, has any proposal to span the gulf between their respective positions other than for the mother’s deferral of the issue until the father has been compulsorily psychiatrically treated.
424 in these circumstances, it would be naïve for either party to consider that the case can be easily finalised at this stage, without at least some thought being given to how ms d’s recommendations for therapy can be implemented. however, at the same time, concerns must arise at the potential for the litigation to be prolonged, without any obvious end point, which can only exacerbate tensions and possibly lead to more rather than less division in the family.
425 it is possible that a continuation of the existing regime, in tandem with an easing of the tensions between the parties and the effluxion of a reasonable period of time, will enable some level of natural repair to occur in the relationship between y and z on the one hand and their father on the other, whilst mr barret undergoes the quasi-compulsory psychiatric treatment proposed by ms barret. however, in my view, this cannot be guaranteed without some form of therapeutic oversight vis-à-vis his relationship with the children.
426 if a continuation of the current regime does proceed well, mr barret is extremely likely to commence a further round of proceedings to extend time, which ms barret may well resist. certainly the prospect of a consensual resolution appears doubtful.
427 mr barret is also likely to feel resentful, if the doorway offered by ms d’s second report of some overnight time, after therapy, an outcome to which y is reportedly open, is slammed shut by the making of the final orders advocated by the mother.
428 however, i am well aware that there is no guarantee that the therapy suggested by ms d will have the restorative consequences for which she hopes. this is particularly so in the absence of an agreed therapist, or any evidence regarding such a person’s involvement with the children concerned. i am also concerned that the psychiatric intervention proposed by the mother, in the absence of the father’s willing embrace of it, is not likely to be a useful intervention in itself. for it to be useful, in my view, mr barret must willingly engage with it.
429 in all these circumstances, i am concerned that to leave the proceedings, with a final order congruent with the present interim arrangements, would represent unfinished business for the family, given the absence of any effort towards therapeutic repair of the relevant paternal relationships. as previously indicated i do not think this would be in the best interests of the children, notwithstanding the risk of further litigation which it represents.
m) any other fact or circumstance
430 the major issue in this case was family violence. at a late stage of proceedings, mr barret made significant concessions regarding his past behaviour to ms barret. in my view, the stance he adopted in the case has considerably lengthened the proceedings and placed an additional emotional burden on ms barret, whom he initially characterised as a person who had lied about what had occurred to her.
431 this is a factor which militates in favour of the cautious approach advocated by the mother, which involves the father being barred from further proceedings until he has provided the favourable psychiatric report stipulated by her following a period of twelve months of meaningful engagement.
conclusions
432 this is a sad and confronting case. it is impossible not to feel some sense of compassion for all the parties involved in it, each of whom continues to feel a sense of hurt and dislocation. this hurt and dislocation has served to drive the conflict between them, which is self-defeating in nature and serves only to postpone the possibility of any reconciliation (or at least the inauguration of a more workable parenting relationship) between them, which will benefit the children in the longer term and enable them to have a more normal relationship with the paternal side of their family.
433 what is particularly concerning, is the extent of the dichotomy between the parties’ respective positions and the absence of any proposal, from either of them, to resolve it in a child-focussed way, involving an agreed form of therapy and therapist for the children. the tenor of ms d’s assessment of the family is that, difficult though it may be, y and z’s relationship with their father is capable of some level of repair. in my view, it would be derelict of the court not to consider such an intervention and in lieu thereof reduce the father’s time with the two children.
434 ms barret wants mr barret to consult a psychiatrist in what she characterises as ‘being in a meaningful manner’. this would involve his acknowledgement of his behaviour towards ms barret and therefore demonstrate insight on his part. i am concerned that any compulsory form of psychiatric treatment, in the form of a court order, is not likely to be successful unless mr barret willingly embraces it. in addition, it was not a topic which was closely examined in the proceedings before me.
435 the chief advantage of such an order is that it places a bar on further litigation, for a finite period of time, whilst the family attempts to recover. in my view, it is more appropriate for mr barret himself to consider whether he needs to seek such treatment. these have been bruising proceedings for all concerned, including mr barret, who conceded openly that his life and his relationship with the children was a work in progress.
436 in my view, it is beyond the remit of my authority to direct specifically how mr barret approaches that topic. it remains a matter for him as to the treatment which he seeks for himself, once he has considered the implications of the various findings arising from this judgment. whether he accepts the findings or not is also obviously a matter for him.
437 the therapist with whom the children have had the most contact is dr c. i do not consider that she can provide the therapy advocated by ms d. as previously indicated, i consider that, in the event the parties cannot agree the therapist, within a period of 28 days of the publication of this judgment, the three sessions outlined by ms d should be provided by a therapist to be nominated by the independent children’s lawyer.
438 a balance must be struck between a raft of competing considerations, which can be summarised as follows: the obvious benefit entailed in bringing the current round of litigation to finalisation now, as opposed to: y and x maintaining some form of meaningful relationship, with their father, whilst there is some form of therapeutic involvement, as recommended by ms d , taking place, in circumstances where the form of that therapy is not known, which, in turn must be balanced against: the need for time between the younger children and their father occurring in a safe fashion, without the possibility of the children being exposed to either the denigration of their mother or a further volatile outburst from their father of some kind.
439 in my view, to make the orders sought by ms barret tip the balance too far in respect of protective concerns. i am also concerned that to keep the orders as they currently are will not maintain the prerequisite level of meaning in the younger children’s relationship with their father. i am satisfied that at some stage, there must be consideration of a modest advance in the time these children spend with their father. the question being what that advance should be, when should it occur, and the level of risk it entails.
440 in all the circumstances, notwithstanding the uncertainty about who the therapist concerned should be and the ultimate outcome of the three sessions envisaged by ms d obviously cannot be known at this stage, i propose making the orders as recommended by ms d. i am comforted in the move to modest overnight time given y and z favour it. it will also enable some modest degree of normalisation of those relationships which will be necessarily entailed in mr barret being responsible for bedtimes and an evening meal on one night per fortnight. it will also give the children more opportunity to interact with their paternal family.
441 the chief deficit of this order is that it defers any consideration of special occasions and school holiday time. as such it is a stop gap measure. there is no answer to this criticism. rather it is a necessary corollary of how the parties have elected to approach the case. what should be the trigger for further court involvement, if required, to address these deficits is also unclear. for the reasons already provided, the mechanism proposed by ms barret in this regard is not without its problems.
442 if adopted, it will prevent mr barret engaging in further litigation and will provide a high level of protection to the various risks identified. however, it will not provide the therapeutic intervention recommended by ms d and will leave the children with an extremely truncated form of relationship with their father for an extended period of time, which may lead to the possible extinction of that relationship, which seems to me to be contrary to their best interests in the long term.
443 in my view, the appropriate response to the risk entailed in this approach is to maintain the appointment of the independent children’s lawyer for a period of twelve months and grant him liberty to re-list the matter on 14 days written notice to address any issues arising in respect of the application of the therapy envisaged by ms d and to act as a gate-keeper in respect of any further applications which either of the parties may contemplate.
444 in this context, it needs to be unequivocally stated to mr barret that this is not an invitation to him to commence another round of proceedings. the ball remains in his court to demonstrate that his relationship with the children has been repaired and he has been an active and insightful participant in such a process. how he chooses to do that is a matter for him. necessarily, given the damage these proceedings have caused, the court must closely consider the application of the principles contained in division 12a of the act, which directs that the court consider the impact of proceedings on any child concerned and protect them from being further exposed to family violence.
445 my focus must remain on the best interests of x, y and z, who are not responsible for the rift in their family. it is not in their best interests to be exposed to the endemic conflict between the parties, which i am satisfied originates more with the father than the mother. this is unacceptable and must cease. the most empathetic way in which to sheet this home is to make the various injunctive orders sought by the mother. i am satisfied that each of the orders individually, and in combination are appropriate for her personal protection.
446 the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted in this case. the parties communicate poorly and whenever they do communicate, even in electronic form, there is always the potential for their communications to descend into recrimination. decisions need to be made in respect of the children in respect of many issues to do with their education and various special needs. these decisions need to be made promptly and efficiently.
447 at present the parties have no capacity to make any of these major long-term decisions consensually. this will remain the case for the indefinite future. however, these decisions will still need to be made. in these circumstances, the only realistic option is to confer this responsibility on one parent alone, contrary though this is to the ethos of the act. given the mother is the children’s unchallenged primary carer that parent should be ms barret.
448 i acknowledge that mr barret remains vitally interested in all issues to do with the children. given this state of affairs, the proposal of ms barret that she inform mr barret in writing of any significant issue regarding the children’s health or education and contact him in the event of any serious injury or illness befalling the children or if any of them is admitted to hospital seems to me to be a viable compromise. it is important that mr barret know about such matters in a timely fashion.
449 in addition, it is important that mr barret be able to send birthday and christmas cards, along with appropriate gifts, to the children but only in a manner which does not expose ms barret to any potential for harassment. mr barret needs to be careful not to abuse this privilege
450 the issue of the children attending school rr for their secondary education was not an issue closely canvassed in the proceedings before me. however, given the conferral of parental authority for the children it is my view that ms barret can select this school, for the children, if she so wishes.
451 neither party advanced any proposal for the children to travel overseas at any time in the future. each party is an australian citizen, who has lived in this country for the entirety of their respective lives. in these circumstances, i consider it premature to deal with the issue of passports for each of the children.
452 arrangements for the exchange of the children are difficult and will remain so for the indefinite future. for the reasons i have hitherto provided, the mother has justifiable and more than ample reasons to be fearful of the father, whom i have characterised as an overweening bully. ms barret has a fundamental entitlement to feel secure at all handover involving the children. for these reasons, although it cannot be considered a child focussed location, all handovers must continue to occur at the e shop.
453 at the end of these lengthy reasons for judgment, i am well aware that the case has provided no opportunity for the bridging of the deep rift in x, y and z’s family. court proceedings rarely provide such an opportunity. i can only hope that mr barret will make good his commitment to do whatever it takes to improve his behaviour so that this rift may, in time, be mended to some degree.
454 for all these reasons, the orders of the court will be as set out at the commencement of these reasons for judgment.
associate: dated: 24 september 2021
[1] see psychological report of dr j dated 5 march 2020 being annexure 6 to the affidavit of mr barret filed 19 october 2020.[2] see order of judge brown dated 27 november 2018.[3] see order of judge brown dated 5 april 2019.[4] see exhibit b.[5] see affidavit of ms barret filed 1 october 2020.[6] see affidavit of mr barret filed 19 october 2020.[7] ibid at [73].[8] see amended initiating application filed by the applicant on 1 october 2020.[9] see family report prepared by ms d dated 29 april 2021 at [147]-[150].[10] see family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[11] see evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[12] see fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118, 129 [31] (gleeson cj, gummow and kirby jj). [13] see exhibit n. [14] see exhibit 26 to the affidavit of ms barret filed 1 october 2020. [15] see affidavit of mr barret filed 19 october 2020 at [53]. [16] see family report prepared by ms d dated 29 april 2021 at [146]. [17] report made by y on 7 november 2017.[18] report made by y on 17 october 2018.[19] report made by y on 23 july 2019.[20] report made by y on 3 september 2019.[21] see exhibit a.[22] see exhibit t.[23] see annexure -2 to the affidavit of ms tt filed 25 may 2020.[24] see exhibit c of the psychological report of dr j dated 25 october 2020.[25] see the affidavit of ms o filed 16 october 2020 at [16].[26] see exhibit p.[27] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[28] see mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at 526 [26] (brown j).[29] see jurchenko & foster [2014] famcafc 127; (2014) 51 fam lr 588, 618 [123] (bryant cj, thackray and duncanson jj).[30] see eaby & speelman (2015) famcafc 104 at [21] (ryan j).[31] see jg & bg [1994] famca 160; (1994) 18 fam lr 255, 261 (chisholm j).[32] see in the marriage of patsalou [1994] famca 118; (1994) 18 fam lr 426, 428 (baker j).[33] see in the marriage of blanch (1998) fam lr 325, 336 [3] (mullane j).[34] see t & n [2003] famca 1129; (2003) 31 fam lr 257.[35] ibid 264 [36] (moore j).[36] garrod & davenort [2018] famca 825.[37] ibid at [341] (bennett j).[38] see amador & amador [2009] famcafc 196 at [95] (may, coleman and le poer trench jj).[39] see deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82.[40] ibid at [61] (finn, thackray and strickland jj).[41] slater & light [2013] famcafc 4 at [37] (may, strickland and forrest jj), quoting johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344 at [68] (may, boland and stevenson jj).[42] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[43] see b v b: family law reform act 1995 (1997) 21 fam lr 676, 755 [34] (nicholson cj, fogarty and lindenmayer jj). [44] ibid 734 [26]. [45] see russell & russell and anor [2009] famca 28 at [141] (ryan j). [46] garrod & davenort [2018] famca 825.[47] ibid [429] (bennett j).[48] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.[49] ibid s 61da(2). [50] ibid s 61da(4).[51] ibid s 65daa(3).[52] see mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, 466 [13] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[53] ibid.[54] ibid [13]-[15].[55] see goode & goode [2006] famca 1346; (2006) 206 flr 212.[56] ibid.[57] see amended initiating application filed by the applicant on 1 october 2020.[58] see amended response filed by mr barret on 16 october 2020. [59] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61b. [60] ibid s 64b(2). [61] ibid s 65dac. [62] bartel & schmucker (no 3) [2012] famca 1094 at [18] (cronin j).[63] ibid at [21]. [64] see exhibit j – text message from mr barret to mr barret dated 15 may 2018 “poor y taunted (sic) with the ms r gene”.[65] see exhibit h – text message dated 24 october 2017.[66] see exhibit i.[67] see exhibit s.[68] see the affidavit of ms barret filed 1 october 2020 at [69]. [69] see exhibit a.[70] see the affidavit of ms barret filed 1 october 2020 at [66]. [71] see exhibit k.[72] see exhibit o.[73] see exhibit r.[74] see exhibit l.[75] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab. [76] see family report prepared by ms d dated 12 september 2019 at [103].[77] ibid at [116].[78] ibid at [132].[79] ibid at [133].[80] ibid at [155]-[169].[81] ibid at [162].[82] ibid at [170].[83] see family report prepared by ms d dated 29 april 2021 at [94].[84] ibid at [11].[85] ibid at [139].[86] ibid at [12].[87] ibid at [151]. [88] the australian oxford dictionary.[89] ibid at [81].[90] see jurchenko & foster [2014] famcafc 127; (2014) 51 fam lr 588, 618 at [123] (bryant cj, thackray and duncanson jj).[91] see explanatory memorandum to the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill 2006 (cth) at [56].[92] see h v w (1995) 126 fam lr 788, 797 (fogarty, baker and kay jj).[93] see r & r: children’s wishes [2000] famca 43; (2000) 25 fam lr 712, 724 [54] (nicholson cj, finn & guest jj).[94] see family report prepared by ms d dated 29 april 2021 at [124] – [125].[95] see marvel & marvel (no 2) [2010] famcafc 101 [120] (faulks dcj, boland and stevenson jj). [96] see bright v bright [1994] famca 176; (1995) flc 92-570.