last updated: 9 april 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
capitani & langer (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 477
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge stewart
legislation and conventions
note: division 4 of part xiiiaa (international protection of children) has effect despite this section.
the note to section 65d(1) of the act reads as follows:
note: division 4 of part xiiiaa (international protection of children) may affect the jurisdiction of a court to make a parenting order.
the full court of the family court of australia’s decision in zanda & zanda (2014) flc 93-607, [2014] famcafc 173, states that this division must be applied in light of australia’s ratification of the convention on jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition, enforcement and co-operation in respect of parental responsibility and measures for the protection of children signed at the hague on 19 october 1996 (“the 1996 convention”).
does subdivision b of division 4 of the act apply pursuant to section 111cc of the act?
111cc application of this subdivision
this subdivision applies only if an issue under this act is whether a court, as opposed to any of the following authorities, has jurisdiction to take measures directed to the protection of the person of a child: (a) a central authority or competent authority of a convention country, (b) a competent authority of a non-convention country.   competent authority of a non‑convention country means an entity that has responsibility or authority under the law in force in the country to take measures or make decisions about:   protecting the person of a child, or (ii) appointing or deciding the powers of a guardian of a child’s property.
it is important to note the provisions of s 111cc of the act as set out above that relevantly provides that the provisions of subdivision c (jurisdiction for the person of a child) of division 4 international protection of children) of the act applies only if an issue under this act is whether a court, as opposed to a “competent authority of a non-convention country” has jurisdiction to take measures directed to the protection of the person of a child. in the context of these proceedings no such issue arises. there is no evidence of any such jurisdictional conflict or issue that needs to be resolved by the application of the subdivision c. indeed there is no evidence as to existence or otherwise of any such competent authority in iraq that may or may not or has sought to exercise jurisdiction over the children. the conclusion must be that the convention has no application to the present matter.
the father argues that there is a close factual matrix between the matter of alfarsi & elhage [2016] and the present proceedings and therefore this court should come to the same conclusion as foster j. for reasons i shall come to later, i do not agree with this position as there are a number of factual differences that are relevant to the outcome of these proceedings.
it was further submitted by mr strum that division 4 of part xiiiaa of the act has no application in the absence of the father having sought to exert any rights in any court or authority in the netherlands. i was referred to the explanatory memorandum and, in particular, to the following paragraph:-
section 111cc – application of this subdivision section 111cc provides in effect that the rules of jurisdiction in subdivision b [which includes s111cd of the act] apply only in the event of conflict between a court in australia and a competent authority in another country. this provision implements the preamble to the convention (which makes clear that the convention is directed to the protection of children in international situations) and article 46 of the convention which provides that a convention country is not obliged to apply the provisions of the convention to conflicts solely between different systems of law in that country. ...
counsel also referred to the general outline of the explanatory memorandum which describes the 1996 convention in the following terms:-
the convention establishes conflicts of law rules to be applied in parental responsibility litigation which has an international aspect. these rules govern the questions whether a court has jurisdiction to hear an international parental responsibility dispute, which country’s law is to be applied in determining international parental responsibility dispute, what conditions must be satisfied to ensure international recognition and enforcement of parenting orders and what obligations courts in australia overseas(sic) have to co-operate in the protection of children.
conflict of laws rules are not predicated on proceedings having been instituted in two jurisdictions which have a connection with the dispute but, rather, on there being two jurisdictions which have a connection with the dispute and which could hear and determine the dispute. in my view, the reference in the general outline and in paragraph 45 of the explanatory memorandum to conflict of laws is not, as mr strum’s submission suggests, a reference to duelling courts. nor does it presupposes that parties must engage in litigation before more than one competent court before conflict of laws rules operate. conflicts of law rules is merely a reference to the jurisprudence or set of rules to be applied to determine which one of two or more competent jurisdictions should be used to resolve an issue in dispute between parties [emphasis added].
the mother argues that this court should follow the approach taken by bennett j due to her honour’s detailed consideration of the background to and purpose of the 1996 convention, which includes an analysis of the explanatory memorandum.
does the court have jurisdiction pursuant to section 111cd of the act?
111cd jurisdiction relating to the person of a child   a court may exercise jurisdiction for a commonwealth personal protection measure only in relation to:  a child who is present in a non convention country, if: the child is habitually resident in australia, and (ii) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child, or  ) any of paragraphs 69e(1)(b) to (e) applies to the child, or
relevant date of assessment
in any event, s 111cd requires a finding as to habitual residence contemporaneously with the court exercising its jurisdiction to take a commonwealth personal protection measure. therefore, i am required to determine where the child is habitually resident now rather than, say, on 6 december 2012 when she was removed to the netherlands, or on 14 december 2012 when the applicant made her first application or on 8 january 2013 or 8 february 2013 when this court purported to make parenting orders.
the mother also refers this court to the recent decision of tree j in amad & hadi [2020] famca 1041 which provides as follows:-
ultimately i am persuaded that the proper construction of s 111cd requires habitual residence to be determined at the date of the relevant hearing. particularly, such a construction is more aligned to the apparent purpose of the provision, namely that child related litigation should be determined in the place where they are habitually resident. it could not promote that objective to have the parenting arrangements for a child who was habitually resident in australia at the commencement of the proceedings, but perhaps many years later, when incontrovertibly habitually resident elsewhere, determined in australia.
therefore the determination of a child’s habitual residence should be assessed from the date of the relevant hearing, and i propose to do the same in this case.
are the children habitually resident in australia pursuant to section 111cd(1)(e)(i) of the act
their honours in their combined judgment later cite the new zealand court of appeal decision of punter v secretary for justice [2006] nzca 533, [2007] 1 nzlr 40 which provides as follows:-
such an inquiry should take into account all relevant factors, including settled purpose, the actual and intended length of stay in a state, the purpose of the stay, the strength of ties to the state and to any other state (both in the past and currently), the degree of assimilation into the state, including living and schooling arrangements, and cultural, social and economic integration. in this catalogue, sk v kp held that settled purpose (and with young children the settled purpose of the parents) is important but not necessarily decisive. it should not in itself override what mcgrath j called at [22], the underlying reality of the connection between the child and the particular state.
moreover, the approach described in p accords with the general tenor of decisions in the united states of america (71). it may be observed of those decisions that there is seen to have been a division between the circuit courts of appeals about the relevance of the parents’ subjective intentions for the child or children concerned (72). when it is also observed, however, that the resolution (73) of the competing approaches has been to invite attention to whether presence at a place has a “degree of settled purpose from the child’s perspective” (74) (emphasis added), the difference in expression of the relevant considerations may not be great. at all events, a thread common to the leading decisions in the united states remains the need to look at all of the circumstances of the case. and it is that approach, as described in p, which should be followed.
foster j then came to the following conclusion:- the circumstances of the children in iraq cannot in any way be described as settled particularly having regard to the uncertainty of their physical circumstances and to the present intentions of both of the parents for them to be returned to australia. it is clear that the children from their perspective have remained habitually resident in australia with the result that if the convention as implemented into the act applied this court would have jurisdiction over them s 111cd(1)(e). the father argues that the factual matrix between alfarsi & elhage [2016] and the current proceedings are so close that this court should follow the decision of alfarsi & elhage [2016] in finding the children are subject to the discretion of this court pursuant to section 111cd(1)(e).
the father argues that the factual matrix between alfarsi & elhage [2016] and the current proceedings are so close that this court should follow the decision of alfarsi & elhage [2016] in finding the children are subject to the discretion of this court pursuant to section 111cd(1)(e).
in 2020, with the encouragement of my employer, i had the opportunity to undertake further professional development which would enable me to advance my career. when my application was successful i sought and received approval from australian immigration to exit australia and the children and i left australia in early 2021, travelling ultimately to [country b] (where the children now reside). at the time of departing australia i had, and still have, no intention of returning to live there.
the mother further confirms in her most recent affidavit dated 24 january 2022 as follows:-
our departure from australia in early 2021 had been planned progressively and prepared for over a lengthy period and was delayed only as a consequence of the requirement to obtain formal permission to exit from australia. it was and remains intended to be permanent and i confirm that i have no intention of returning to live in australia.
there is no evidence that the mother has since returned to australia or resided elsewhere.
with the advent of the covid pandemic in 2020 and the subsequent lockdowns and border closures, it became clear that i could not remain in australia with the children without support and continue to give them the best opportunities in life, and i made a decision to relocate to [country b] with them.
the mother then appeared to gain employment to advance her career in country b and then made arrangements for the children for a permanent relocation.
my parents have been a major and continuing part of the children's lives from the time of their birth and have played a significant role in assisting me in raising and caring for them, firstly on regular visits to australia and now in [country b]. further, in the period between 2018 and us permanently leaving australia in [early] 2021, i travelled frequently with the children to [country b] and [country d] (where my brother and sister live) to enable them to spend time with family and to develop close bonds with their aunts, uncles and cousins
in preparation for this i enrolled the children in their present school, which they attended by remote learning during 2020 until we were able to obtain permission to leave australia. they also began to participate in virtual counselling with their [country b] psychologist, who they still see regularly to assist with ongoing issues arising from the trauma experienced prior to the father and me separating. accordingly, by the time we got to [country b] and they were able to attend school in person, they already had an established friendship group and were comfortable with and established in the school community. they have now attended the school remotely and in person for over 1 ½ years, and have thrived socially and educationally and progressed to the degree that they have been promoted to the next class.
a small number of trends can be noted in the international jurisprudence relating to the concept of “habitual residence”. first, where there is clear evidence of an intention to commence a new life in another state, then an existing habitual residence will usually be lost and a new one acquired. secondly, where a move is open-ended, or potentially open-ended, the habitual residence at the time of the move may also be lost and a new one acquired relatively quickly.
in the current proceedings, i am of the view that the mother’s and the children’s habitual residence in australia was lost upon their relocation to country b when the mother intended to commence a new life in country b. i am also of the view that as the mother was returning to her country of origin, a previous life and a country where she has the support of her parents, that upon the intention to permanently relocate that habitual residence in country b was quickly acquired by both the mother and the children.   in alfarsi, the children were removed from australia and taken to “war-torn iraq”. in this matter, the children were removed from australia but were not taken to a war-torn country, (b) in alfarsi, shortly after the children were removed from australia, the father (who removed the children) returned to australia, leaving the children in iraq without either party for just under two years. this differs greatly from the current proceedings as the mother remained in country b with the children and, as previously discussed, the children’s habitual residence is somewhat dependent upon the mothers habitual residence. the fact that the mother remained in country b with the children is a significant factor in assessing these children’s habitual residence, (c) in alfarsi, the father contended that “[the children] were removed for a temporary purpose to be returned to australia after a period”. this is a significant difference to the current proceedings, where the mother since the beginning of her involvement in these proceedings has said that she intends to permanently reside in country b and has no intention of returning to australia, and (d) in alfarsi, the father asserted that he did not know who was caring for his children in iraq while he was in australia and also did not know whether they were attending school. in these proceedings, the mother remains the primary carer for the children and actively ensured the children’s enrolment in school in country b prior to leaving australia. these factors, while they may appear small at first blush, create significant differences between the factual scenarios of these two matters. the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].   in alfarsi, shortly after the children were removed from australia, the father (who removed the children) returned to australia, leaving the children in iraq without either party for just under two years. this differs greatly from the current proceedings as the mother remained in country b with the children and, as previously discussed, the children’s habitual residence is somewhat dependent upon the mothers habitual residence. the fact that the mother remained in country b with the children is a significant factor in assessing these children’s habitual residence, (c) in alfarsi, the father contended that “[the children] were removed for a temporary purpose to be returned to australia after a period”. this is a significant difference to the current proceedings, where the mother since the beginning of her involvement in these proceedings has said that she intends to permanently reside in country b and has no intention of returning to australia, and (d) in alfarsi, the father asserted that he did not know who was caring for his children in iraq while he was in australia and also did not know whether they were attending school. in these proceedings, the mother remains the primary carer for the children and actively ensured the children’s enrolment in school in country b prior to leaving australia. these factors, while they may appear small at first blush, create significant differences between the factual scenarios of these two matters. the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].   in alfarsi, the father contended that “[the children] were removed for a temporary purpose to be returned to australia after a period”. this is a significant difference to the current proceedings, where the mother since the beginning of her involvement in these proceedings has said that she intends to permanently reside in country b and has no intention of returning to australia, and (d) in alfarsi, the father asserted that he did not know who was caring for his children in iraq while he was in australia and also did not know whether they were attending school. in these proceedings, the mother remains the primary carer for the children and actively ensured the children’s enrolment in school in country b prior to leaving australia. these factors, while they may appear small at first blush, create significant differences between the factual scenarios of these two matters. the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].   in alfarsi, the father asserted that he did not know who was caring for his children in iraq while he was in australia and also did not know whether they were attending school. in these proceedings, the mother remains the primary carer for the children and actively ensured the children’s enrolment in school in country b prior to leaving australia. these factors, while they may appear small at first blush, create significant differences between the factual scenarios of these two matters. the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].
these factors, while they may appear small at first blush, create significant differences between the factual scenarios of these two matters. the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].
the intention of the primary carer of the children and the children’s degree of assimilation into the non-convention country are two key considerations when determining habitual residence pursuant to lk & director general (2009). as the facts relating to these considerations are so different between these two cases, i do not regard alfarsi & elhage [2016] as being persuasive or binding upon me and prefer to follow the reasoning in lk & director general (2009) and bunyon & lewis (no.3) [2013].
associate: dated: 13 april 2022
dated: 13 april 2022