last updated: 23 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
joyner & joyner [2022] fedcfamc2f 510
orders
the court orders that:
1. the parents, ms joyner (‘the mother’) and mr joyner (‘the father’), shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the children w born in 2009, x born in 2012, y born in 2014, and z born in 2016 (‘the children’).
2. the children shall live with the mother.
3. the children shall spend time with the father as follows:  during the school term and until the commencement of term one in 2023 as follows: (i) from the conclusion of school on friday to the conclusion of school monday (or tuesday morning if the monday is a public holiday or non-school day) each alternate week, with such time to commence on the second friday of each school term, and (ii) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, (b) during the school term commencing on day one of term one in 2023 as follows: (i) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school monday (or tuesday morning if the monday is a public holiday or non-school day) each alternate week, with such time to commence on the second thursday of each school term, and (ii) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, (c) during the school holidays: (i) at the conclusion of term one, term two and term three, for one half of the school holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (ii) at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (d) notwithstanding any other order: (i) the father shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years, on father’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (ii) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and (e) at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.   from the conclusion of school on friday to the conclusion of school monday (or tuesday morning if the monday is a public holiday or non-school day) each alternate week, with such time to commence on the second friday of each school term, and (ii) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term,  ) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term,   during the school term commencing on day one of term one in 2023 as follows: (i) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school monday (or tuesday morning if the monday is a public holiday or non-school day) each alternate week, with such time to commence on the second thursday of each school term, and (ii) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, (c) during the school holidays: (i) at the conclusion of term one, term two and term three, for one half of the school holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (ii) at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (d) notwithstanding any other order: (i) the father shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years, on father’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (ii) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and (e) at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.   from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school monday (or tuesday morning if the monday is a public holiday or non-school day) each alternate week, with such time to commence on the second thursday of each school term, and (ii) from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, to commence on the first thursday of each school term,   during the school holidays: (i) at the conclusion of term one, term two and term three, for one half of the school holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (ii) at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (d) notwithstanding any other order: (i) the father shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years, on father’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (ii) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and (e) at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.   at the conclusion of term one, term two and term three, for one half of the school holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, (ii) at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years,  ) at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years,   notwithstanding any other order: (i) the father shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years, on father’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (ii) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and (e) at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.   the father shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm christmas day in odd numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in even numbered years, on father’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and from 4:00pm on easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and (ii) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and  ) the mother shall have care of the children: from 4:00pm on christmas eve until 4:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, from 4:00pm on christmas day until 4:00pm on boxing day in odd numbered years, on mother’s day from 8:00am to 6:00pm, from 4:00pm easter saturday until 4:00pm on easter monday in odd numbered years, and from 4:00pm on holy thursday until 4:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, and   at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.
4. for the purpose of these orders, the school term and school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the last day of school and conclude at the commencement of the first day of the next school term on which the children are to attend school, and changeovers shall occur at 6:00pm on the day in the middle of the school holiday period.
5. for the purposes of any changeover which does not take place at the children's school/s, the parents are to meet at suburb b mcdonald's at the commencement and conclusion of the children's time with the father unless otherwise agreed between the parents including text messages.
6. for the purpose of any changeover which takes place at the children's school, only the parent who is collecting the children from, or delivering the children to, the school shall attend the school and the other parent is restrained from being in attendance at that time.
7. the parents shall communicate with each other directly via text message about the children and in circumstances of urgency or emergency via telephone.
8. the children shall have virtual communication with the father, whether by telephone or video call, each second night between 6:00pm until 6:30pm, commencing the second night that the children are in the mother’s care.
9. the children shall have virtual communication with the mother, whether by telephone or video call, each second night between 6:00pm until 6:30pm, commencing the second night that the children are in the father’s care.
10. each party shall at all times:  be courteous and respectful to the other parent and their family members, (b) not denigrate the other parent or their family members, (c) not discuss these court proceedings, and (d) be restrained form using profane language and making derogatory comments about the other party, or their family members, to or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any other third parties, and shall remove the children from the presence of any person who is denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children.   not denigrate the other parent or their family members, (c) not discuss these court proceedings, and (d) be restrained form using profane language and making derogatory comments about the other party, or their family members, to or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any other third parties, and shall remove the children from the presence of any person who is denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children.   not discuss these court proceedings, and (d) be restrained form using profane language and making derogatory comments about the other party, or their family members, to or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any other third parties, and shall remove the children from the presence of any person who is denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children.   be restrained form using profane language and making derogatory comments about the other party, or their family members, to or in the presence or hearing of the children, or any other third parties, and shall remove the children from the presence of any person who is denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children.
11. both parents are at liberty to liaise directly with the children's school and sporting bodies to receive school notices, information, newsletters, school reports, school photographs and any other necessary information about the children's progress.
12. both parents are at liberty to attend upon the children’s schools for events which parents are ordinarily invited to attend and, for the purpose of parent-teacher interviews, as they may arrange.
13. each parent shall ensure that the children attend their extra-curricular activities whilst in their respective care, and the other parent shall be permitted to attend such extra-curricular activity whilst the children are in the care of the other parent, including annual awards and end of season events at which both parents shall be entitled to attend.
14. the parents are restrained from further enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities that would impact on the other parent's time save and except by agreement.
15. in the event of a medical emergency concerning the children, or either parent, the parent with whom the child or children are with at that time shall contact the other parent forthwith by telephone call if possible or otherwise by text message to inform them of the nature of the emergency, and the address and telephone number of the hospital emergency department to which the child or children are to be or have been admitted.
16. each parent shall give the other parent fourteen (14) days’ written notice prior to any change in residential address or mobile number.
17. in the event either party wishes to travel with the children outside the commonwealth of australia, then the party proposing such travel shall notify the other party in writing no less than sixty (60) days prior to the departure date of such proposed travel, and shall provide to the other parent:  particulars including the proposed itinerary and proposed period of such trip at least sixty (60) days prior to departure, (b) a final itinerary, including contact telephone numbers and full street addresses of where and with whom the children are staying, at least ten (10) days before departure, and (c) copies of return airline tickets and detail of flights once booked and irrespectively at least ten (10) days before departure.   a final itinerary, including contact telephone numbers and full street addresses of where and with whom the children are staying, at least ten (10) days before departure, and (c) copies of return airline tickets and detail of flights once booked and irrespectively at least ten (10) days before departure.   copies of return airline tickets and detail of flights once booked and irrespectively at least ten (10) days before departure.
18. unless otherwise agreed by the parents, if a parent is to travel internationally with the children pursuant to order 17 above, that travel must occur during the travelling parent’s regular scheduled time with the children during the gazetted school holidays and, in the event that such time transgresses upon the non-travelling parent’s scheduled time with the children, the non-travelling parent’s time is to be compensated within twelve (12) calendar months of the date upon which the travelling parent returns to australia with the children and, if the non-travelling parent wishes to exercise that compensatory time, is to give at least 14 days’ written notice to the other parent of their intention to exercise the same.
19. whilst travelling outside the commonwealth of australia with the children, the travelling parent shall use their best efforts to facilitate a telephone or televisual call such as by facetime or skype with the non-travelling parent at least once each seven (7) days.
20. in the event that either party wishes to travel with the children outside the commonwealth of australia during their time with the children or at other times as agreed, then the parents shall do all things and sign all documents necessary to obtain australian passports (‘passports’) for the children and shall equally share the cost of the passport applications, and also shall do all things and sign all documents necessary to obtain any other documents required to allow the children to travel internationally.
21. the children’s passports shall initially be in the possession of the mother, and thereafter ordinarily be in the possession of the parent with whom the children most recently travelled internationally, but shall be made available to the other parent who intends to travel internationally with the children not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the notified date of departure (or earlier with written evidence that it is required to be made available earlier for the purposes of obtaining a visa).
22. in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute any deed, document or instrument necessary to give effect to these orders, the registrar of the court be appointed pursuant to s 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to execute such deed, document or instrument in the name of the said party and do all acts and things necessary to give validity and operation to the deed, document or instrument upon the registrar being provided with verification of such refusal or failure by way of affidavit.
23. all extant orders be discharged.
24. all outstanding applications be dismissed.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview
1 ms joyner (‘the mother’) wishes to relocate with her children. mr joyner (‘the father’) opposes that application.
2 both parents and their children currently live in the general suburb b area in new south wales. the mother wishes to relocate, with the children, to darwin in the northern territory.
3 there are four children subject to these proceedings: w, born in 2009 (‘w’), x, born in 2012 (‘x’), y, born in 2014 (‘y’), and z, born in 2016 (‘z’).
4 this case presents this court with two central issues for determination:  should the mother be permitted to relocate, with the children, to darwin? (2) if (1) above is answered in the negative, meaning the mother and the children will not relocate to darwin, should the children live in an equal-time arrangement between their parents?   if (1) above is answered in the negative, meaning the mother and the children will not relocate to darwin, should the children live in an equal-time arrangement between their parents?
5 the mother and the father presented two proposals each — one for either contingency resulting from issue (1) above. the independent children’s lawyer (‘icl’), on the other hand, did not endorse the mother’s relocation application and therefore did not propose orders for that eventuality.
6 the ‘overarching issue’ for this court, with respect to the parties’ relocation and time proposals, is whether the ultimate parenting orders are in the children’s best interests.[1] i note this here to foreshadow discussions yet to come concerning the unique issues raised in relocation applications.
7 for now, however, it is beneficial to summarise the inciting events of this litigation and this family’s past and current circumstances.
a brief procedural history
8 the mother instituted proceedings on 23 december 2019. at that time she sought, in addition to final orders permitting her relocation, a recovery order and substantive interim orders pending final determination.
9 the parents had, between separation and the commencement of proceedings, agreed upon and implemented an equal-time arrangement for the children. on 22 december 2019 the children were in the father’s care. the father did not, pursuant to the parties’ agreed arrangement, return the children to the mother on this day. several people expressly advised him, or otherwise indicated to him, that she may imminently relocate to darwin.[2] he says that he retained the children out of fear that the mother intended to relocate ‘without [his] knowledge or consent’.[3] the father, via his sister ms c, informed the mother that he intended to retain the children.[4] hence the mother, the next day, sought a recovery order.
10 pursuant to an order of his honour judge newbrun, the father returned the children to the mother on 24 december 2019. no recovery order issued. his honour also ordered the appointment of an icl at this time.
11 on 6 february 2020 his honour made interim consent orders providing for, inter alia, the children to live with the mother, spend supervised time with the father each alternate weekend, and communicate daily with the father over the telephone. the father’s weekend time was to be supervised by the children’s paternal grandmother and take place between 8:00am saturday and 6:00pm sunday. his honour further ordered on 24 april 2020, again by consent, that the father’s time would build throughout 2020-2021 and incorporate communication through skype. this was, however, on the conditions that he continue therapy and complete hair panel testing for alcohol consumption.[5] a further interim consent order dated 3 december 2020 clarified aspects of the interim arrangements — the father’s time during the school term would continue as previously ordered, he would spend half of all holidays with the children, and each parent would communicate daily with the children when not in their care. the current arrangement, having progressed to its present form in term four 2020, involves a two-week structure in which the father spends time with the children on friday until monday in week one and on friday 3:30pm until 7:00pm in week two.[6]
12 his honour also ordered a family report on 24 april 2020. that report, prepared by family consultant mr e (‘mr e’), was released on 4 february 2021.
13 the final hearing commenced on 1 november 2021, via microsoft teams, and concluded on 3 november 2021.
the children
14 all of the children attend school and play sport. they are, in the circumstances, progressing well and in good health. y and z are, however, more reserved than w and x.[7]
15 w, 13, attends f school and is in grade 8. he plays a variety of sports.
16 mr e (adopting the mother’s words) described w as a happy, healthy, and quite adaptable boy.[8] he has difficulties with his speech and has required speech therapy in the past.[9] mr e noticed a ‘persistent stammer’ that made w hard to understand and, as such, he recommended that w may benefit from re-engaging in speech therapy.[10] shortly after the family report was released w recommenced speech therapy.[11]
17 in 2021 w experienced some difficulties at school including disruptive behaviour, inattention to schoolwork, and generally getting into trouble.[12] under cross-examination the mother agreed that she and the father have managed to communicate effectively in relation to w’s behaviour and, as a result, adopt a unified approach. the parents’ cooperation in this respect has, as agreed by them, led to a substantial improvement in w’s behaviour at school. his behaviour has now settled considerably — it is a testament to his parents that they were able to work together, in a child-focussed way, to achieve this outcome.
18 the rest of the children attend suburb b school (‘suburb b primary’).
19 x, 10, plays a variety of sports. she is in grade 6. she is, in mr e’s account, considered the most outspoken of the children.[13]
20 w and x attended trauma counselling sessions with ms g (‘ms g’) from victims services between april and november 2020. the mother enrolled them in the counselling because they, in her own words:
130. ...required assistance to deal with the trauma they had witnessed ...
21 the trauma to which the mother refers is that of w and x witnessing the father’s anger. the parties disagree in some respects about the extent of any anger or family violence and whether the children witnessed the same.
22 w and x’s trauma counselling took place over the telephone. the mother says (as reported by mr e) that they told ms g that the father ‘had been very angry with them in the past’.[14] the father agreed in march 2020 that trauma counselling was appropriate for his eldest children. he was not, however, consulted prior to the initial enrolment therein nor was he (in his account) aware that it was ‘ongoing’.[15]
23 y, 7, is in grade 3. he plays sports and, in mr e’s view, is in good emotional and physical health.[16] mr e does, however, note y’s diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (‘adhd’) in 2020.
24 the parents have managed y’s adhd under his paediatrician, dr h, with a combination of prescription medications. dr h’s letter dated 1 may 2021 also outlines that y has two other previous diagnoses — emotional dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder (‘odd’).[17] dr h described y as being ‘fidgety, impulsive and inattentive’ at school.[18] further, he recommended that the parties gradually wean y off his prescribed dose of risperidone. the mother confirmed during cross-examination that y’s risperidone dose was reduced as recommended. y still takes other prescription medication and, from mr e’s report, it appears that both parties administer y’s medications as prescribed.[19] y was referred to a behavioural psychologist but, in may 2020, the psychologist discontinued these appointments.[20]
25 y’s behaviour and mental health have, through his own and his parent’s efforts, improved. he is ‘doing well emotionally and educationally’, notwithstanding his hyperactivity at school and difficulty sleeping, and sports is a ‘good outlet’ for his energy.[21] the parties’ efforts to cooperate and effectively communicate with respect to y’s treatment and care is also demonstrably instrumental to the improvement in y’s condition. the mother conceded, in a sense, that y’s health was better managed in person with the father. she recognised that relocating would require the parties to find a new paediatrician and behavioural psychologist. further she recognised that, despite the success of the parties’ face-to-face communication and joint attendance at most appointments, they would have to manage y’s health remotely instead of in person upon her relocation. mr e expressed during cross-examination that the effect of the proposed relocation upon each child, and each child’s response to a significant change in their living arrangements, is uncertain. in this respect the mother, at least in part, concedes that her relocation application may specifically disrupt y’s current progress with his adhd and general mental health.
26 z, 6, is in grade 2. she currently enjoys dance lessons.
27 both y and z held ‘very little awareness’ of the parties’ separation at their interview with mr e. they did, however, know of the mother’s proposed relocation to darwin and say that it would be ‘good’.[22] generally they were curious and happy but, due to their young age, mr e could not discuss their feelings about their circumstances in great depth.
28 the father is heavily involved in the children’s sporting activities and, as conceded by the mother during cross-examination, engages with activities including various sports activities.
29 both parties, evidently, profoundly love their children. they have taken considerable steps to adapt to a post-separation life — not only for the children, but for themselves. the core of this case, despite its multiple factual aspects, remains directed to the parties’ genuine disagreement as to the appropriate course of action to serve the children’s best interests with respect to relocation or alternative time.
facts
30 the mother, born in 1989, is 32 years old. she works full-time as a professional at a local employer.
31 the father, born in 1982, is 39 years old. he works full-time as an manager at a company in suburb b. the parties and their children lived in the house for the entirety of the parties’ relationship prior to separation.
32 the parties met in 2007. the commenced cohabitation in august of that year.
33 i note here that, when the father left his then-partner to be with the mother, an apprehended violence order (‘avo’) issued against him.[23] he admits the same. the parties disagree, however, as to the nature and intent of the threat which ultimately resulted in the avo. the father admits making a threat against his ex-partner’s cat out of frustration but denied any intention to act on it. the mother, on the other hand, says that he threatened his ex-partner personally — not the cat. she further alleges (and he denies) that he possessed, and evidenced an intention to use, firearms after making the threat. the parties’ disagreement on this point, among several factual disputes within the chronology of their relationship, foreshadows their general dispute as to the degree of risk posed by the father to the children.
34 the parties were married in 2011 and separated on a final basis on 1 november 2019 — their marriage endured for just over eight years.
35 their relationship began to deteriorate in late 2019. the mother alleges that the father’s behaviour, escalating in the months prior to separation, included extensive harassment, abusive text messages, pushing her, yelling at her when intoxicated, and demanding sex from her. she further alleges that the children were present on some of the occasions when he yelled at her.[24]
36 the father, as admitted by him, did send several inappropriate text messages to the mother. the mother sets out the following instances prior to separation: 21-24 october 2019 — the father sends messages to the mother asking her for sexual intercourse, with varying degrees of assertiveness, which the father agrees was ‘excessive’,[25] 28 october 2019 — the father sends a number of harassing and, at times, vulgar messages, some of which threatened self-harm or insinuated suicidal intent, and a video evidencing him driving at a dangerous speed, which resulted in the mother contacting the police, and the father being scheduled by police under the mental health act and spending approximately 10-13 hours at suburb j hospital.[26]
37 the text messages received by the mother at this time were annexed to her affidavit.[27] they evidence the father’s deep distress about the breakdown of their marriage. his language was at times vulgar, abusive, and threatening. his intimations of suicide were, without doubt, distressing for the mother — it is understandable that she called the police.
38 following the incident on 28 october 2019 the father, upon release from hospital, returned to the house.
39 the mother says that the father’s messages, alongside his other conduct as alleged, contributed to their final separation on 1 november 2019. the other alleged conduct — not admitted by the father — includes pressuring the mother for sex, pushing her head into a wall, and yelling at her in the house and in the street.[28] he does, however, agree that he followed her to the bathroom in an attempt to ‘rejuvenate [their] relationship’ and that he behaved somewhat erratically on 26 october 2019 en route to town k from a party.[29]
40 following separation, but before the mother moved out of the house, the father continued to send messages to the mother. between 12-15 november 2019 the father texted the mother asking for sexual intercourse and the parties discussed, among other things, their separation, living arrangements, and the prospect of the mother relocating to darwin.[30] with respect to the messages about sexual intercourse, but not with respect to messages on other topics, the father acknowledges that he should not have sent them. it was, in his words, ‘not the best way to deal with the separation’.[31]
41 the mother vacated the house on 15 november 2019 and has, since that time, lived in rental accommodation. she agrees that the father financially assisted her in setting up her new residence.[32]
42 both parties’ mental health suffered post-separation. the father’s mental health, in particular, deteriorated and his behaviour worsened.[33] the parties continued to text each other and, under cross-examination, the mother admitted that some of her messages from this time were also unhelpful. this included telling the father that she could not cope looking after the children and asking him to take them into his care.[34] she claims that she felt overwhelmed at this time due to the father’s ongoing harassment.
43 the parties’ post-separation lives were further disrupted on 14 december 2019 at which time the father, admittedly affected by alcohol,[35] sent a number of text messages and videos to the mother. the videos depicted the father breaking wedding memorabilia and poking his arm with a knife. the latter videos show the father puncturing his skin causing his arm to bleed.[36]
44 he expressed regret for sending these videos and, with respect to the second-mentioned videos, accepts that puncturing his skin and bleeding would have caused the mother concern.[37] police were again involved and, on this occasion, the father was charged with using a carriage service to menace/harass/offend.[38]
45 a provisional avo, naming the mother as the person in need of protection, issued on 17 december 2019 against the father.
46 at trial the father admitted to perpetrating family violence towards the mother — despite his denials to the contrary in his affidavit.[39] that violence included abusive language and text messages and, crucially, the videos containing self-harm. during cross-examination he admitted that the messages and videos were ‘designed to terrify’ and they would have been ‘horrible’ for the mother to experience. the mother was, pursuant to the father’s intention for her to apprehend fear, ‘extremely scared’ and called the police.[40] his behaviour had, by that time, escalated to a point where the mother felt the need to obtain an avo for her protection. as such i find, in the terms of s 4ab(1) of the act and as conceded by the father, that his threatening conduct in this respect caused the mother to be fearful — he perpetrated family violence.[41]
47 family violence, as it concerns the risks associated with the parties’ proposals, is addressed further with respect to s 60cc(2)(b) commencing at paragraph 220 of these reasons.
48 the father commenced the first of seven sessions with ms l (‘ms l’) on 20 december 2019. he attended these sessions to help him deal with the breakdown of the relationship.[42] he also continued to attend individual counselling sessions with ms m (‘ms m’) of n counselling, with whom the parties had previously attended one joint marriage counselling session, throughout 2020 and 2021. the father’s sessions with ms m, which he continued to attend at the time of the final hearing, served to assist him with separation and his approach to parenting.[43] the father also commenced the equips domestic & family violence program (‘the equips program’) around this time and completed the same on 16 april 2021.[44] he stated during cross-examination that he commenced therapy because he ‘had to conduct himself better’ and that he was ‘disgusted’ by his behaviour. the father’s mental health, as it concerns the risks associated with the parties’ proposals, is also addressed further with respect to s 60cc(2)(b).
49 upon separation the children initially lived in an equal time week-about arrangement between the parties. the procedural history of this case, set out at paragraphs 8-13 of these reasons, foreshadows that this arrangement was disrupted on 22 november 2019. to briefly revisit the events — the father received from the mother a message that she intended to relocate ‘with or without the children’ and, on the basis of this and other information, retained the children. the father admits that he engaged his sister ms c to message the mother notwithstanding the avo of 17 december 2019. during cross-examination the father confirmed his deep regret for sending the mother the distressing videos and text messages and, further, he recognised that retaining the children was a gross breach of trust which caused more distress to the mother and the children.
50 shortly after separation, in february 2020,[45] the father commenced a relationship with dr o — hereinafter referred to as ‘dr o’, noting that she is involved in this litigation personally and not as a treating professional. dr o works full-time from home for a queensland-based company and, as of january 2021, has lived with the father at the house.[46] they now have a child together.
51 as at the date of ms m’s report the father had attended on 26 occasions over nearly two years. the last session as at the date of final hearing occurred on 15 july 2021.[47] some of these sessions have also involved dr o.
52 the mother also appears to have been in a post-separation relationship with mr p (‘mr p’ or ‘uncle p’ to the children).[48] the mother does not mention this relationship in her affidavit. during cross-examination she clarified that mr p was from darwin, that she was seeing him in 2020, and that the relationship had since ended. she and mr p are, in her view, more like friends. the mother is not currently in a committed relationship.
53 a final avo, again for the mother’s protection, issued on 26 march 2020 and expired on 25 march 2021. no further avo has issued.
54 the mother commenced psychological therapy with dr q (‘dr q’) on 23 october 2020. dr q’s letter of this date outlines that, like the father, she also sought counselling to help her cope with the breakdown of the parties’ marriage. the mother’s clinical presentation also, however, notes her social isolation and the absence of a local support network.[49] she does not maintain scheduled appointment with dr q but maintained during cross-examination that she would return to dr q or another practitioner in darwin if she required further treatment.
55 the facts of this case reveal the veracity behind each party’s position with respect to the issues for determination. the mother, as conceded by the father, has been subject to instances of harassment. she may reasonably be worried about the children’s welfare and, alongside some understandable homesickness, may wish to start over in darwin. the father, on the other hand, appears concerned as to the effect of the relocation upon the children and seemingly taken steps to improve his conduct.
issues
introduction to the parties’ proposals
56 there are five proposals for this court’s consideration. given the number and verbosity of proposals in this case it is beneficial to, at the outset, explain the priority order thereof for each party.
57 the mother’s primary position is that she be permitted to relocate with the children. she proposes, in the alternative, that the children live with her and spend alternating weekends and half of school holidays with the father.
58 the priority of the father’s proposals runs directly opposite to the mother’s proposals. his primary position is that the children remain in the suburb b area and, from mid-2022, live in a week-about arrangement between their parents. his alternative proposal, in the event that the mother’s relocation application succeeds, is that the children live with the mother and spend school holiday time with him either in the northern territory or new south wales.
59 the icl, as stated above, presented only one proposal — that the children live in an arrangement in which they spend a little less than equal time with the father.
60 in setting out the orders sought below, and throughout these reasons, i will refer to the parties’ ‘primary’ and ‘alternative’ proposals as explained above (where applicable).
61 i note that the father’s primary proposal, contained in exhibit f5, is based on the icl’s proposal in exhibit i3. these reasons extract, at paragraphs 94 and 96, the contents of each showing the differences in bold italicised text.
62 finally i note that the father’s alternative proposal, exhibit f1, comprises a short minute of proposed orders. it confines itself to the amount and formulation of time, notice periods for exercising time, phone and video communication, and boilerplate orders with respect to the parties’ obligations and the dismissal of outstanding applications. exhibits f1 is, as a result, silent on several other proposed orders. the father’s alternative proposal was in other respects confirmed during final submissions.
issues for determination
63 the two main issues for determination, as outlined at the beginning of these reasons, are:
64 the parties’ proposals also reveal, in addition to the central issues above, various other issues:  how frequently should the children communicate (by telephone or video) with each parent while not in their care and, further, how frequently should the same occur in the event that the children travel internationally with one of the parents? (4) should one or both of the parents be restrained from consuming, or otherwise being effected by, alcohol, drugs, or illicit substances while the children are in their presence, care, or control? (5) in what proportion should the parents pay the children’s travel costs to facilitate the father’s time if the mother’s relocation application succeeds? (6) in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?   should one or both of the parents be restrained from consuming, or otherwise being effected by, alcohol, drugs, or illicit substances while the children are in their presence, care, or control? (5) in what proportion should the parents pay the children’s travel costs to facilitate the father’s time if the mother’s relocation application succeeds? (6) in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?   in what proportion should the parents pay the children’s travel costs to facilitate the father’s time if the mother’s relocation application succeeds? (6) in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?   in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?
65 with respect to issue 3 above, the father’s primary proposal seeks that the children have ‘liberal and flexible’ communication with each parent by phone or video on every second night as agreed.[50] the icl, while seeking the same ‘liberality’ and ‘flexibility’ of communication, did not wish to be heard in relation to specific proposals of the parties in relation to telephone time. both of the mother’s proposals, and the father’s alternative proposal, seek telephone or video communication at specific times and frequencies when the children are in the other parent’s care. however they do not, like the father’s primary proposal, seek that the children’s communication be ‘liberal’, ‘flexible’, or any other descriptor to this effect. the father’s primary proposal seeks that virtual communication obligations be reduced to once every seven days while travelling overseas. the mother’s proposals are both silent on this point.
66 with respect to issue 4 above, the mother’s primary proposal seeks that the father be restrained from consuming and being effected by substances while the children are in his presence, care, or control.[51] neither of the father’s proposals include any injunctive orders to this effect nor does the mother seek the same in her alternative proposal. it is my view that, within the factual matrix of this case, i must determine the appropriateness of such an order notwithstanding that the mother may have abandoned the same since filing her amended initiating application.
67 in relation to issue 5 above, the mother’s primary proposal seeks that she fund the children’s travel to the father’s residence. she seeks that, in turn, the father fund the children’s travel to return to her residence.[52] neither the father nor the icl propose orders about the payment of travel costs. mr blackah, on behalf of the father, raised the issue of travel costs with the mother during cross-examination. he asked the mother about the logistics of air travel, including covid-19 restrictions, the children’s confidence travelling by plane, and the cost of facilitating the father’s time between darwin and suburb b. the mother said that one-way fares for herself and the children were, maybe, $1,100.00. mr blackah put to the mother that airfares change — she said in response that this was not an issue. there is an underlying tension around this issue but its relevance depends on the success or otherwise of the mother’s relocation application.
68 finally, in relation to issue 6, the parties agree much of the orders concerning international travel save for those concerning passports and virtual communication. the latter is addressed within issue 3 above. the children’s passports should, in each parent’s proposals, be ordinarily held by them. i will determine this discrete logistical issue at the conclusion of these reasons.
matters agreed, substantially agreed, or peripheral to the issues in dispute
69 the parties’ proposals in this case are quite detailed and have, over the course of the litigation, markedly evolved. for this reason i have, wherever possible, distilled the orders sought by each party to those which touch and concern the issues for determination. the sub-headings and accompanying discussions below, between paragraphs 70-90 of these reasons, briefly address matters wholly agreed, substantially agreed, or otherwise unnecessary to extract in full. having addressed those matters i will, in the parties’ respective proposals, only extract the orders sought in relation to the contested issues.
equal shared parental responsibility
70 all parties agree that equal shared parental responsibility should be ordered.[53]
the children’s living arrangements
71 there is also agreement between the mother and the father with respect to the children’s living arrangements if the mother’s relocation application succeeds. they agree that, in those circumstances, the children should live with the mother in darwin.[54] this is a practical point of agreement but i note, perhaps pedantically, that it is not agreed between all parties. the icl did not endorse the mother’s relocation application and, as such, did not propose orders for that eventuality.
72 i further note that, while he proposed that the children live with the mother in the event that she and the children remain in new south wales, the father ultimately seeks an equal-time arrangement in his primary proposal.[55]
the children’s time with the father if the mother’s relocation application is successful
73 the mother’s primary proposal and the father’s alternative proposal contain identical terms with respect to the children’s time: one week during the northern territory april school holidays, three weeks during the northern territory june/july school holidays, two weeks during the northern territory september/october school holidays, four weeks during the northern territory december/january school holidays with such time to involve the children spending christmas day with the father each odd year, and at any other time as may be agreed between the father and mother.[56]
74 both parents’ proposals also allow the father, with 14 days’ notice, to travel to darwin to spend time with the children. the father’s alternative proposal does, however, provide for two additional nuances. first, he proposes an additional obligation for the mother to make the children available for this purpose if he has given notice in compliance with the order.[57] second, he proposes that his time with the children may occur either in the northern territory or in new south wales and that such time also be subject to 14 days’ notice.[58] this issue is one of logistics and, as it was not agitated at trial, will be addressed if the mother’s relocation application is successful.
changeover arrangements if the mother and the children remain in new south wales
75 the parties agree that, if the mother’s relocation application fails, changeover shall occur at the suburb b mcdonald’s at the commencement and conclusion of the children’s time.[59] the father and the icl’s proposed orders also provide for other changeover arrangements to be made in writing.
76 the mother and the father seemingly agree that, in the event the relocation application succeeds, they will organise changeover arrangements once the father’s time with the children has been notified and confirmed between them.[60]
injunctions against denigration and discussion of litigation
77 it was not in contention at the trial that, regardless of whether the mother’s relocation application succeeds, the children should not witness, hear, or otherwise be involved in any denigration of the other parent or any discussion about the litigation.[61] while the precise terms of these proposed injunctive orders differ slightly it was apparent at trial that their essence was agreed.
communication between the parents
78 the parties agree that, if the mother’s relocation application fails, the parents shall ordinarily communicate through text messaging and only by telephone in circumstances of urgency or emergency.[62]
79 the mother’s primary proposal includes a substantially similar order, at least initially, but further seeks that the father be restrained from directly contacting her if she tells him she does not wish to speak to him.[63] the father’s alternative proposal does not include orders in response or, indeed, with respect to the parents’ routine communication at all. at trial the mother did not push her position on this specific issue. it appears that, since filing her amended initiating application in january 2020, the mother no longer requires an order in those terms.
medical emergencies and illnesses
80 the mother and the father substantially agree that if one or more of their children becomes subject to illness or medical emergency while in their care they must contact the other parent. the haste with which they must do so, and the information they must provide, varies between the proposals.[64] the essence of the order appears to be uncontentious — neither the mother, father, nor the icl sought to agitate the issue.
changes of address or contact details
81 the parties’ proposals differ somewhat in relation to their obligations to notify the other upon changing their address or contact details. the mother’s primary proposal seeks that, following relocation, she immediately notify him of her new address and notify him within 24 hours of any changes to her address or other contact details.[65] the father’s primary proposal and the icl’s proposal, on the other hand, seek that the parties give one another 14 days’ notice of any changes to their addresses or phone numbers.[66]
82 the issue was not greatly focussed upon at trial. the appropriate form of such an order, at least to a degree, depends upon the success or otherwise of the mother’s relocation application.
parents’ liberty to liaise with the children’s schools and attend school and extracurricular activities
83 the parties substantially agree that both parents shall be at liberty to attend and liaise with the children’s schools and extracurricular activities.[67] the extent of their liberty to do so is described by the parties’ proposals somewhat differently. in essence the mother seeks a broad non-descript liberty and the father and the icl propose a liberty which is specific and itemised.
84 the father’s proposal in this respect amends that of the icl with these reasons, at paragraph 94, showing the same in bold italicised font. the father and the icl further seek that, except by mutual agreement, the parents be restrained from enrolling the children in extracurricular activities that would impact the other parent’s time.
85 the parties’ minor disagreement on this point will arise if the mother’s relocation application fails.
notification of intention to visit darwin
86 the mother and father agree that, if the mother’s relocation application succeeds, the father may travel to darwin to spend time with the children upon 14 days’ notice to the mother.[68] the mother in those circumstances also seeks 14 days’ notice of the father’s alternative residence in darwin and any other persons with whom the children may be staying.[69] the relevance of this slight misalignment in the parent’s agreement will, again, become relevant if the mother’s primary proposal succeeds.
mother’s caveat to equal shared parental responsibility order in amended initiating application
87 the mother’s primary proposal originally sought that she have sole parental responsibility with respect to the children’s education.[70] mr scarlett, on her behalf, conceded this point during final submissions.
overseas travel and the children’s passports
88 both parents’ primary proposals expressly include terms with respect to overseas travel. such issues are important but, in the landscape of these reasons, they are one of several logistical background concerns.
89 in essence the parents agree to 60 days’ notice of an intention to travel overseas and that, upon notification, the non-travelling parent cannot unreasonably withhold consent to the travel.[71] further they agree to facilitate the travel by signing all relevant and necessary documentation, share the children’s passport costs equally, and provide the other with intended itineraries, accommodation details, and proof of return airfares before departure.[72]
90 there are two minor points upon which there is no apparent agreement — first, the travelling parent’s obligations with respect to telephone or video communication during overseas travel and, second, which parent is to ordinarily possess the children’s passports.[73] i will specifically determine these issues, included at issues 3 and 7 above, at the conclusion of these reasons.
the mother’s proposals
primary proposal
91 the essence of the mother’s primary proposal, omitting agreed or peripheral issues, is that:
... 2. the father be responsible for the day-to-day decisions about the children’s care and welfare when they are in his care, and that such decisions be the mother’s responsibility at all other times.
...
9. the mother and the children may permanently relocate and change residence from the suburb b area in new south wales to the geographical area of the northern territory known as darwin. ... 12. to facilitate the father’s time ... the mother is to arrange at her own expense for the children to travel from her residence to the father’s residence, and at the conclusion of the visit the father is to arrange necessary travel arrangements for the children to return to the mother’s residence at his own expense. ... 14-15. the children, when residing with one parent (‘parent a’), have telephone or video-call communication with the other parent (‘parent b’) each evening between 6:30pm and 7:00pm, with parent a to initiate the call to parent b’s mobile telephone, and for parent a to facilitate the call by ensuring the availability of the children and a switched-on, charged mobile phone. 16. the father not consume (or be in any way effected by) alcohol, drugs or any illicit substances in the presence of the children or which they are in his care or control. ...
alternative proposal
92 exhibit m1 is, of course, substantially different from the mother’s primary proposal with respect to the father’s time and any changeover arrangements. the extract below, again, omits matters agreed or peripheral including a final boilerplate order discharging all previous parenting orders.
... 3. the respondent father is to have responsibility for decisions as to the children’s day to day care welfare and development during periods when they are spending time with him and the mother has that responsibility at all other times. 5. the children are to spend time with the father as follows: during the school term from the conclusion of school on each alternate friday to the conclusion of school on the monday commencing on the second friday of the school term, each other thursday from immediately after school to the commencement of school on the friday, on father's day from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm, and during the school holidays for half of the mid-year school holidays and for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in each year as agreed between the parties in writing, and, failing agreement, on a week about basis, with the father's time commencing at 8:00 am on 26 december 2021 and each alternate week thereafter, and at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parties in writing. 6. the father's time in accordance with order 5(i) is suspended at 8:00 am on mother's day in each year. ... 11. both parents are at liberty to attend upon the children's schools and extracurricular activities and shall be at liberty to liaise with the schools. ...
the father’s proposals
93 the essence of the father’s primary proposal is that the children should not relocate to darwin with the mother. exhibit f5 also sought, in addition to the amended terms of exhibit i3, orders from the further amended response and a s 106a order.[74]
94 exhibit f5 is relevantly extracted below and, where changes have been made to exhibit i3, these are shown in bold italicised text.
... 3. that the children shall spend time with the father as follows: during the school term and until the conclusion of term two in 2022 as follows: from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school monday (or 3:30pm if it is a non-school or public holiday) each alternate week, with such time to commencing on the first thursday of each school term,[75] during the school term commencing on day one of term three in 2022 as follows: from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school tuesday (or 3:30pm if it is a non-school day or public holiday) each alternate week, with such time to commencing on the first thursday of each school term,
c. during the school holidays: at the conclusion of term one, term two and term three, for one half one the school holidays, being the first half of the holidays in odd years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years, at the conclusion of term four, for one half of the holidays being, the first half of the holidays in odd numbered years and the second half of the holidays in even numbered years. d. that the notwithstanding any other order:
i. the father shall have care of the children:
1. from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 5:00pm christmas day in even numbered years, 2. on fathers' day from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 3. from 3.30pm on holy thursday until 3.30pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years. 4. from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3.30pm on easter monday in even numbered years
ii. the mother shall have care of the children:
1. from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 5:00pm on christmas day in odd numbered years, 2. on mothers' day from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 3. from 3.30pm easter saturday until 3.30pm on easter monday in odd numbered years. 4. from 3.30pm on holy thursday until 3.30pm on easter saturday in even numbered years. at other times and with variations of the above orders as agreed between the parents in writing including text message.
4. that for the purpose of these orders, the school term and school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the last day of school and conclude at the commencement of the first day of the next school term on which the children are to attend school, and changeovers shall occur at 6.00pm on the day in the middle of the school holiday period. ... 6. that for the purpose of changeover at the children's school, only the parent who is collecting the children from, or delivering the children to, the school shall attend the school and the other parent is restrained from being in attendance at that time. ... 8. that the children shall have liberal and flexible communication on every second night with each parent via telephone or skype as agreed. ... 10. that both parents are at liberty to liaise directly with the children's school and sporting bodies to receive school notices,, information, newsletters, school reports, school photographs and any other necessary information about the children's progress. 11. that both parents are at liberty to attend upon the children’s schools for events at which parents are ordinarily invited to attend, for parent teacher interviews as they may arrange, and to attend non-urgent medical appointments, which as far as possible, shall be scheduled at times convenient to both parents. 12. that each parent shall ensure that the children attend their extra-curricular activities whilst in their respective care, and the other parent shall be permitted to attend such extra-curricular activity whilst the children are in the care of the other parent, including annual awards and end of season events at which both parents shall be entitled to attend. 13. that the parents are restrained from further enrolling the children in extra­ curricular activities that would impact on the other parent's time save and except by agreement. ... [+ paragraphs 17-21 of the further amended response] 17. that both parties are at liberty to attend any school based event, sporting event and extracurricular activity that the children may undertake regardless of whose care the children are in at the time that the event or activity takes place. [+ s 106a order]
95 the father’s position in the event that the children are permitted to relocate to darwin with the mother is contained in exhibit f1. as mentioned above this proposal is short and, with respect to the issues in contention, only contains a proposal about telephone and video communication.
... 3. that the children shall have telephone or video chat communication with the respondent father when in the applicant mother's care three (3) days a week as agreed between 6.30pm and 7pm, according to the location of where the children are at the time of the telephone or video chat communication, with the respondent father to initiate the call to the mother's mobile telephone and the mother is to facilitate the call by ensuring that the children are available and that her mobile phone is switched on and charged. 4. that the children shall have telephone or video chat communication with the applicant mother when in the respondent father's care three (3) days a week as agreed between 6.30pm and 7pm, according to the location of where the children are at the time of the telephone or video chat communication, with the applicant mother to initiate the call to the father's mobile telephone and the father is to facilitate the call by ensuring that the children are available and that his mobile phone is switched on and charged. ...
the icl’s proposal
96 exhibit i3 contains the icl’s single proposal which was, as explained above, edited by the father to create his primary proposal contained in exhibit f5. the contents of exhibit i3 is extracted below omitting matters agreed or peripheral and, again for convenience, showing where it differs from exhibit f5 in bold italicised text.
... 3. that the children shall spend time with the father as follows: during the school term and until the conclusion of term two in 2022 as follows: from the conclusion of school on friday to the conclusion of school monday (or 3:30pm if it is a non-school or public holiday) each alternate week, with such time to commencing on the second friday of each school term, from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, commencing on the first thursday of each school term. during the school term commencing on day one of term three in 2022 as follows: from the conclusion of school on thursday to the conclusion of school monday (or 3:30pm if it is a non-school day or public holiday) each alternate week, with such time to commencing on the second friday of each school term, from the conclusion of school on thursday to the commencement of school on friday each alternate week, commencing on the first thursday of each school term. d. that the notwithstanding any other order:
1. from 2:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in even numbered years, 2. on fathers’ day from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 3. from 3.30pm on holy thursday until 3.30pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years. 4. from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:00pm on easter monday in even numbered years
1. from 2:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in odd numbered years, 2. on mothers’ day from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 3. from 3.30pm easter saturday until 3.30pm on easter monday in odd numbered years. 4. from 3.30pm on holy thursday until 3.30pm on easter saturday in even numbered years.
4. that for the purpose of these orders, the school term and school holidays are deemed to commence at the conclusion of the last day of school and changeovers shall occur at 6.00pm on the day in the middle of the school holiday period. ... 8. that the children shall have liberal and flexible communication with each parent via telephone or skype as agreed. ... 11. that both parents are at liberty to attend upon the children’s schools for events at which parents are ordinarily invited to attend, for parent teacher interviews as they may arrange. 12. that each parent shall ensure that the children attend their extra-curricular activities whilst in their respective care, and the other parent shall not attend such extra-curricular activity whilst the children are in the care of the other parent, save and except for annual awards or end of season events at which both parents shall be entitled to attend. ...
documents relied upon
97 the mother relied upon the following documents: amended initiating application filed 14 january 2020, affidavit of ms joyner filed 2 august 2021, affidavit of ms r filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of ms s filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of ms t filed 30 july 2021, notice of risk filed 23 december 2019, exhibit m1 — mother’s minute of proposed orders in the event that she is not permitted to relocate to darwin with the children, exhibit m2 —ms g’s psychological notes, dated between april and november 2020, from victim trauma counselling sessions with w and x,[76] exhibit m3 — dr q’s psychological notes, dated between october 2020 and june 2021, with respect to the mother, and exhibit m4 — new south wales police reports, including records from september and october 2007, april 2008, december 2019, and february 2020.
98 the father relied upon the following documents: further amended response filed 31 may 2021, affidavit of mr joyner filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of mr u filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of ms m filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of mr v filed 30 july 2021, affidavit of dr o filed 30 july 2021, exhibit f1 — father’s minute of proposed orders in the event that the mother is permitted to relocate to darwin with the children, exhibit f2 — school reports, internal correspondence, and caution notices produced by f school, dated between 18 may 2021 and 8 june 2021, exhibit f3 — one page of ms m’s psychological notes, dated 1 november 2019, with respect to the mother and the father, exhibit f4 — extracts from the aa early learning sign-in sheets, including records from 1 february 2018 to 4 july 2018, 25 october 2018 to 30 november 2018, and 21 may 2019 to 19 june 2019, and exhibit f5 — father’s minute of proposed orders in the event that the mother is not permitted to relocate to darwin with the children, as amended from exhibit i3, and an email from the father’s solicitor to the court dated 3 november 2021.
99 the icl relied upon the following documents: family report, prepared by family consultant mr e, dated 29 january 2021, exhibit i1 — single page headed ‘new south wales government education’, dated 20 may 2021, extracting case note number ...with respect to w, exhibit i2 — single page headed ‘bb paediatrics’, dated 1 may 2021, extracting correspondence from dr h to the suburb b healthcare centre with respect to y, and exhibit i3 — the icl’s minute of proposed orders.
evidence
the mother
100 the mother was cross examined by mr blackah, counsel for the father, and mr schroder, counsel for the icl. while she did occasionally volunteer information she generally answered questions calmly and responsively and, at times, against interest.
101 the mother has, and continues to make efforts towards, a cooperative relationship with the father notwithstanding her allegations of family violence. she believes that the children benefit from their relationships with the father and, in my view, she genuinely holds this position. further she conceded that the children are happy living in new south wales.
102 it appears that the mother harbours mistrust of the father. she remains impacted by his behaviour at the time of separation and, seemingly, that experience forms part of her desire to return to the northern territory.
103 with respect to the mother’s presentation as a witness she appeared to be genuine and truthful. she earnestly believes that relocating to darwin will be a fresh start and allow her to follow her dream of becoming a public servant.
104 i was, however, left with the impression that the mother had not fully considered the practicalities of her primary proposal. in particular i refer to the impact upon the children, who are well settled in their home environment, of the proposed relocation.
ms s
105 ms s is the children’s maternal grandmother and resides in darwin. she was cross-examined by mr blackah.
106 notwithstanding the distance, ms s said, she and the children have a close relationship and communicate every day. she presented as a supporter of the mother and the children and, in the event of relocation, appears able to help the mother.
107 ms s’ presentation under cross-examination does, however, leave me concerned that she has a negative attitude towards the father. such an attitude would affect her ability to promote the children’s relationships with him. for example she was asked whether she could positively comment on, or acknowledge the benefit to the children of, the father’s relationships with them. ms s gave an indirect answer by saying that ‘i assume that the children enjoy their time with him’. she was reluctant to say that the children benefitted from their relationships with the father.
108 ms s’ attitude towards the father has some relevance to the outcome of these proceedings since, if permitted to relocate, the mother and the children will spend significant time with ms s. this is particularly true if they reside with her for a period of time.
ms r
109 ms r — the self-described ‘best friend’ of the mother — works as a public servant in darwin. she was not cross-examined.
110 the affidavit evidence from ms r corroborates the mother’s evidence in several respects. ms r says she was with the mother when, on 14 december 2019, the father sent a number of abusive text messages.[77] she says that at this time she, the mother, ms s, and the children were present when the father arrived at the property wanting to talk to the mother. in her account the father raised his voice, upset the children, and was met by a yelled plea from y — ‘please stop fighting daddy please leave’.[78]
111 ms r also states that the father continued to contact the mother on 14 december 2019. she and ms s monitored the mother’s phone over the following five hours during which time the father sent text messages, voice messages, photographs and videos.[79] ms r says she viewed the videos — namely, those depicting the wedding memorabilia and self-harm — and witnessed how upset the mother became after viewing the same.[80]
112 ms r further witnessed w, on 17 december 2019, become distressed about having to spend time with the father. she says that he was reluctant to do so and that the mother was visibly distressed to hand the children over.[81]
113 consistently with the mother’s evidence ms r states that the mother has no family support in new south wales. she says that throughout their friendship, and in particular during this litigation, she is an important support figure for the mother.
114 ms r also relevantly states that her daughter and son have ‘great relationships’ with w and the younger children (particularly z) respectively.[82] she expressed a belief that, if permitted to relocate, the mother and the children will be ‘flooded’ with support making the transition easy. she further states her confidence that, despite the distance, the children’s relationship with the father will not deteriorate if the mother’s relocation application succeeds.[83]
115 the evidence of ms r was unchallenged by the father or the icl. i am not, however, bound to accept evidence purely because it is not challenged. the full court in scott & scott [1994] famca 12 explains, with some qualification and exploration of authorities, that there exists no rule of law in australia that a primary judge must accept unchallenged evidence.[84]
116 ms r’s evidence has some relevance to the issues to be determined and, in particular, has some weight as to the impact of the father’s poor behaviour towards the mother at the time of separation.
ms t
117 ms t is the mother’s step-mother. she lives with the children’s maternal grandfather in the northern territory and, in her account, visited the mother and the father in new south wales every year. ms t was not required for cross-examination.
118 ms t’s lengthy affidavit paints a somewhat negative picture of the father. her claims against him include that he dedicated himself to his work over his family, drank too much, yelled, was often angry and the children, and increasingly controlling of the mother.
119 in effect, ms t concludes that the father is incapable of simultaneously caring for the children and maintaining his work and that, if the mother relocates, her many family members will assist with the children.[85]
120 ms t’s evidence, like that of ms r, was unchallenged. it does not follow, by virtue of that fact alone, that such evidence should be wholly accepted. i refer again to scott & scott as cited and discussed at paragraph 115 above.
121 ms t’s evidence corroborates some of the mother’s evidence regarding the father’s involvement in the children’s lives prior to separation. observing and spending time with the family on her yearly visits may have provided an impression. an impression is not, however, necessarily representative of the manner in which the family operated generally. the mother’s facebook posts and messages, as annexed to the father’s affidavit, also contradict some of the negative sentiments expressed by ms t.[86]
122 while i afford ms t’s evidence some weight, particularly in relation to her potential support of the mother if she is permitted to relocate, my decision is likely to be more influenced by other evidence.
the father
123 the father was cross-examined by mr scarlett, counsel for the mother, and mr schroder, counsel for the icl. the father answered questions directly and conceded that his behaviour, particularly at the point of separation, had been very poor. he further conceded that the children should live primarily with the mother. this concession was child-focussed and it is a position with which i agree.
124 that said i am not convinced that the father fully appreciates the mother’s remaining trauma from the family violence suffered at the time of separation. at times he minimised the effect of past events upon the children and dismissed some of the mother’s ongoing concerns. it is clear that he has considerable work ahead of him to regain the mother’s trust.
dr o
125 dr o, the father’s partner, provided her evidence directly and was not moved from the evidence contained in her affidavit. in my view she was not only an impressive witness but an important support figure for the father and the children.
126 i accept dr o’s evidence and gain great confidence from her as a strong support for the father. i am confident that she enhances his ability to provide for the children’s needs.
mr u
127 mr u, the father’s cousin, was cross-examined by mr scarlett. he currently lives in brisbane and, from 2016 to 2018, lived as a guest in the house on a part-time basis.
128 the effect of mr u’s evidence was that he saw the father assist with the children and the housework. he implied that the mother did not greatly contribute in this regard.
129 mr u was an unconvincing and unimpressive witness. i find him to be a partisan witness and not particularly helpful to the father's case. he was unfairly critical of the mother.
130 i give mr u’s evidence little weight. his observations, in addition to being from many years ago, were coloured by his desire to assist the father’s case.
mr v
131 mr v, the father’s employer, was not required for cross-examination. mr v also lives on the property in suburb b upon which there are 16 residences.[87]
132 mr v confirmed the flexibility of the father’s working hours and thus his ability to attend to the children’s school needs and extracurricular activities.
133 i accept mr v’s evidence.
ms m
134 ms m, the father’s treating counsellor, was not cross-examined. as introduced earlier in these reasons she initially was the parents’ joint marriage counsellor and, after separation, counselled only the father. her report dated 16 july 2021 is annexed to her affidavit.
135 as at the date of her report the father had attended 26 sessions, over nearly two years, with the last being on 15 july 2021.[88] dr o was also present on some of these occasions. ms m described the father as ‘diligent’ in attending his appointments.[89]
136 as set out in the factual background the father, in january 2020, commenced the equips program.[90] ms m described the equips program as follows:
... this is a program that is used within corrections and also as part of parole. it is a cognitive behaviour program that is well researched, to identify abuse and ways in which to change. each week there are goals set that the client must attempt and report back.[91]
137 ms m’s report concludes as follows:
3. mental status examination (mse). after many sessions with mr. joyner, he does not present as having any obvious mental health issues. he has maintained that he does not drink at all, even socially, and this can be supported by his hair follicle tests. mr. joyner’s physiological and psychological stressors have been addressed in sessions around the loss of his children and he shows no signs of returning to any of the initial aggression displayed at the onset of his separation from mrs. joyner. 4. psychometrics
after many sessions with mr. joyner, he does not present as having any obvious mental health issues. he has maintained that he does not drink at all, even socially, and this can be supported by his hair follicle tests. mr. joyner’s physiological and psychological stressors have been addressed in sessions around the loss of his children and he shows no signs of returning to any of the initial aggression displayed at the onset of his separation from mrs. joyner. 4. psychometrics
4. psychometrics
scale range
clasification
percentile
depression
normal
< 7%ile
anxiety
< 9%ile.
stress
< 7%ile.
these percentile scores are relative to other individuals in the general population. e.g. a score of 61st percentile implies that a person obtained a higher score than 61% of the population. the above dass-21 test was recently carried out on mr. joyner to ascertain his level of depression/anxiety at present. further mr. joyner’s pai (personal assessment inventory) responses suggest an acknowledgement of the importance of addressing problems and the perception of a need for help in dealing with these challenges should they arise. he reports a positive attitude towards the possibility of personal change, the value of therapy and the importance of personal responsibility.[92]
the above dass-21 test was recently carried out on mr. joyner to ascertain his level of depression/anxiety at present. further mr. joyner’s pai (personal assessment inventory) responses suggest an acknowledgement of the importance of addressing problems and the perception of a need for help in dealing with these challenges should they arise. he reports a positive attitude towards the possibility of personal change, the value of therapy and the importance of personal responsibility.[92]
further mr. joyner’s pai (personal assessment inventory) responses suggest an acknowledgement of the importance of addressing problems and the perception of a need for help in dealing with these challenges should they arise. he reports a positive attitude towards the possibility of personal change, the value of therapy and the importance of personal responsibility.[92]
138 ms m’s evidence is important. her report corroborates the father’s position that, notwithstanding his past conduct as alleged and in part conceded, he takes his mental health and anger issues seriously.
139 i accept ms m’s evidence.
mr e
140 mr e provided the family report, dated 29 january 2021, and was cross-examined by all counsel. in preparing the report mr e conducted interviews in january 2021 with the mother, the father, and the children. he also read the court file.[93]
141 w and x were interviewed separately. y and z were interviewed together.[94]
142 both w and x expressed a desire to live in darwin. x said that she had written a letter to the father expressing the same. mr e opined, during cross-examination, that w and x’s stated desires to relocate should be interpreted as them wishing to live with the mother wherever she resides. they had not, however, properly considered the ramifications of living in darwin — including, in particular, the immense distance from their father and their home state in which they have lived for all their lives. mr e maintained during cross-examination that, for w and x, their primary concern was to remain living with the mother.
143 mr e concluded that w remained the most concerned about living with the parent he perceived as his main attachment figure — relocation was not the primary issue for him.[95] with respect to x mr e reported that, upon asking her why she wished to live in darwin, she expressed that ‘it will be more fair’. this, in mr e’s view, referred to her ‘being able to spend greater time with the maternal extended family’, although he noted that x held little awareness of how relocating may affect her time with the father or otherwise have personal implications.[96]
144 y and z both told mr e that they knew of the mother’s desire to live in darwin and that this would be ‘good’. they also stated that they love their parents ‘the same’.
145 mr e concludes with respect to the children’s views about the proposed relocation as follows:
the expressed wishes of w and x to move to darwin appeared firm and should be given some weight yet this needs to be assessed in context. the older children seem more attached to the mother, whom they regard as the primary parent. one assumes that if ms joyner did not wish to relocate, w and x would be happy to remain living where they are.[97]
146 mr e reports, in effect, that the children will adjust and adapt to their new darwin environment if they relocate.[98] he expressed some concern, however, that y and z could experience ‘parental loss issues’ if they relocate.[99] mr e’s report is reluctant to provide a concluded view about the relocation issue but, under cross-examination, he was pressed to do so.
147 ultimately mr e opined that it is in the children’s best interests for them to remain in new south wales and spend substantial and significant time with the father. mr e justified this position on three bases — the stability and certainty of the children’s current arrangement in new south wales, the children’s strong and committed relationships with the father through regular time, and that they had only ever known new south wales as their home.
148 mr e further expressed concern at the uncertainties in the mother’s relocation proposal. it was not well planned and, in mr e’s view, this posed some risk to the children. the children have specific, and sometimes significant needs — w’s behaviour, y’s adhd and odd, and various other physical and emotional needs. mr e opined that these needs may be more impacted by a move to uncertain circumstances notwithstanding any financial and family supports in darwin.
149 i asked mr e about the impact of family violence (noting the father’s admissions) upon the mother. he replied that her stated need to move away from where that violence occurred might be a considerable matter to take into account. he also said that, while he understood the impact of family violence upon the mother, he was comforted by the father’s efforts to address his poor behaviour, his improved mental health, and the fact that he is currently in a committed and stable relationship. further mr e thought that alcohol was a feature of the family violence as described and, if the father is telling the truth, he no longer consumes alcohol at all (or at least not to excess).
150 on this issue, in his report, mr e stated:
although mr joyner's behaviour leading to the avo, is indicative of an acute mental health episode, exacerbated by alcohol, he maintains both these issues have been overcome and have no impact on his parenting capacity.[100]
151 with respect to the mother’s trauma resulting from family violence mr e ultimately said that, irrespective of where she lives, that trauma will likely follow her for some time. his view was that the proposed relocation will not necessarily cure her trauma.
152 mr e also referred to the other benefits — for the children — of the mother and the children remaining in new south wales. the mother has not lived in darwin in a long time. further she does have friends who support her in new south wales. she is also supported by the father and dr o when the children are in their care and, when the opposite is true, they receive support from the mother in the same way. the mother may, in fact, need a higher level of support dealing with the children. there was a moment after separation in which the mother felt unable to cope with the care of the children. that vulnerability remains. as such ongoing therapy (whether from dr q or otherwise) and support from the father will assist her.
153 with respect to the children’s emotional wellbeing mr e’s view was, in essence, that their specific needs, experiences, and circumstances requires the maintenance of stability and certainty in their lives. this is particularly because they did not cope well with the uncertainty caused by the separation of their parents.
154 mr e was firm that, if the mother and children remain in new south wales, there should not be an equal time arrangement. such an arrangement is, in his view, misaligned with the children’s best interests and is contra-indicated by the mother’s lingering distrust of the father. mr e did, however, say that a substantial and significant time arrangement would be appropriate. he proposed that the children should live with the father for four nights per fortnight during school terms for approximately six months and, thereafter, spend five nights per fortnight during school terms by mid-2022.
155 throughout his oral evidence mr e provided practical and helpful evidence. he highlighted an important matter for consideration in this case — the need to provide these vulnerable children, of whom some have specific and special needs, with ongoing certainty and stability.
156 i accept mr e’s observations and opinions as contained in the family report and as expressed at trial.
submissions
the icl’s submissions
157 as explained earlier in these reasons the icl made a single proposal. mr schroder submitted, consistently with that proposal, that the children should not relocate to darwin and that they should spend substantial and significant time with the father. that time would commence with a 4/10 arrangement and then build to a 5/9 by mid-2022 as recommended by mr e. mr schroeder further confirmed that the icl proposed an order for equal shared parental responsibility.
158 mr schroder submitted that the mother’s relocation plan, having not been well thought-out, is too uncertain for the children give their vulnerability and special needs. if the children live in darwin it will be a fundamental change to their relationship with the father. he has been a substantial presence in their lives and, if the mother relocates, this will affect the whole family.
159 it was further submitted that the children live in a settled environment in new south wales — primarily living with the mother and spending regular time with the father. this arrangement should, in mr schroder’s submission, continue and the father’s time should continue to build according to the icl’s proposal.
160 as reflected in mr e’s evidence mr schroder submitted that, while the mother’s claims of family violence should be believed and the accompanying trauma not be understated, her experience of family violence was not in itself enough to justify the proposed relocation. mr schroder submitted this point on the basis that any trauma resulting from family violence is unlikely to be remedied simply by relocating to another part of australia.
161 it was further submitted that, on the mother’s own evidence, she has not needed continuing therapeutic assistance from dr q and she has not identified any darwin-based therapist that might assist her.
162 there has also been no reported family violence, or other poor behaviour, since the events of late 2019 and early 2020. the father has undertaken therapy, and completed the equips program, to assist him with his mental health issues. he now shows a greater level of insight into his past behaviour and, as evidenced by many months of hair panel testing, no longer drinks alcohol. dr o has also been a positive influence upon the father and adds a further level safety and support for the children. the mother’s proposal for the father to have unrestricted, unsupervised and regular time with the children allows one to infer that, in her eyes, he no longer poses a risk to the children notwithstanding her experience (and his admissions) of family violence.
163 the father and dr o are heavily involved in the children’s lives including, in particular, their education, sports activities, and health needs. this provides a level of support for the mother that would, upon her relocation as proposed, be removed.
164 the icl is also concerned about the children’s maternal grandmother, ms s, whom he views as being unable to positively support the children’s relationship with the father. if the children relocate to darwin ms s will be heavily involved in their lives. the icl is concerned that, given the cost and distance involved, the children may ultimately be reluctant to travel to new south wales to spend time with the father unless the same is positively encouraged. ms s is also likely to remain in contact with the mother and the children and visit new south wales from time to time. the evidence from the mother, ms r and ms s herself shows that she has been doing this already. that support will not be lost if the mother and the children remain in the suburb b area.
165 w and x have both expressed views that they wish to relocate to darwin. it was mr schroder’s submission, again consistently with mr e’s evidence, that in reality this is an expression of wishing to live where the mother lives. it is not, mr schroder submitted, evidence that w and x understand the implications of relocation if it were to occur.
166 i was also asked to consider the improvement in the parties’ communication with each other and their cooperation regarding y’s adhd/odd and w’s behaviour at school. the improvement seen in both children is a testament to the parties’ ability to work together about important parenting matters.
167 in this way the mother has a level of support from the father which, if the children live in darwin, will be impeded.
168 ultimately, and as summarised above, the icl’s submissions were that the children’s best interests are met by remaining in the suburb b area and spending substantial and significant time with the father.
submissions on behalf of the mother
169 as outlined with respect to the parties’ proposals mr scarlett, at the outset of submissions, departed from the mother’s amended initiating application and proposed an order for equal shared parental responsibility. she initially sought sole parental responsibility in relation to the children’s education but, as of final submissions, all parties agreed to an order for equal shared parental responsibility.
170 mr scarlett maintained, however, that the evidence supported the mother’s application to relocate with the children to darwin. he emphasised, referring to ams v aif [1999] hca 26, 199 clr 160, that the mother need not establish ‘compelling reasons’ to relocate. notwithstanding that there is no need to consider whether a compelling case for relocation exists mr scarlett submitted that the mother has a solid basis for wanting to relocate from suburb b to darwin.
171 the first basis upon which mr scarlett advanced this position was the mother’s desire to be close to her family and friends for ongoing support. she has endured family violence, as admitted by the father and as found at paragraph 46 of these reasons, and remains impacted by that experience. crucially, for current purposes, she remains fearful that the father will at some point act poorly again.
172 mr scarlett referred, secondly, to w and x’s views (as expressed to mr e) that they wish to live in darwin. these views, in mr scarlett’s submission, should be given significant weight. w and x have maintained these views for a long time and expressed them to a number of people — including the father.
173 thirdly, and in response to mr schroder’s submissions, mr scarlett submitted that it is wrong to suggest that the mother does not have a well thought-out plan or that she wishes to relocate on a whim. the mother wishes to join the northern territory public service and has made enquiries and undertaken research to this end. failing this, however, she feels confident she will secure work in a position similar to her current role.
174 mr scarlett submitted that the children will cope with a transition to life in the northern territory. their relationship with their father will not be impacted by the move since, as agreed by the parties, they will spend considerable time with him during school holidays and otherwise as agreed. the father has an established relationship with each of his children and, despite the distance between suburb b and darwin, it will endure upon relocation.
175 it was submitted that, notwithstanding her experience of family violence experience, the mother has shown herself to be able to promote the children’s relationships with the father. she proposes generous time during the holidays which, in mr scarlett’s submission, evidences her capacity to promote those relationships. further she has communicated effectively with the father about parenting matters — again notwithstanding the remaining trauma of family violence.
176 mr scarlett submitted that, in the event of relocation not being permitted, the father should spend four nights per fortnight with the children during school terms. this is an increase of time from that which he currently spends with the children. in conceding greater time the mother, again, accepts that the children benefit from having a meaningful relationship with the father.
submissions on behalf of the father
177 mr blackah presented similar submissions to those of the icl.
178 the father’s position, in essence, is that relocating the children to darwin will create uncertainty and instability in their lives. there is a danger that the father’s relationship with the children will erode if the mother, ms s, and the children’s extended maternal family do not actively promote his relationship with them. as submitted by the icl there is a danger that the children will, given the distance and cost, eventually stop travelling to see the father.
179 mr blackah submitted, counter to mr scarlett’s submissions, that w and x’s stated views that they want to live in darwin should be given little weight. again, i note the evidence of mr e — w and x’s views in this respect do not mean they appreciate all the consequences of relocation but instead evidence a desire to live wherever the mother lives.
180 it was submitted that the father has always participated in the children’s lives and assists them at a high level particularly in relation to education and other activities. that support will be significantly impacted if the children move to darwin.
181 mr blackah submitted that, if the children do not relocate, their rime with the father should be increased to five nights per fortnight. that 5/9 arrangement should, in mr blackah’s submission, build over a six-month period to allow the children time to adjust. it was further submitted that such time should be structured in blocks instead of dividing the time over two weeks but, alternatively, could be split into four nights in one week and one night in the other. the basis for the father’s submission about block time was that, if they come into contact less often, this decreases the potential for parental conflict.
parenting orders — the law
182 this court must craft and consider the terms of a parenting order with regard to the best interests of the children as a paramount consideration.[101] i am not bound by the terms proposed by the parties and may — subject to ss 61da and 61dab of the act — create parenting orders as i think are proper for the children in the circumstances.[102]
183 what, however, guides this court’s assessment of the children’s best interests? then, having ascertained the children’s best interests, how does the act ensure that parenting orders reflect them as a paramount consideration?
184 the objects of part vii of the act, and the principles underlying these objects, indicate the act’s aspirations in this respect:
60b objects of part and principles underlying it   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
...   an additional object of this part is to give effect to the convention on the rights of the child done at new york on 20 november 1989.
185 part vii of the act, to give effect to these aspirations, carves a legislative pathway. the pathway has a number of substantive stepping-stones which may be legitimately and properly followed in various forms.[103]
186 while there is no ‘preferred’ pathway, the description in mrr & gr [2010] hca 4, 240 clr 461 remains authoritative and informative.[104] i must, in any event, follow the steps outlined in part vii of the act and shall do so consistently with their honour’s description in mrr & gr. the steps set out therein are summarised in the table below which, in addition to describing the pathway, provides pinpoints within these reasons for each analytical or determinative stepping-stone.
‘relocation cases’ — not a ‘special category’ of parenting orders
187 a relocation case does not, by the mere fact of relocation being in issue, open up a specific avenue by which the case must be determined. in the words of boland j in morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230:
72. ... the act does not treat “relocation” cases as a special category of parenting orders. in that respect the amending act has effected no change to the law. 73. it is also undisputed that in determining a parenting case where one party wishes to relocate the child’s best interests remain the paramount, but not sole, consideration.[105]
188 watts j in withers & russell [2016] famca 793 confirms that, in following the legislative pathway in part vii, relocation proposals should not be isolated from the holistic assessment of whether the ultimate order is in the children’s best interests.[106]
189 these reasons, commencing at paragraph 70, summarised the parties’ proposals and distilled each with respect to the issues for determination. it is on the basis of his honour watts j’s reasoning above that i set out the proposals in this manner.
190 while relocation cases are not carved out as ‘special’ orders, they do enliven a unique balancing act for any judicial officer tasked with their determination. the act instructs that, in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order under part vii, the children’s best interests be regarded as a paramount consideration.[107] this instruction does not require me to ‘ignore the legitimate interests and desires of the parents’.[108] in this case it does, however, affect a parent’s constitutional right to absolute freedom of intercourse among the states.[109]
191 the extent to which an exercise of power under part vii of the act (to make parenting orders) may encroach upon a person’s rights under s 92 of the constitution must, in essence, be ‘no more than incidental and necessary consequences of the [family law act]’s permissible operation’.[110] a parenting order made pursuant to part vii will not, in every case, necessarily ‘interfere’ with s 92 of the constitution. the interference arises when the facts of the case require a balance to be struck between the rights contained therein.
192 a parent’s desire to relocate — with or without their child or children — is necessarily intertwined with the child or children’s best interests. this makes for a somewhat circular assessment in which the paramount question of the child or children’s best interests cannot be abstracted from the circumstances of the applicant parent. the assessment by which a proportional outcome may be reached is, therefore, one of complexity and self-informing regress.
193 it is not necessary in this case to make a coercive order preventing the mother from relocating to darwin. her alternative proposal makes clear that she will remain in suburb b if her relocation application fails. it is therefore unnecessary for this court (through either s 65d(1), s 68b, or s 114(3)) to create a situation in which the mother’s freedom of movement is restrained against her will.[111] notwithstanding this i must, as explained above, satisfy myself of the appropriateness of the ultimate parenting orders in line with the pathway in part vii of the act.
194 his honour harper j in hill & weston [2021] fedcfamc1f 174 helpfully summarises the principles, considerations and inherent tensions regarding relocation applications as follows:
120. a parent is entitled to live where they choose, and need not demonstrate “compelling reasons” to live where they propose to live: ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”), adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232, (2014) 51 fam lr 626 at [65] and [66]. however, since the best interests of the children are paramount, and whatever weight should be accorded to a right of freedom of mobility of a parent, it must defer to the paramount consideration: u v u at [89]. 121. however, parental responsibilities can inherently restrict choices made by a parent. in zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90, at [47] the full court noted:
all applications for parenting orders before the court involve a situation that, axiomatically, is not in the children’s best interests. what is best for children is that their parents co-parent by agreement and without conflict and as selflessly as circumstances reasonably allow. when parents are unable to agree, the parents’ proposals embraced in competing applications involve, again axiomatically, advantages and disadvantages for the children, each and all of which have ramifications for the children’s best interests. concomitantly, gummow and callinan jj said in u v u [(2002) [2002] hca 36, 211 clr 238 [92]]: ...the reality is that maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents: obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement have been incurred. [footnote omitted]
122. in franklyn at [27] to [28], the full court has explained the applicable law as follows:
27. there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children’s ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207–208, 210). the tension at the intersection of those conflicting interests is even greater when an order is sought, not just to restrain one parent’s move further away, but to compel the parent who has already moved away to return and establish a new residence closer to the other parent. 28. while the children’s interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”) at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223 –224, 231 –232, sampson and hartnett (no.10) (2007) flc 93–350, zanda & zanda (2014) flc 93–607 at [132]–[136]). only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests (see u v u at 262 ).
123. the form of the order is important. in ember & assadi [2013] famcafc 107 (“ember”) at [60], after citing the passage from sampson at [58] and [59] (set out above) the full court said:
we consider that these pronouncements are as definitive as they need to be to be relied on as identifying the source of power, although we consider that it may well be more appropriate to invoke s 65d and s 68b than s 114(3). in any event, what is overlooked in this appeal is that there was no order made by the federal magistrate specifically requiring the mother to relocate. the relevant orders are orders 2, 3 and 4, and plainly they were made in the context of where the children should live, not the parents. they require that the mother ensure the children relocate to new south wales within eight weeks, and that the children live with the mother. understandably these orders would not be workable if the mother did not move, but it is readily apparent that they do not direct her to move. in that format at least we are satisfied that the court has the power under s 65d and s 68b of the act to make those orders.[112]
195 her honour judge stewart, in tabac & kelmer [2016] fcca 1937, helpfully lists the applicable principles, which are: a) that the child’s best interest remain the paramount but not the sole consideration (morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230), b) that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate “compelling” reason (morgan & miles [2007]), c) “the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the “right” of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement” (morgan & miles [2007]), d) “there can be no dissection of the case into discrete issues, namely a primary issue as to who should have residence and a further or separate issue as to whether the relocation should be “permitted””(paskandy & paskandy [1999] famca 1889), e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
a) that the child’s best interest remain the paramount but not the sole consideration (morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230), b) that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate “compelling” reason (morgan & miles [2007]), c) “the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the “right” of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement” (morgan & miles [2007]), d) “there can be no dissection of the case into discrete issues, namely a primary issue as to who should have residence and a further or separate issue as to whether the relocation should be “permitted””(paskandy & paskandy [1999] famca 1889), e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
b) that a parent wishing to move does not need to demonstrate “compelling” reason (morgan & miles [2007]), c) “the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the “right” of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement” (morgan & miles [2007]), d) “there can be no dissection of the case into discrete issues, namely a primary issue as to who should have residence and a further or separate issue as to whether the relocation should be “permitted””(paskandy & paskandy [1999] famca 1889), e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
c) “the child’s best interests must be weighed and balanced with the “right” of the proposed relocating parent’s freedom of movement” (morgan & miles [2007]), d) “there can be no dissection of the case into discrete issues, namely a primary issue as to who should have residence and a further or separate issue as to whether the relocation should be “permitted””(paskandy & paskandy [1999] famca 1889), e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
d) “there can be no dissection of the case into discrete issues, namely a primary issue as to who should have residence and a further or separate issue as to whether the relocation should be “permitted””(paskandy & paskandy [1999] famca 1889), e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
e) “...the proper approach to be adopted in a relocation case is a weighing of competing proposals, having regard to relevant s 68f(2) [now s 60cc] factors, and consideration of other relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the parent who wishes to relocate, bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child” (kb & tc [2005] famca 458).[113]
196 ultimately, the decision turns on the best interests of the child.
standard of proof
197 i note briefly, before embarking upon the s 60cc factors, that all facts in issue in these proceedings must be proved on the balance of probabilities. a fact in issue is ‘proved’ if i am reasonably satisfied, on the evidence, that it is more likely than not that the fact existed or occurred in the manner ultimately determined.
198 the evidence act 1995 (cth) sets out the applicable standard:
140 civil proceedings: standard of proof
in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: (a) the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject‑matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged. [114]
199 dixon j, as he then was, also remarked upon the standard of proof for civil proceedings in briginshaw & briginshaw [1938] hca 34, 60 clr 336, which remain relevant and authoritative:
the truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be found. it cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently of any belief in its reality. no doubt an opinion that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of certainty, and this has led to attempts to define exactly the certainty required by the law for various purposes. fortunately, however, at common law no third standard of persuasion was definitely developed. except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. but reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved. the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal.[115]
200 unless applicable legislation prescribes a different standard of proof, i must ground my assessment of the children’s best interests in facts, of which i am persuaded, on the balance of probabilities.
the children’s best interests – section 60cc considertions
primary considerations
201 the act sets out two mandatory considerations at s 60cc(2) — (a), the benefit of the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, and (b), the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm and from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect, or family violence. section 60cc(2)(b) outweighs s 60cc(2)(a) in the event of conflict between the two considerations.
section 60cc2(a) — the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents
202 the act does not define ‘meaningful’. characterising a meaningful relationship between a child and their parent is, necessarily, an individualised assessment.
203 the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 endorsed the explanation of ‘meaningful relationship’ as given by brown j in mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520:
26. what these definitions convey is that "meaningful", when used in the context of "meaningful relationship", is synonymous with "significant" which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for "important" or "of consequence". i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.[116]
204 a ‘meaningful relationship’ does not, however, have to be an ‘optimal relationship’. kay j’s remarks in godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102 more fully state this position:
36. it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.[117]
205 both parents are dedicated, loving, and have been involved in the children’s lives since birth. the children have meaningful relationships with both of their parents. the children have maintained their strong relationships with both parents notwithstanding the disruption to their lives at the time of separation.
206 the mother conceded under cross-examination that the children maintain strong relationships with the father. this is notwithstanding mr e’s evidence that w and x regard the mother as their primary parent and, as such, expressed clearly their views to live with her in darwin. that evidence is not contradictory — the eldest children have meaningful relationships with the father but wish to live with the mother whether in darwin or suburb b. y and z, too, said that they love their parents ‘the same’.[118] it is unfortunate that the mother did not express this sentiment in her affidavit. instead she deposed that, due to the father’s long and inflexible working hours, she had primary care of the children prior to separation and was left to undertake the majority of the parenting.[119] the father’s affidavit, conversely, details a significant involvement in the children’s lives outside his long working hours.[120]
207 i prefer the father’s evidence with respect to his pre-separation involvement in the children’s lives and, thus, the nature of his relationships with the children. his description is consistent with the mother’s concessions that he and the children have strong relationships and in relation to his post-separation care of the children and involvement in their lives generally.
208 the father’s trial affidavit details a healthy, active and connected involvement in the children’s lives whilst they are in the care of himself and dr o.[121] he also maintains involvement in the children’s schooling, medical requirements, and sporting activities.
209 the mother accepted under cross-examination that she and the father have been able to collaborate and communicate effectively about the matters affecting the children’s lives. she agreed that she and the father have attended appointments together with y’s paediatrician, dr h.[122] the father also regularly took w to his speech therapy appointments in 2019 and following separation on the off-week because the mother was working and was aware of w’s desire to stop speech therapy in 2021.[123] she further agreed that she and the father worked together to address w’s disruptive behaviour at school and, to that end, adopted a consistent approach to discipline. i accept the father’s account, set out in his affidavit, of the mother reaching out to him when w was behaving poorly:
170. on tuesday, 25 may 2021, i received a phone call from ms joyner at 12.40pm who said to me words to the effect of "w just called me from his mobile at school crying. i am on my way to the school now to pick him up. apparently he was in a punch up with another kid. " 171. i was working though indicated to ms joyner that i could meet her and w at mcdonalds suburb b to talk to him after she had picked him up. ms joyner then responded with words to the effect of "i can't do this alone. i need your help." 172. when i arrived at mcdonalds w was inside waiting for his and ms joyner's order. ms joyner and i spoke alone outside first. ms joyner said to me words to the effect of "i need your help. i can‘t keep doing this on my own." i responded with words to the effect of "i have always been here to help but you don't let me."
210 it is, as already stated, a testament to the parents’ cooperative and child-focused approach that w’s behaviour has now settled considerably.
211 the father is also heavily involved in the children’s sporting activities. the mother conceded that the father is involved in all of the children’s various sporting pursuits.[124] the father’s affidavit states that he and dr o can flexibly manage their own work commitments around the children’s school pick-ups and drop-offs and that, into the future, the father will remain involved in that and in extracurricular activities.
212 the mother conceded that the father’s direct involvement with the children’s school, medical appointments, and sporting activities would be a significant change for the children if they relocated to darwin.
213 it was submitted on behalf of the father that, if the children live in darwin, their meaningful relationship with him will be impaired.
214 any relocation naturally results in a diminution of the relationship in the sense that the children will not spend regular face to face time with the other parent. that is a disadvantage of any relocation. the children in this case, however, have an established bond with the father as fostered through his significant involvement in their lives. the established nature of this bond will assist the children to retain their relationships with the father if they move to darwin.
215 that said, and as mr e opines, the children’s regular time with each parent, together with and their parents’ ability to put aside their differences in front of the children, has to date sheltered them from many possible effects of their parents’ separation.[125]
216 a meaningful relationship, as explained by reference to godfrey & sanders above, does not denote an optimal relationship. the fact that the children will see less of the father, if the relocation occurs, does not itself result in irreparable harm to those relationships. provided the mother and her family promote the relationship, and as long as there is regular time between the children and the father, their strong relationships will likely endure.
217 the question, therefore, is whether the mother will promote the children’s relationship with the father and whether time between the father and the children will occur on a regular basis.
218 mr e was concerned about whether the mother and her family could promote the children’s relationship with their father if they live in darwin. as already outlined there is a danger that, given the distance and costs of travel, if the children’s relationships with the father are not maintained they will become reluctant to travel for the purpose of spending time with him. this would, in mr e’s description, further ‘weaken’ the children’s relationships with the father.
219 the ability of the mother and her family to promote the father’s relationship with the children is an important consideration and will be explored later in these reasons.
section 60cc(2)(b) — the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
220 as explained above, at paragraph 201, the assessment of the children’s best interests must give greater weight to the need to protect them from physical or psychological harm resulting from subjection or exposure to family violence, abuse or neglect. if there is any conflict between a ‘meaningful relationship’ and the risk of physical or psychological harm in the manner described in s 60cc(2)(b) my approach must be precautionary and protective.
221 family violence is defined at s 4ab of the act:  for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.
222 abuse, in relation to a child, means:  an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child, or (b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with the first person or another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and where there is unequal power in the relationship between the child and the first person, or (c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, or (d) serious neglect of the child.   serious neglect of the child.
223 the act does not define ‘neglect’ for the purpose of s 60cc(2)(b) nor does it define ‘serious neglect’ for the purposes of sub-section (d) of the definition of ‘abuse’.
224 the children must not, as a result of the ultimate parenting orders, be placed at an unacceptable risk of harm due to family violence, abuse, neglect, or being exposed to the same. the assessment of whether a risk is ‘unacceptable’ is prospective. in essence it is a question of whether the children, notwithstanding any fact or past conduct proven on the balance of probabilities or even to a higher standard, will in the future be at risk in a manner described by s 60cc(2)(b) and whether that risk is ‘unacceptable’ in the context of part vii. an unacceptable risk may be characterised and found from a culmination of factors in the evidence. the parenting orders ultimately made, in those circumstances and if appropriate, can include measures to mitigate the type of risk as characterised.
225 the assessment is explained well in murphy & murphy [2007] famca 795:
318. a positive finding of sexual abuse can, but does not always, decisively constitute an unacceptable risk of potential future harm if unsupervised time is ordered in respect of a child. there is however nothing illogical in a negative future risk finding despite a positive finding of misconduct in the past. previous behaviour is not always the best or even a reliable predictor of future conduct. people and circumstances change. the converse, however, is not necessarily true and the failure to establish an allegation of past abuse does not determine the wider and ultimate issue of what parenting order, if any, is in the best interests of the children. 319. thus, the unacceptable risk inquiry involves a real and substantial consideration of whether or not, and why or why not, particular facts raise an unacceptable risk.[126]
226 further in isles & nelissen [2021] fedcfamc1f 295 his honour mcguire j neatly summarised the character of the inquiry:
267. ... ultimately, this court’s focus is not on guilt or innocence but on the best interests of the children. the considerations and findings above are in respect of alleged past acts or behaviour. it remains for me to conduct a separate and predictive consideration as to risk where the focus is on the adjective ‘unacceptable’. ... i am able to reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk on a cumulative consideration but without the restriction of particular findings on the balance of probabilities. rather, the consideration here is as to “possibilities” in a prospective sense. this is not to be considered as a ‘default consideration’ where a court is unable to make a positive finding of fact but one carried out discretely, separately and independently with the focus being on future risk rather than past fact.[127]
227 the mother describes controlling, verbally abusive, and threatening behaviour perpetrated against her by the father. this occurred both during the relationship and after separation.[128] i have already summarised the father’s escalating poor behaviour in the months leading up to 1 november 2019. this behaviour includes extensive, harassing, and abusive text messages, yelling, unwanted demands for sex, and allegedly pushing the mother. his expressions of self-harm, suicidal ideation, and at times suicidal intention — as evidenced by the messages annexed to the mother’s affidavit — show the father’s deep distress at the breakdown of their relationship. his mental health deteriorated following separation and an avo for the mother’s protection issued on 15 december 2019. the mother describes the events leading to the avo of 15 december 2019 in her affidavit:
81. from 12.24pm mr joyner started repeatedly sending me text messages and trying to call me. between 12.24pm and 8.33pm he sent approximately 322 text messages and left me 48 missed calls. i did not respond to the messages or answer the phone as i was scared by his behaviour. 82. some of these messages were of a threatening nature, included photographs of smashed beer bottles. one of those messages said "i'm going to turn up, its in your best interest to keep the kids away they don't need to see my like this. i will punch the fuck out of whoever i need to talk to you." screenshots of the text messages and two photos are annexed and marked "5". 83. mr joyner also sent me two videos which depicted him laying on the bed and waving around a large kitchen knife. in these videos i could see his arm was bleeding. in one of these videos he was stabbing himself in the arm with the knife repeating words to the effect on "just call me and i won't come around". 84. mr joyner sent me a number of videos on snapchat that day which i was unable to save, in which mr joyner was saying similar things to his text messages, and he was going through our wedding albums and destroying our wedding signature board. 85. mr' joyner’s behaviour made me feel extremely scared and i called police for assistance. mr joyner was arrested and charged with domestic violence offences. a provisional apprehended domestic violence order was issued for my protection, naming mr joyner as the defendant. a copy of the provisional advo is annexed and marked "6". 86. what scared me most about mr joyner at that time was his unpredictable behaviour due to his declining mental health. mr joyner had not sought the assistance of a counsellor or therapist after separation and was clearly struggling to deal with it.
228 to the father’s credit he acknowledged, under cross-examination, that his behaviour towards the mother (particularly at the time of separation) was poor and would have impacted the children. he accepted that the mother remains anxious as a result of his behaviour and, further, expressed understanding as to the mother’s remaining fear of him and her reluctance to go into his house. he conceded that he intimidated the mother by sending the text messages and videos. the videos were, in his words, ‘designed to terrify’ and must have been ‘horrible’ for the mother to witness. the children, he further conceded, would have been impacted by seeing the mother in distress. he says in his affidavit that he ‘deeply regrets’ sending those text messages and videos and that the vision of him harming himself would have caused the mother ‘concern’.[129] these events are, as set out at paragraph 46 of these reasons, the basis of a finding of family violence.
229 the father, notwithstanding his concessions about his behaviour at the time of separation, denied the balance of the mother’s family violence allegations.[130] in particular he denied being coercive or controlling.[131] his affidavit annexes photographs and facebook posts in which the mother, during the relationship, praises the father as an ‘amazing father’ and an ‘amazing husband’.[132] the issue of coercive control was not deeply explored during cross-examination and, given the father’s denials and the mother’s posts, i am not satisfied of this allegation on the balance of probabilities.
230 as foreshadowed at the beginning of these reasons, at paragraph 33, the mother and father also disagree about an alleged incident of family violence in 2007. that event involved the father’s former partner against whom, in the mother’s account, the father made threats of physical harm. the father, on the other hand, says that in a moment of frustration he made the threat against his former partner’s cat which he did not intend to carry out. he again said that this behaviour did not indicate a propensity for violent behaviour but, instead, reflects words said in the heat of the moment at a time that his previous relationship had soured.[133] exhibit m4 — containing the police record of the incident — appears on its face to confirm that the father admitted to the threats of physical harm made by him to his former partner. the description in the police report is, however, somewhat ambiguous. it says that the father made ‘full admissions stating that he made the threats however did not intend on carrying through with the threats’. it does not at this point specify the threats to which the father admitted — the threats against his former partner or the threats against her cat. notwithstanding the obliqueness as to the precise target of the threats the police incident report shows that, at least at this time in the father’s life, he had a propensity for ‘snapping’ in stressful circumstances.[134] the father has taken strides to improve himself in this respect, and many others, since separation.
231 the mother alleges that the father was verbally abusive and yelled at her and the children.[135] this evidence is corroborated by ms g’s trauma counselling notes, contained in exhibit m2, with respect to w and x. in those notes, written in 2020, ms g refers to w’s account that the father ‘swears’ and ‘gets cranky’, that ‘sometimes [w] feel unsafe’, and ‘if [dr o] wasn’t there he may hurt us’.[136] w says that the father has called him an ‘idiot’ and told him to ‘shut the fuck up’.[137] in another session he told ms g that the father had ‘thrown something at x’ and in another that ‘he just raises his voice when the kids frustrate [him]’ and ‘dad is just loud but he can get angry’.[138]
232 in july 2020 w spoke to the counsellor about the father’s anger towards the mother when spending time with him. as noted in the list of documents relied upon the text of ms g’s notes, here and throughout these reasons, will be extracted exactly as it appears in the exhibited document:
... going to dads every second weekend ..ngry at mum for a lot of things ... dad got angry and frustrated with mum mum and dad would fight when we were not around dad were call her idiot or dumb have ever called mum any names don’t think like that[139]
233 in april 2020 x also raised the father’s anger with ms g — ‘he doesn’t always yell ... [n]ot a lot just like sometimes’.[140]
234 i also refer to ms g’s notes, dated 15 april 2020, made with respect to one of w’s sessions:
...ometimes dad swears at us. he gets frustrated and angry. quite awhile he threw a log at the window and it broke the window ...fter myself or mason did something wrong he got angry. he got angry at mum or someone then he walked out the door and ...ammed the door and walked off. i feel really scared, i start crying and feel sick in the stomach. onetime at the day before mums ...irthday dad came to mums new house and got cranky and aunty ms r mums friend was there and then he said he asked how ...veryone there. he said to mum happy birthday and then started arguing with everyone and started swearing with everyone. ...he kids all ran to the door to say hi to dad and then later they were all scared and ran inside crying. in the end when he left he ...ut the car in reverse and screached out the driveway and mason ran outside and called dads name. i was scared he was going ...reak the front glass panel on the door. i felt scared nauseous in my stomach. .we go to dads every second weekend and i don't want to go because i'm too scared. if i tell dad that you want to move in with mum i'm scared he will call us names or scream or break something. i fear for everyones safety and my own. ive been crying to mum. four of us go and nan ms cc thats dads mum as well. w 11, x 8, y 5, and z 4 and mum ...ncourages me to go so i can look after them. ...am scare that he is going to hurt us kids and i'm fearful of going there. i don't know whether nan could protect us from dad if h... ...as going hurt us. ...ad has also been this way he always got mad in some points. dad drinks alot of alcohol and sometimes when he has family or ...iends over he drinks alot more. ...xis in year 6 at suburb b school and late will attend f school. he is average at school amongst ...is peers. the violence at home has affected his ability to do his studies. i feel depressed and get really down sometimes. i don’t ...lk and i get irritated and annoyed by things. when i'm really depressed i get all the bad things stuck in my head and i cant get ...em off my mind. especially think about when dad gets angry and what is going to happen next. w cant predict what going ... happen next with his father and gets scared and fearful that he would hurt someone. fearful that dad could also hurt himself. ...x fears for his life when he is with his dad. i'm scared that he wont let us see mum again. that he will take us away ...nywhere. he is extremely anxious about going to fathers. he becomes quiet, does not talk and goes to his bedroom. he is not ...arful at home with his mum.[141]
235 ms g’s notes, as contemporaneous evidence of the eldest children’s observations and feelings, persuades me that the father, towards the end of the relationship, was regularly abusive and yelled at the mother and the children. this is consistent with the mother’s account, which i accept, of the same:
43. by the end of our relationship, mr joyner was verbally abusing me every day from as soon as he got home and continued until i went to bed, although he would often then start messaging me and come into the room to yell at me.
236 crucially, as foreshadowed in the evidence of the mother and ms r, the father’s yelling caused members of his family to be fearful and distressed. in their account of 14 december 2012 the father arrived at the house, yelled at the mother, and caused the children to cry and plead with him to stop. further, with respect to earlier instances, the mother says that the children were also present for much of the father’s yelling and verbal abuse, becoming ‘extremely upset’ and, again, begging him to stop. this is, in my view, sufficient evidence to establish on the balance of probabilities that the father’s yelling constitutes family violence as defined in s 4ab(1) of the act. i make this finding with respect to the incident on 14 december 2019 and the months leading up to this incident.
237 again, to his credit, the father acknowledged shortly after separation that his behaviour towards the mother was unacceptable. motivated by his acknowledgement that he ‘had to conduct himself better’, having been ‘disgusted’ with his own behaviour, he undertook therapy and enrolled in the equips program. he says that therapy has helped him manage his emotions and communicate more effectively with the mother and the children. i have no reason to doubt that such statements were sincere and that he has shown contrition for past poor conduct.
238 the father has also stopped consuming alcohol and does not intend to drink again. he denies in his affidavit that he has ‘always consumed alcohol to excess’ and says that the incident on 14 december 2019 was an isolated one.[142] this evidence is, to some extent, contradicted by admissions contained in his text messages to the mother annexed to her affidavit. in those messages he says he is an ‘alcoholic’ at least three times.[143] he has, in any event, been subject to hair panel testing for over a year — even after the order requiring him to do so was discharged in march 2021. all hair panel tests were clear. the interim orders for his time also restrain him from consuming alcohol 24 hours prior to spending time with the children.[144]
239 he said he has discussed his past behaviour with dr o and has not engaged in such behaviour with her. dr o corroborated this evidence.
240 dr o confirmed, under cross-examination, that she was aware of the family violence that was alleged by the mother. she was aware of the father’s past difficulties with alcohol. her experience of him was, however, quite different to the mother’s experience. the father had not subjected her to any family violence nor had she seen him drink alcohol to excess or exhibit mental health problems of concern.
241 i asked her whether she had been locked down with the father during the covid-19 pandemic restrictions. she replied that they had been locked down together for about two weeks in queensland and approximately four months in new south wales. dr o said that, notwithstanding the isolation and all its associated pressures, she did not experience any concerning behaviour on the part of the father.
242 dr o, in her affidavit, further confirmed that she and the father have a strong and enduring relationship. she is pleased to support the father and offers to help the father with his care of the children. she states in her affidavit that she has a strong relationship with the children — this was not challenged.[145]
243 there is no doubt that the father’s conduct, as admitted by him and that which i have found to have occurred, constitutes family violence. these experiences have negatively impacted the mother. the father, under cross-examination, accepted the effect of his actions in this respect.
244 the mother engaged in therapy with dr q for ‘support regarding stress reaction on a background of a relationship breakdown’.[146] when the mother commenced therapy in october 2020 dr q reported that she was ‘struggling to cope on her own, with no current support, this prompting her desire to go back to northern territory to be with her family of origin’. her sleep was described as ‘poor and disturbed’ and her mood as ‘flattened’ with little self-care.[147]
245 dr q’s report reveals that, by july 2021, the mother’s mood and ability to cope had improved significantly. she reported ‘reduced anxiety, improved mood, increased social engagement, effective management of her children and their behaviour, with some signs of improved self-care’.[148] the mother herself says that her mental health has improved and, as such, she no longer keeps regular appointments with dr q. it is hoped that she will continue to heal the trauma from the time of separation although, again, i note mr e’s evidence that the proposed relocation will not itself cure the mother’s ongoing trauma associated with family violence. that trauma needs to be dealt with by ongoing therapy.
246 the mother does, however, remain somewhat distrustful of the father. mr schroder, for the icl, submitted that this distrust impacts her ability to fully promote the father’s relationship with the children. this, in turn, could impact on their relationship with him if they were to move to darwin.
247 mr schroder asked the mother to state three positive things about the father. she responded that the father plays with the children, provides them with food, clothes, and material things, and further provides emotional support when he is available. mr schroder was somewhat critical of this response. it was, in his submission, not overly positive about the children’s relationships with the father. that is, to some extent, an unfair observation. i make three comments in this regard: the father was not asked the same question of the mother. further, and as acknowledged by the father himself, the mother’s remaining distrust is not surprising in light of her experiences. indeed, and to her credit, the mother has largely maintained contact between the children and the father. this is save for the father’s complaint about some agreed telephone communication not being facilitated. in this respect the mother has not been as accommodating as she could be as to the father’s time with the children.[149] the mother also proposes extensive time for the father if her primary proposal succeeds. this suggests that she is able to balance her concerns about the father's family violence and drinking, and her own trauma born from the same, with her understanding of the children’s needs, and rights, to maintain a relationship with him.
248 i find that the magnitude of risk to the children of being exposed to family violence by the father has greatly reduced since separation.
249 the father has taken real measures to address his poor behaviour. this includes therapy, contrition, and abstinence from alcohol. dr o, as a positive and calming influence, also provides significant support to him. his improved attitude has enabled the parents to communicate and work together on parenting issues post-separation, meet each other at changeover, greet each other, and put aside their differences in front of the children. the mother must also to be commended for adopting such a child focused attitude in working with the father in this way.
250 it is for these reasons that, with respect to issue 4, i will not restrain either party from consuming or being under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other illicit substances prior to and during the children being in their care. the evidence supports that the father, notwithstanding his history of violence as aggravated by alcohol consumption, does not pose a risk of this character moving forward. this determination applies whether or not the mother’s relocation application succeeds. ultimately the mother’s alternative proposal did not seek an order in these terms and did not press the issue at trial.
251 i find that, if the mother and the children remain in new south wales, there is not an unacceptable risk of the mother or the children being exposed to further violent, abusive or threatening behaviour from the father.
252 i further find that the mother’s ability to cope with her past experiences of family violence has improved greatly. she and the children have benefitted from the counselling and therapy they received post-separation.
section 60cc(3)(a) — any views expressed by the child, and the weight to be accorded to those views given their age and level of maturity
253 there is no universal rule for the weight to be afforded to the views of a child. it is ultimately a matter of discretion and, ultimately, this factor is one of several in the overall assessment of best interests. importantly, as stated in bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8, 259 clr 662:
the terms of s 60cc(3)(a) itself may be taken to recognise that, whilst a child’s views ought to be given proper consideration, their importance in a given case may depend upon factors such as the child’s age or maturity and level of understanding of what is involved in the choice they have expressed. children may not, for example, appreciate the long term implications of separation from one parent or the child’s siblings. section 60cc requires that attention be given by the court to these matters.[150]
254 w, 13, and x, 10, have expressed that they would like to live with their mother in darwin. both have spoken of living there with the mother. the children have, according to the mother’s affidavit, told her that they would like to move to darwin, asked her many questions, about moving, and have spoken to family members about the same.[151]
255 the father states that, in january 2021, x wrote him a letter. he describes the letter in his affidavit as follows:
96. on 6 january 2021, i received a note from x addressed to me. the letter from x reads words to the effect of "dear dad, i'm not trying to beg but can us kids and mum move to dawin and no mum did not tell me to wright it please please please please from x. "
256 x also spoke with ms g about moving to darwin on 22 april 2020. ms g made the following notes about x’s views as expressed during the session:
...appy to go to darwin to see mums family ...ll be able to see them more often when we go to darwin we will see dad in the school holidays ...eing separated from dad i will be ok ... ...f i miss daddy ill ask mum if could video call ...[152]
257 mr e commented that x also expressed a view to live in darwin during the family report interview:
78. while she claimed to feel greater attachment for the mother than the father, x's statement seemed directly connected with what she perceived to be mr joyner's opposition to the darwin proposal. she remarked that her father had become upset when she told him she wanted to relocate. 79. she also claimed to have composed the recent letter without help from ms joyner. 80. asked why she wished to live in darwin, the girl replied "it will be more fair". this referred to her being able to spend greater time with the maternal extended family. yet she held little awareness of any personal implications of such a move, including how she might feel about the reduction of time with mr joyner.[153]
258 similarly, in relation to w’s views regarding the proposed relocation, mr e opined that:
74. w stated that he wants to relocate to darwin because he has more family there. but when it was put to him that he has family in nsw as well, he burst into tears and said "i don't want to leave mum". 75. thus it was concluded that w remained most concerned about living with the parent he perceived as his main attachment figure, and relocation was not the primary issue for him.
259 w stated to ms g in july 2020 that he had spoken to the icl about wanting to move to darwin.[154]
260 mr e opined, particularly under cross-examination, that w and x’s real views are that they want to live with their mother. it is less important to them where they live, in geographical terms, so long as it is with the mother.[155]
261 mr e also opined that the children's views may be, in some part, influenced by their mother. the children are aligned to her and are desperate to ensure that they continue to live with her. they know that the mother desires to live in the northern territory and, as a result, their stated views mirror the mother’s desires in that regard.
262 the mother denied that she had deliberately influenced the children’s views about the proposed relocation. she did, however, concede that her connection with the children was such that she struggles when they are not in her care when they spend time with the father. she agreed that dr q advised her that she needed to be less of a friend to w and more of a parent. she further agreed that the children sleep with her at their request. it was put to her that, for a child of w’s age, this was inappropriate. the mother did not agree but said that she is working to remedy her relationship with w and is making efforts to stop the children from sleeping in her bed.
263 the mother accepted that the older children had been drawn into adult concerns, including her desire to relocate. she conceded that, since the approximate time of separation, the children have known about her desire to live in darwin. they knew of his prior to expressing any of their own views about the concept.
264 the father stated in his affidavit that y has also spoken to him about moving to darwin:
87. it was during this call that y and i had the following conversation with words to the effect of:
y: "daddy, why won't you let me and mummy move?" me: "where do you want to move to? " y: "darwin." me: "why do you want to move to darwin buddy?" y: "because mummy wants to and i want to move with her. i will still talk to you every night and visit in the holidays."
i was shocked as this was less than one week of the orders being in place.
265 i also take into account that the children’s views have not been assessed since mr e’s report was released over a year ago. since then the father has maintained his time with the children including block time with them in the holidays. dr o has also developed a relationship with the children and is deeply involved in their care.[156]
266 dr o stated that w said to her, whilst walking around the property on 9 july 2021, 5 months after the release of the family report, that he ‘would love to live out here with all the space and no one else around’, that ‘you could build tracks and do so much’, and that ‘it would be awesome’.[157] this may indicate that w’s views regarding the proposed relocation are more moderate than when mr e interviewed him.
267 for the reasons set out above i accept mr schroder’s submission that i should not place undue weight on the expressed views of the children, particularly w and x, to live in darwin.
section 60cc(3)(b) — the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents and grandparents
268 the children have a loving relationship with both of their parents. w and x were clearly affected by the cessation of their parent’s relationship and the family violence that they witnessed.
269 the children have always been cared for by both of their parents and, as conceded by the mother, the father and dr o are heavily involved in the children’s lives. further, as stated earlier in these reasons, i accept the father’s evidence as to his parenting role both pre and post separation.[158]
270 it was also agreed that the mother and father are able to communicate well, support each other, and adopt child-focused approaches concerning parenting issues that have arisen post-separation. this includes educational and medical matters. for example the mother, as extracted at paragraph 209 above, reached out to the father for his support about w’s disruptive behaviour at school. i accept the father’s evidence of this incident as proof of the mother having relied upon him to parent the children post-separation.
271 the children also have a very close relationship with ms s, their maternal grandmother. ms s gave evidence that the children will, on occasions, speak to her up to three times a day. ms s also states in her affidavit that the mother has the support of her sister, ms kk, her friend ms r, cousins, aunties and uncles in darwin.[159] her father and step-mother, ms t, also lives there.
272 the father states in his affidavit that the children have relationships with their paternal family in sydney. this includes his sister ms c, ms c’s children, long term friends mr joyner and ms dd, the children’s friends, and some of the mother’s family.[160] the children also have a close and secure relationship with dr o.
273 under cross-examination the mother conceded that, if she and the children did not relocate to darwin, the children’s relationships with maternal family members will endure.
274 the mother also conceded that she is currently supported by friends in sydney including ms ee (described by the mother as her ‘best friend’), ms ff and ms gg. these friends help her with the care of the children and, in particular, do so when the mother is working. the children also have sleep-overs at ‘hh and jj’s home’. presumably the children all have relationships with these people.
275 the mother sent the father a text in august 2020 confirming that, in part, her desire to relocate was based on being near family support:
231. ms joyner has otherwise acknowledged the family support i have in new south wales. on 25 august 2020, ms joyner sent me a text message which read words to the effect of "i am only asking for the kids and i to move to darwin so that i can have the same as you have mr. joyner’s family support. but you're denying me and the kids that even though they continually ask you. "[161]
276 an advantage to relocating to darwin is that the children will be able to spend more time with their grandmother and the maternal side of the family. a corresponding disadvantage, however, is that their existing relationships in new south wales will likely diminish. this includes their relationships with the father, their parental family, and their established friends in new south wales.
277 further, as explained earlier in these reasons, both parents agree that managing their co-parenting relationship has been effective in person. the parents’ cooperation in this respect has, in part, shaped each child’s relationship with each parent. the development of the children has, in many aspects, depended upon the mother and father cooperating and communicating effectively. w in particular has struggled at times since separation. this is the case despite the parents sheltering the children from the effects of separation to a large extent.[162] his behaviour at school improved through a success of co-parenting but, if the mother and the children relocate, the father’s ability to participate at that high level would be significantly reduced.
278 mr e further opined that:
89. while it remains uncertain whether they will suffer any psychological reactions to the withdrawal of the current arrangements, ms joyner believes they shall readily adjust, given her proposal for daily skype contact with the father. it seems more likely that y and z, on account of their young ages and emotional immaturity, could experience greater parental "loss" issues.[163]
279 a move to darwin gives rise to a number of possible significant disruptions to the children’s lives and established relationships. they have family and friends in the suburb b or greater sydney area and, as conceded by the mother, their relationships in darwin would endure in any event. if the children moved their established relationships with family, friends, and other children would be disrupted. they would also have to cope without the regular hands-on parenting from the father and dr o. further, with respect to their relationships with each parent and each other, the children would not continue to benefit from the strides made by the parents in their co-parenting relationship.
section 60cc(3)(c) — the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child
280 the father, as already found in these reasons, has always had a deep involvement in the children’s lives. this includes making decisions about major long-term issues regarding the children and, in particular, in relation to schooling and medical matters. both pre and post-separation the parents have worked together on w’s disruptive behaviour at school, y’s adhd and odd, and w’s speech pathology.
281 the father does complain that the mother made a unilateral decision to engage w and x in trauma counselling. the father feared that ms g’s negative impression of him resulted from statements made by the mother.[164] under cross-examination the mother explained that, at the time this counselling was organised, she was not on speaking terms with the father.
282 largely, however, the mother has had a child-focused approach to dealing with major decisions regarding the children’s lives. this will continue as the parties have agreed to an order for equal shared parental responsibility.
section 60cc(3)(ca) — the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
283 the father is working and pays child support. neither parent said that they cannot financially provide for the children’s needs and both have fulfilled their obligations to the children in this regard.
section 60cc(3)(d) — the likely effect of any changes in children’s circumstances, including the likely effect to him from any separation from:(i) either of the child’s parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the children), with whom they have been living
284 this factor is almost always one of the most important matters for a court to consider when considering a parent’s relocation application.
285 in this case the children have lived in the suburb b area all of their lives. they have established friendships and family connections in the area. they are all now at school and are actively involved in various sporting pursuits. w and x consistently engaged with trauma counselling through victims services, within the new south wales department of communities and justice, throughout 2020, and y has consistently seen the same paediatrician for some time.
286 if the children live in darwin these deep connections — communities, friendships, schools, sports, medical professionals, and more — will be reduced or, in some respects, lost.
287 this will, importantly, impact the mother as well as the children. the father and dr o will not, in those circumstances, offer their weekly hands-on involvement that the children currently enjoy which has been a consistent feature of their lives.
288 mr schroder submitted that these significant changes in the children’s lives, as proposed by the mother, would be a negative disruption for them. this issue is compounded, in his submission, by the lack of real planning by the mother for such a move.
289 under cross-examination the mother was pressed about what enquiries she had made to find a new counsellor for the older children if required, a new speech pathologist for w, or a paediatrician for y. the mother was not able to detail any real enquiries that she has made about any of these important matters.
290 the mother also conceded that the father’s direct involvement in the children’s medical appointments, education, and sporting pursuits would be much more difficult if she relocated. as an example the mother confirmed that, in december 2021, she and the father are scheduled to jointly attend an appointment with y’s paediatrician. this again confirms the improved level of communication and functionality of the parent’s relationship and their joint involvement in the children’s medical matters.
291 the mother, as shown earlier in these reasons, sought out the father’s help in relation to w’s issues at school. again, if any of the children encountered such issues at school or in another context in darwin, the father would not be able to provide direct assistance like he did with w.
292 the mother also agreed that the children were happy in sydney, had established friendship groups, and were doing well at school. the mother agreed that they would have to start a new school and make new friends if they relocated.
293 notwithstanding these concessions the mother was firmly of the view that, if permitted to relocate, the children will adapt to the significant change that would occur upon their relocation to darwin. in her view the children have an established relationship with their father and, through her own and others’ efforts, that relationship will be promoted. the father will have regular virtual and physical time with the children. moving to darwin will, in the mother’s view, give effect to their stated desires and enable time with members of their maternal family with whom they have established relationships.
294 for all of these reasons the mother is confident that the children will adapt to the relocation to darwin.
295 notwithstanding this confidence mr schroder submitted the icl’s concerns about the lack of real planning by the mother in relation to the planned move. she has not, in the icl’s view, established that the children will not be negatively impacted by such a significant change to their lives. there are no details about schools, doctors or even exactly where she and the children will live. the proposed relocation requires definition and clarity — her concept of the same is abstract. there is, therefore, a great deal of uncertainty for the children if the move to darwin occurs. w has already exhibited some issues coping with the changes since separation and y, on account of his special needs, requires stability and certainty. further, as opined by mr e, the older children do not truly understand the ramifications of such a significant change and the younger children would likely feel a sense of loss.[165] this evidence reflects their honours’ remarks in bondelmonte v bondelmonte above — the children have not considered the full ambit of long-term consequences resulting from being away from the father. i must, to the extent possible, limit emotional disruptions to the children’s lives in deciding the issues for determination before me.
296 i agree, as the icl argues, that there is a lack of detail and planning for the proposed relocation.
297 a further uncertainty is the question of the mother’s ongoing employment if the relocation occurs. the mother was asked, under cross-examination, about her proposed working arrangements in darwin. she said that she was going to apply for the public service although she had not, to date, made any efforts to do so. she said that she found information about the public service application prerequisites online and that, in her belief, she met all those prerequisites. she had not made any formal application. it was suggested to her that, if she was successful with such an application and successfully passed the course, she would at least initially likely be stationed in remote areas of the northern territory. she said that, on her information, if she has a court order allowing her to relocate with the children to darwin she will be exempt from that requirement. she did not produce any evidence to corroborate this position. her evidence in this respect in uncorroborated hearsay and cannot be given any weight.
298 the mother said that, in any event, she would be able to obtain work as an administrative assistant in the northern territory in line with her current employment. there was, again, no evidence to corroborate any efforts to obtain work in this field. the mother also said that her parents would support her in caring for the children (inter alia, looking after them, collecting them from school) in the event that she obtained full-time employment in the northern territory.
299 the mother’s affidavit does not provide much clarity with respect to her employment, housing, and financial circumstances:
10. there are numerous administration jobs in darwin at present. i have been keeping an eye on seek and there are upwards of 30+ jobs added a week. plus, it is my intention once the children have settled into the move that i will join the public service and hopefully move into this industry as this has always been a dream of mine. this will enable me to be able to support the children better. i will also be able to rely on my support from my family. 11. housing is cheaper in darwin. where i currently rent in suburb f, nsw, it is quite expensive. at the moment i am living in a 3-bedroom, 1 bathroom home paying $420 per week. i have the options of a 4-bedroom, 2 bathroom home for between $400 - $450 per week in darwin which is much more suited for a family of 5. 12. i work part time as a professional and receive family tax a and b, as well as child support, and i still struggle to financially support myself and the children. i cannot take on any extra hours at work because i need to be available to care for the children before and after school. i do not have anyone that i can rely upon to assist me with the care of the children in the event of an emergency.[166]
300 there is, therefore, much uncertainty in the mother’s proposal with respect to employment and income. this uncertainty, naturally, also raises uncertainty as to whether the mother will be able to afford any part of the children’s travel costs between darwin and suburb b to effect time with the father. her primary proposal seeks that travel costs be shared equally but, in light of the uncertainties in her evidence, it is unclear whether this will be feasible for her.
301 mr schroder contended that, if the relocation application succeeds, the mother may not be able to easily afford the cost of the children travelling to and from new south wales. the mother agreed that the children could not currently fly unaccompanied and that, until that time, the cost of one-way flights for herself and the children totalled around $1,100.00. this figure was not corroborated. the airfare costs for all four children between the northern territory and new south wales would be significant and, as mr blackah put to the mother, may in fact increase in future. she indicated, in response, that this was not an issue.
302 the father’s alternative proposal does not specify how the children’s travel costs are to be shared, if at all.[167] while mr blackah did not agitate the issue at trial it is not expressly agreed by both parents that they shall share the travel costs as the mother proposes. if the relocation application succeeds i will need to determine this issue but, for the moment, it is sufficient to say that the ability of the mother, let alone the father, to afford this cost on a number of occasions each year is in question. in those circumstances the parents’ capacity to financially facilitate and promote the father’s time can, potentially, compound the effects of the children’s already-changed circumstances resulting from the relocation.
303 there is much uncertainty as to the mother's financial circumstances in the event that she is able to relocate. there was not sufficient evidence placed before this court as to this important consideration. the mother’s ability to meet the high cost of travel, given the uncertainty of her employment status if the relocation occurs, is the real query.
304 the concern is that, given the distance and the costs, that it may become too costly for the mother to send the children to the father pursuant to ordered time. this will inevitably lead to the children not spending ordered time with the father if, indeed, the mother’s financial situation deteriorates.
305 the uncertainty surrounding the mother's financial circumstances, in the event that a relocation is allowed, disadvantages her primary proposal.
306 if the children relocate to the northern territory it will be a significant change to the lives they have always known in new south wales. the mother has failed to articulate how the children’s various needs will be met, and how they will not be negatively impacted, if they move to darwin.
307 i emphasise again that the mother is not required to show compelling reasons to relocate. she must, however, demonstrate the measures that she will employ to ensure that the children adapt to the significant change contemplated.
section 60cc(3)(e) — the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time communicating with a parent
308 the parties’ current parenting arrangements do not cause any practical difficulty or insurmountable expense and, if the children remain in new south wales, these arrangements will continue. in fact, since the mother has agreed to the father having one further night in the off-week, her alternate proposal makes for a more practicable arrangement. under that arrangement, as proposed and agreed by the mother, the father would collect the children from school and return the children to school the next day.
309 under cross-examination the father said that the nature of his work had changed. this allows him a greater amount of flexibility and time to meet the demands of an equal or substantial and significant time arrangement if either is ordered. his evidence in this regard was corroborated by his employer, mr v.
310 if the children relocate, however, the question of practicability and expense to spend time with the children becomes more complex. there is, as stated, some concern as to the mother's ability to finance the children’s travelling to and from new south wales. there will, of course, be a greater cost for the father as well.
311 mr blackah submitted that, as the children become older, they may become reluctant to undertake the long journey to spend time with their father pursuant to the school holidays — irrespective of any order in place. he further submitted that the mother's ability to promote the children’s relationship with the father, given her deep distrust of him, will also affect the children’s enthusiasm to make the journey each holiday. ms s’ very negative view of the father also creates risk in this regard.
312 as already stated i find that, notwithstanding her trauma and experiences at the time of separation, the mother has promoted the relationship with the father and the children since separation. the father’s ordered time has largely occurred and the mother’s high level of communication and collaboration with the father about w’s behavioural issues clearly evidences that she values the father’s input into the children’s lives. she reached out to him for help. on this basis i am satisfied that the mother will promote the children’s relationship with their father wherever they live.
313 i cannot, however, say the same of ms s. she is seemingly reluctant to put aside her negative view of the father for the purpose of promoting the children’s relationships with him. this is concerning since, if they relocate, the children will be spending a large amount of time with their maternal grandmother.
314 the real danger for the children is that, if they relocate, the mother’s financial circumstances may be impacted by the high cost of the children spending time with the father. the mother’s evidence about her financial prospects and circumstances in darwin is wanting and, importantly, does not quell my concerns about the logistics and costs of the mother’s primary proposal.
section 60cc(3)(f) — the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the children),to provide for the children’s needs, including emotional and intellectual needs
315 both parties, as already stated in these reasons, have the capacity to provide for the children's emotional needs and have been heavily involved in the children's care throughout their lives.
316 the father caused a significant upheaval in the children's lives at the point of separation by exposing the mother, and in at least one instance the children themselves, to family violence. these experiences are, as conceded by the father, likely to have impacted the children. w’s behavioural issues may be attributed, in part, to the trauma experienced at this time.
317 the father's poor behaviour, particularly at the point of separation, showed a lack of insight and was not child-focused.
318 the mother has shown a somewhat dependent relationship with the children. the mother admits that she struggles when the children are not in her care. the children co-sleep with her and, as conceded during cross-examination, she needs to foster a more parent-like relationship with her children (w in particular). the mother acknowledges these shortcomings and is making an effort to change them.
319 these different dynamics have unsettled the children and have created some vulnerability for them. a change to their living arrangements, away from the structure and certainty that they have known in new south wales for all their lives, may be disruptive and negatively impact on the children. this concerned mr e who, as set out at paragraph 155, echoed these issues.
section 60cc(3)(i) — the attitude to the child and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents
320 both parents have shown a good attitude to their role as parents and their co-parenting relationship post-separation. the level of communication between the parties is high notwithstanding the mother’s experience of family violence.
321 according to the father both parents are able to communicate effectively about medical and educational issues and are pleasant to each other at the point of changeover. under cross-examination the father said that his communication with the mother has improved and now functions reasonably well. they are able to meet each other at the changeover point, greet each other, and discuss matters relating to the children.
322 this bodes well for the future regardless of whether the children ultimately live in darwin or new south wales. a high level of communication is, however, vital to a successful transition if the mother’s relocation application succeeds.
323 the mother’s primary proposal and the father’s alternative proposal do not evidence agreement about the frequency of telephone or video communication. notwithstanding this minor point of disagreement the parents have, for the most part, cooperatively facilitated telephone or video communication for the parent who is not spending time with the children. this, again, bodes well if the children do relocate.
324 the father's attitude to parenting was in question at the point of separation. not only did he behave in what can only be described as an appalling manner towards the mother but, shortly after separation, he retained the children in his care.
325 to some extent the father underestimates the impact of his behaviour at that time upon the children. he has, however, gained some insight in relation to his past poor behaviour. he has taken measures aimed towards preventing the same behaviour occurring again and, again, i refer to dr o’s evidence to corroborate his improvement this regard.
326 the mother does have some admitted anxiousness when the children are not in her care and also is, to some extent, over-parenting the children by allowing them to co-sleep with her. she admits that she has, at times, treated w as a friend and not a child. this, in part, may have led to some of the difficulties that w in particular has experienced.
327 i am confident that, wherever the children live, both parents will remain child-focused and put the children’s needs first. the real question is the ability for both parties to ensure the children adapt to a completely new life in darwin, away from the life they have always known. there remains some doubt in this regard.
section 60cc(3)(j) — any family violence involving the children or a member of their family
328 the father admits to committing family violence towards the mother at the point of separation.
329 the violence included abusive language, texts and a video sent to the mother, showing the father cutting himself.
330 the father also retained the children in his care on 22 december 2019 which, without doubt, caused the mother significant distress.
331 the mother sought therapeutic psychological treatment to deal with her experience of family violence and the breakdown of the relationship generally.
332 mr blackah, during submissions, submitted that the mother is no longer impacted by that experience. i do not accept that submission. the level of distrust that she has for the father and her inability to make positive statements about him finds, at least in some past, its origin in her experience of family violence.
333 it is, in the mother’s circumstances, commendable that she has fostered a relationship between the children and the father and has maintained a reasonable level of communication with him.
334 the mother's desire to relocate seems, in a large part, traceable to her experiences at the point of separation and the impact of those experiences upon her and the children. i do not have any doubt that the children would have, at the very least, been indirectly impacted by the violence that the mother suffered. the father conceded that witnessing the mother in distress would have had an impact on them.
335 the mother is not currently receiving therapeutic assistance. she says that, should further therapy become necessary in darwin, it will be available to her. i note that, in those circumstances, her rapport with dr q will be lost.
336 i accept mr e’s opinion that the mother's trauma as experienced (and endured to this day) will not necessarily dissipate if she succeeds with her application to relocate. ongoing therapy will be the means to overcome this trauma.
337 mr blackah referred to dr q’s notes which, in his argument, indicated that the mother’s main concerns were the ongoing litigation and her inability to effectively communicate with the father — not the family violence that she suffered. this, in my view, understates the ongoing impact of the events that surrounded separation.
338 i agree with the mr e that moving to the northern territory with the children will not necessarily deal with the impact of family violence and, in a way, it may be better for the mother to stay close to her therapist. in the event that the children do not cope with moving to darwin this may actually become a further stressor for the mother in what appears to be, at least from my perspective, a relatively unplanned concept of living in the northern territory. w and y, in particular, have some special needs and require vigilance and support. the father is, and has been, providing that support. i am concerned that, if the mother does not have his assistance and input, she will more keenly feel the burden of those children's issues.
section 60cc(3)(k) — if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the children or a member of their family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account:(i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter.
339 the mother has been protected by the father by two avos. the final avo expired in march 2021 and, since early 2020, no further allegations of family violence have been made by the mother against the father.
340 the father’s personal circumstances and mental health have significantly improved since the tumultuous events of late 2019 and early 2020. he is now settled into a new relationship and has undertaken therapy and the equips program to change his behaviour. he and the mother have a relatively good level of communication and understanding. the mother proposes that, wherever the children live, the father have significant time with them.
341 i have found (at paragraph 251 of these reasons) that the children will not be subject to an unacceptable risk in his care. i am, in light of this finding and the evidence set out above, satisfied that the father’s previous poor behaviour is unlikely to resurface. there is no evidence to suggest that any further injunctive order against the father is necessary nor desired.
342 it is hoped that the mother will continue to regain the trust of the father that she has, understandably, lost. this will take time but, ultimately, each instance in which the parents appear as a united front improves the prospects for the children. the parties should, however, be able to deal with each other regarding decisions regarding the children irrespective of the children’s location.
section 60cc(3)(l) — whether it would be preferable to make orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children
343 there is some chance that, if relocation is permitted, the children will be disrupted and may not cope with the significant change in their circumstances. they will be removed from their father who has, as found, always had a significant involvement in their lives. they will also be removed from the suburb b area in which they have lived their entire lives so far.
344 w and y have special needs that will require certainty, stability, and ongoing vigilance. the existence of those conditions in darwin, to the extent that they currently exist in suburb b, is uncertain.
345 in all of those circumstances i find that allowing the relocation application is more likely to cause further proceedings to be instituted with respect to the children.
346 it is, plainly, not in the children's best interests to be involved in further litigation. indeed, as indicated by the mother herself, litigation has been a stressor for her.
347 it is better, in my view, that the parents are put in a position that is the least likely to result in further proceedings. i find that will be best achieved if the mother and the children remain in new south wales.
conclusion in relation to the children’s best interests
348 my conclusion in this respect has, in many of the s 60cc factors, been foreshadowed. in essence it is my conclusion that the children require stability to continue on their trajectory of growth, recovery, and development, and the parents need to place themselves in the best possible position to facilitate the same. having so determined i must now consider aspects of parental responsibility and care arrangements.
shared parental responsibility
349 parental responsibility means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to their children.[168] a parent does not have rights over their children — they have responsibilities to love and nurture their children and serve their children’s best interests. upon separation parents are not, simply by virtue of their changed relationship with one another, absolved from their parental responsibilities.[169] court orders may, however, change the nature of parental responsibility, and the obligations attaching thereto, to suit a post-separation life.
350 an order for shared parental responsibility is distinct from the baseline concept of ‘parental responsibility’.[170] the effect of such an order is set out at s 65dac of the act, upon which i will briefly offer a summary and pose some comments, is extracted below:  this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.
351 major long-term issues, in relation to a child, means:
... issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long-term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child's education (both current and future), and (b) the child's religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent. to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new partner is not, of itself, a major long-term issue in relation to the child. however, the decision will involve a major long-term issue if, for example, the relationship with the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent.   the child's education (both current and future), and (b) the child's religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child's religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
352 all parties to this case agree that, regardless of whether the mother’s relocation application succeeds, there should be an order for equal shared parental responsibility. their agreement in this respect is consistent with the principles underlying the objects of part vii of the act and, most relevantly in this case, those contained in s 60b(2):  parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children,   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children,
353 these principles reflect a child’s basic right to have both parents involved in big, and often difficult, decisions affecting their lives. to make such decisions is hard and, generally, both parents are needed to formulate decisions that are in a child’s best interests.
354 shared parental responsibility does not just refer to the nature and scope of a parent’s responsibility but, further, entrusts parents (or others) with certain decision-making obligations about major long-term issues.
355 the mother and the father must, for each of their children, share decisions about major long-term issues in relation to each child. the act requires them to make joint decisions about the major long-term issues for which equal shared parental responsibility has been ordered which, in this case, includes all major long-term issues.
356 i note here the possible anomaly within s 65dac — namely, subsections (2) and (3)(b). the section dictates that an order for equal shared parental responsibility requires decisions within its ambit to be jointly made. that, from the language of the provision, is non-negotiable. yet, in almost the same breath, the section requires consultation in relation to the issue and the ‘genuine effort’ of all parties involved to come to a joint decision on that issue. it is entirely possible that all parties involved may make a ‘genuine effort’ to make a joint decision but nevertheless fail to do so. they may simultaneously comply with sub-section (3) and breach sub-section (2) — a problem for which s 65dac appears to offer no resolution. that said i am not concerned that this anomaly will rear its head because, as already stated, the parents have shown considerable improvement in their communication and have adopted an impressive co-parenting relationship built on a child-focused outlook.
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
the presumption — legal principles and operation
357 the act requires this court to presume that it is in the children’s best interests for their parents to be equally responsible for major decisions affecting their long-term care and welfare. section 61da of the act sets out the applicability of that presumption (emphasis added):  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.   the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
358 the operation of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is significant. the line of authority from the full court suggests that, if the presumption remains in place, equal shared parental responsibility must be ordered.[171] section 61da makes clear, however, that this outcome may not always be appropriate.
359 sections 61da(2) and 61da(4) provide for two ways by which equal shared parental responsibility may not be ordered, as are relevant to the case at hand.
360 section 61da(2) provides that, from the outset, the presumption will not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent (or someone who resides with a parent) has engaged in child abuse or family violence. the standard set out in s 61da(2) is important. it does not require proof of the fact that, on the balance of probabilities, child abuse or family violence took place. it requires only that the evidence provides reasonable grounds to believe that a person has engaged in child abuse or family violence. the wording of subsection (2) indicates a legislative intention to, in limited circumstances, prevent the application of the presumption notwithstanding that there may be no evidentiary finding of child abuse or family violence. any actual finding of child abuse or family violence itself activates s 61da(2), at which point there becomes no need to explore whether or not the presumption applies. once s 61da(2) is enlivened, whether through reasonable grounds of belief or a factual finding on the balance of probabilities, the presumption is excluded as a matter of law. in those circumstances there is no discretionary power by which the presumption may be revived.[172]
361 the enquiry as to an order for parental responsibility always, with the exception of s 61da(2) and 61da(3) (noting that subsection (3) is irrelevant in this case), commences with the presumption that equal shared parental responsibility is in the child or children’s best interests. this is not to say that the presumption, once in place, is set in stone.
362 section 61da(4) accounts for instances in which, although the presumption applies from the outset of the enquiry, an order for equal shared parental responsibility may nevertheless not serve the child or children’s best interests. if s 61da(2) applies, s 61da(4) never comes into operation.[173] subsection (4) provides for the presumption to be rebutted — namely, for it to be ousted from consideration, despite the fact that it was initially applicable. to rebut the presumption a judge must determine, on the balance of probabilities, that it would not be in the child or children’s best interests to order equal shared parental responsibility. the grounds upon which the presumption may be rebutted are significantly broader than those given in s 61da(2). a court must, therefore, reach ‘a level of satisfaction on the evidence ... that it would not be in the interests of the child for [the presumption] to apply’, and must give ‘explicit and cogent reasons why the presumption should be rebutted’.[174]
applicability of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility in this case
363 the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility has, in this case, been ousted before it ever came into play. this is because my findings of family violence — the instance found at paragraph 236 of these reasons and the instance admitted by the father and found at paragraph 46 — enliven s 61da(2)(b) of the act.
364 this does not, however, mean that i no longer have jurisdiction to make an order for equal shared parental responsibility as agreed by all parties. warnick j in robertson & sento [2009] famcafc 49, though in dissent, plainly sets out the operation of s 61da(2) by reference to the words therein:
41. [s 61da(2)] does not say that, if there are reasonable grounds to believe one of the nominated circumstances exists, equal shared parental responsibility, qualified or unqualified, shall not be ordered, but merely that the presumption does not apply (at all).[175]
365 this court remains bound under s 60ca to consider the children’s best interests as a paramount consideration in making any parenting order. if the evidence suggests that it is in the children’s best interests for there to be an order for equal shared parental responsibility then i may make that determination and craft an order accordingly.
discussion of the parents’ abilities to consult and make a genuine effort to come to joint decisions about major long-term issues
366 the mother, in the past, has not genuinely consulted the father about all matters concerning the children’s major long term decisions since separation. it is noted here that, in her amended initiating application filed 14 january 2020, she sought to carve out sole parental responsibility for decisions with respect to the children’s education. she since moderated her position and agreed to unqualified equal shared parental responsibility at trial.
367 under cross-examination the mother was taken to ms g’s notes and interviews and she gave evidence about w and x’s victims services trauma counselling between april and november 2020. the mother intimated that the children required the counselling after becoming aware of the father’s apparent suicidal intentions and tendency for self-harm.
368 importantly the mother agreed that she did not inform the father that the children were involved in the trauma counselling sessions. she said, however, that her communication with the father was not strong at the time she enrolled w and x. as mentioned throughout these reasons the parents’ communication has improved markedly since this time. the mother says that, in particular, this improvement has taken place over the last year.
369 the mother conceded that the father had been involved in parent-teacher interviews and with the school generally and that, if she relocated, this would become harder to achieve. further she agreed that w, in light of his recent behavioural difficulties at school, would have to adjust to a new school if he moved to darwin. in those circumstances the mother agreed that the father would not be as ‘hands-on’ if w had issues adjusting to his new school.
determination with respect to order for equal shared parental responsibility
370 i find that, notwithstanding the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility being ousted, it is in the children’s best interests for there to be an order for equal shared parental responsibility. this is my determination irrespective of where the children ultimately reside.
371 my determination is based on the high level of involvement of the father in the children's lives, the strong level of communication between the parents, and the need for the parents to make joint decisions in relation to medical and educational issues in particular.
equal or ‘significant and substantial’ time?
372 i will make an order that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. i must, therefore, consider whether i should order an equal time arrangement, with reference to two considerations. first is, predictably, the children’s best interests, and secondly, i must assess whether the children spending equal time with both parents is reasonably practicable. if both considerations are assessed in the affirmative i must then consider making an order for equal time.[176]
373 if i am to make an order for equal shared parental responsibility, but do not order equal time, i must consider whether there should be an order for substantial and significant time instead. i will undertake this assessment, again, with reference to the children’s best interests and whether the children spending substantial and significant time with each of their parents is reasonably practicable.[177]
equal time
if the mother’s relocation application succeeds
374 if the children relocate to darwin, with the father remaining in suburb b, an equal time arrangement is neither practicable nor in the children’s best interests.
if the mother’s relocation application fails
375 neither parent seeks equal time if the mother and the children remain in new south wales.
376 mr e also did not believe an equal time arrangement would benefit the children in those circumstances. his evidence was that it is important for the children to know that they live with their mother — there needs to be no confusion as to that fact. for this reason mr e also did not support an arrangement in which the children would spend six nights per fortnight with the father. he believed that the children would, in effect, experience that arrangement as splitting their time between their parents instead of living with the mother.
377 mr e was convinced that the children want to live primarily with the mother and those views should be respected.
378 the parties do hold a level of distrust towards one another, particularly the mother towards the father, emanating from the family violence that she experienced. an equal time arrangement is not an optimal one for the children in those circumstances. it is also, for those reasons, not reasonably practicable in that it may agitate this distrust and cause the children to become unstable as a result of the arrangement. i will not order equal time.
substantial and significant time
379 if the children live in darwin and the father lives in suburb b a substantial and significant time arrangement, as defined, is not reasonably practicable nor is it in the children’s best interests. the two localities are thousands of kilometres apart. by reasons of time, cost, and sense i cannot, in those circumstances, order an arrangement of the frequency and variety set out in s 65daa(3).
380 all parties propose a substantial and significant time arrangement in the event that the mother and the children remain in new south wales.
381 the mother’s alternative proposal seeks a 4/10 arrangement in which the father spends time with the children each alternate friday until the following monday and one night in the off-week.
382 the father’s primary proposal seeks a 5/9 arrangement in which the children spend time with him for five nights in one week without any time in the off-week. he is content for the 5/9 arrangement to commence in mid-2022 and for a 4/10 arrangement to be in place until that time.
383 the icl also proposes a 5/9 arrangement, with four nights in one week and one night in the off-week, again for it to commence in mid-2022. this is in line with mr e’s recommendation.
384 the parties’ proposals meet the definition of significant and substantial time because all of them provide the children’s time with the father both on weekends and during the week. there are also accommodations made for special days and holiday time. importantly, this allows the children to experience time with their father outside of weekends and holidays. it allows the father to engage with the children’s school and the day-to-day chores of school term time.
385 it is in the children’s best interests for a substantial and significant time arrangement to be put in place if they remain living in suburb b. that arrangement also must be reasonably practicable.
386 the reasonable practicability of a substantial and significant time arrangement are, to some extent, still impacted by the mother’s distrust of the father. this issue is less impactful here, as opposed to its impact upon an equal time arrangement, since the children would still remain primarily in the mother’s care. an equal time arrangement requires high-level communication and, while a substantial and significant time arrangement also requires this, it does not have to exist to the same extent if the mother remains the children’s primary carer.
387 that said, and as found, the parties communicate very well about parenting matters and their interactions with each other are now cordial. in addition to their functional communication they live close to one another and would, if the mother remained, be able to continue living at their current residences and using the same changeover point.
388 i am satisfied that, if the mother’s relocation application fails, a substantial and significant time arrangement with the father is in the children’s best interests and reasonable practicable.
389 i am further satisfied that such an arrangement should adopt the structure suggested by mr e and the icl — that is, an arrangement building from 4/10 to 5/9 over a six-month period. the children’s time with the father should occur in each week because they have become accustomed to such an arrangement. further, and despite mr blackah’s submission with respect to parental conflict at changeover, there is not a need to mitigate the risk of conflict at changeover by adopting strict block time. there is no evidence of any conflict or difficulty at changeover.
conclusion
390 i find that it is in the children’s best interests to remain in the suburb b area and spend substantial and significant time with the father. the mother’s relocation application, therefore, fails.
391 i make this finding having considered and weighed the parties’ competing proposals with regard to s 60cc(2), relevant s 60cc(3) factors, s 65daa and s 60ca.
392 there are some advantages to the mother’s relocation application. the mother has a long-held desire to work in the public service in the northern territory and desires to be close to her darwin-based family and friends. remaining in new south wales totally or at least partially prevents these desires from being realised.
393 that said her family have visited, and will continue to visit, suburb b. furthermore there are holiday periods which will allow the mother to visit her family and friends in darwin. the mother and the children will maintain enduring relationships with friends and family in darwin and will not have to risk the financial instability maintaining the father’s relationship with the children halfway across australia. if the relocation occurs the mother will be subject to the burden of expensive long flights for the children to and from new south wales. without certain employment that adds another complexity to her proposition.
394 the mother has, without doubt, suffered significantly as a result of the family violence that she experienced. it is understandable that moving back to the northern territory would provide her some respite from that experience, the support and familiarity of home, and the chance to effectively start again. the difficulty is that, if she still harbours trauma from family violence, moving to the northern territory may not overcome the impact of family violence. the mother needs ongoing therapy and, as mr e opines, her trauma will necessarily not be resolved by the move alone.
395 in addition to her family and friends in darwin the mother also has friends and support in new south wales. she has been leaning on those friends recently for support with the children. the father's increased time with the children, pursuant to a substantial care arrangement, will also provide the mother with support in this respect. with this support she can keep in contact with her friends and family, undertake further work, or spend time with those visiting from the northern territory.
396 the advantages to the children if they remain in new south wales are significant.
397 firstly, in remaining in new south wales, they will remain in the only environment which they have ever called home. in doing so they will maintain their ongoing connection and time with their father and, in time, build to spending more time with him. this will allow them to maintain a close connection with someone that has always been involved in their lives.
398 they will also be able to maintain their connections with their schools, doctors, therapists and, for y specifically, his paediatrician. given some of the children’s special needs this is vitally important.
399 remaining in new south wales will provide certainty and stability for the children. given the disruptions the children (and w in particular) have already experienced it is important to now allow the children to settle in the home they know.
400 the ongoing presence of the father in their day-to-day life will also benefit the children. the father is in a settled and stable relationship and the children will be able to enjoy and further build their relationships with dr o.
401 in essence the mother’s primary proposal is not sufficiently advantageous to outstrip its own disadvantages and, ultimately, it cannot compete with the father’s primary proposal, the icl’s proposal, or her own alternative proposal with respect to the children’s best interests. the children view new south wales as their home, have had the father actively involved in their lives, and have experienced disruptions which have sometimes been exacerbated by specific needs and circumstances. the mother’s proposal for relocation is not particularly detailed or thought-through and, in particular, she made no significant inquiries as to the children’s school, possible housing, doctors, therapists or other relevant resources or professionals. she just wishes to move back to the northern territory but, in my view, she has to some extent felt hamstrung in making too many plans because of the uncertainty of this litigation. nevertheless she has had ample opportunity to provide a well thought-out plan and corroborative information to confirm the same, particularly in relation to employment, medical and educational issues. she did not do so. this did not assist her case since, as a result, the evidence remained unclear.
402 having considered the abovementioned reasons, alongside all the other considerations involved in the holistic assessment of determining parenting orders, i find that the advantages of the children remaining in new south wales and their current environment far outweigh the risks of uncertainties and unknowns inherent in the mother’s proposed relocation to darwin. it is, therefore, not in the children’s best interests for them to live with the mother in darwin.
conclusion in relation to other outstanding issues
403 having determined the mother’s relocation application the following issues, as initially set out at paragraphs 63-64 of these reasons, remain:  should the children live in an equal-time arrangement, or some other arrangement of time, between their parents? (3) how frequently should the children communicate (by telephone or video) with each parent while not in their care and, further, how frequently should the same occur in the event that the children travel internationally with one of the parents? (6) in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?   how frequently should the children communicate (by telephone or video) with each parent while not in their care and, further, how frequently should the same occur in the event that the children travel internationally with one of the parents? (6) in what arrangement, or by which parent, should the children’s passports ordinarily be held?
404 i note that issue 5 is not addressed at this point because the mother’s relocation application has failed. issue 5 has, in any event, been generally addressed at paragraph 67 of these reasons. issue 4, too, is omitted, having determined the same at paragraph 250 above.
405 i further note that, with respect to the minor issue of liberty to attend the children’s schools and activities (introduced at paragraphs 83-85), i intend to adopt terms from the icl’s proposal and the father’s primary proposal.[178] the children will remain in new south wales and the parents have demonstrated their cooperative co-parenting style. it is, therefore, appropriate that they both be permitted to liaise, attend, and otherwise be involved in the children’s schooling and other activities without exclusions to the other parent.
substantial and significant time arrangement
time during school terms
406 further to my determination with respect to the mother’s relocation application i find that, for the reasons contained at paragraphs 201-348 above, it is in the children’s best interests to spend significant and substantial time with the father, commencing with a 4/10 arrangement and building to a 5/9 arrangement commencing at the start of term one in 2023. the father’s primary proposal and the icl’s proposal both include a six-month transitionary phase between the 4/10 and 5/9 arrangement. the children currently spend three nights per fortnight with the father. it is, therefore, in the children’s best interests to order a six-month adjustment period of 4/10 time before progressing to 5/9 time.
holiday time
407 both parents agree that the children should spend equal time with each of their parents during school holidays. the mother, however, seeks a ‘week on’ and ‘week off’ arrangement for these holidays and even during the christmas/new year holidays.
408 it is, in my view, important for the children to spend extended time with their parents in the summer school holidays. i will therefore adopt the icl’s proposal in this respect.
christmas day and easter time
409 the mother’s alternative proposal is silent as to christmas and easter time arrangements.
410 it is important for the children to spend time with both of their parents on these special days and i will make orders accordingly.
telephone and video communication
411 the mother proposes that virtual communication should occur every day. the father, having submitted that her proposal is excessive, proposes that the same occur every second day.
412 i intend to adopt the father’s proposal in this respect. it is important that virtual communication does not unnecessarily impose on the in-person time the children spend with their parents and, given the parents’ cooperation to date, virtual communication every second day is appropriate.
413 with respect to international travel i also consider it appropriate to adopt the father’s proposal. it is important to make pragmatic orders which can be attained and, in the context of international travel, it may be difficult to maintain virtual communication at least once every two days. as such i will order that, in those circumstances, the non-travelling parent will communicate with the children at least once per week.
passports and international travel
414 both parties agree on a suite of orders allowing them to travel overseas with the children. they also both seek an order that the children’s passports ordinarily remain in their care and possession.
415 i will not make the order as sought by either party and, instead, will order that the children’s passports remain with the parent who most recently travelled internationally with the child or children. an order in these terms is more reasonably practicable than appointing a ‘caretaker’ of the passports although i will order that, initially, the mother possess the children’s passports.
416 i also intend to provide, in the ultimate orders, that international travel occur during gazetted school holidays and that, if necessary, the non-travelling parent be compensated for any time lost by virtue of any international travel occurring.
associate: dated: 26 april 2022
dated: 26 april 2022
[1] u & u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238, 260 (gummow and callinan jj); kb & tc [2005] famca 458, [71]-[72]. the full court in kb & tc explain, with respect to relocation applications, that a court should weigh competing proposals having regard to the child or children’s best interests (as described in s 60cc(2) and (3), and as relevant) and other relevant factors including the parents’ constitutionally-enshrined freedom of movement. their honours state, however, that this assessment should be undertaken ‘bearing in mind that ultimately the decision must be one which is in the best interests of the child’. see also boxer & boxer [2021] fedcfamc1f 340, [16], at which his honour hogan j confirms that ‘[w]here there is an issue of relocation, a parent’s right to freedom of movement is just one of the factors to be weighed, together with all other relevant factors, in deciding what is in the children’s best interests’. [2] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021, [58]-[64]. this includes the father’s sister ms c (having been in contact with ms d, who had been in contact with the mother), the children themselves (with w, x and y allegedly telling the father of the mother’s intention), one of y’s teachers (having heard the same from y), and the mother herself (with the text messages extracted at annex -11).[3] ibid [58].[4] ibid [65], annex -12.[5] the hair panel testing conditions of 24 april 2020 and 3 december 2020 were suspended on 31 march 2021.[6] the father’s time in week one currently occurs from 3:30pm on friday until the commencement of school on monday although, if z was not in school on mondays, she would remain with the father until 3:30pm on monday.[7] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021, [42].[8] ibid [39].[9] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 [127]-[130].[10] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [72], [95].[11] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [129]; affidavit, mr, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [141]. the parties appear to disagree as to how frequently the father takes w to his speech therapy appointments.[12] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [116]-[122].[13] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [40].[14] ibid [41].[15] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [143]-[144]; family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [58], at which mr e notes that the father doubted the need for w and x to attend further counselling sessions at the time of the family report interviews.[16] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [40].[17] exhibit i2.[18] ibid.[19] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [59]. neither party alleged that the other is non-compliant with y’s prescription medications.[20] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [125]; affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [229]. the mother and the father attended y’s behavioural psychology appointment in april 2020 together. the parties appear to disagree as to whether there were two appointments (in the mother’s account) or whether there was only one appointment (in the father’s account).[21] exhibit i2 (n 16). the mother stated during cross-examination that y’s sports was a ‘good outlet’ for him. the father did not challenge this claim and, as such, i accept it.[22] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [81].[23] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [34]; affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [94]-[97]; exhibit m4, 9-10.[24] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [48]-[56].[25] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [121]; affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [50]-[53].[26] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [58]. the father denies that he was admitted to hospital.[27] ibid annex -2.[28] ibid [55]-[58].[29] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [122], [124].[30] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [64], annex -3.[31] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [128].[32] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [66]; affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [127]. the parties disagree as to the extent of assistance rendered by the father to the mother.[33] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [63].[34] ibid [71].[35] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [51].[36] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [81]-[86], annex -5. the mother describes the father sending approximately 322 text messages and leaving 48 missed calls over a period of eight hours to which she did not respond out of fear of his behaviour. she further describes that some messages were threatening in nature, including photographs of smashed beer bottles, and in one of these messages the father said that he was going to turn up and that it is in the children’s best interests to keep them away because they do not need to see him ‘like this’. she further describes the videos of him destroying wedding memorabilia and self-harming, repeating words to the effect of ‘just call me, and i won’t come around’.[37] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [52]-[53].[38] ibid [53]; exhibit m4 (n 22), 4.[39] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [33]. the father denied the mother’s allegations of family violence and, with respect to the specific instances admitted at trial, acknowledged his actions and expressed regret for the same but did not admit to that conduct constituting family violence as defined in the act.[40] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [85].[41] family law act 1975 (cth) s 4ab(1). i note the mother’s subjective account of her fear and the father’s subjective (albeit retrospective) account of his intentions and that, while s 4ab(1) does not import a mental element to be proven by the party alleging family violence, the evidence from both sides clearly indicates fear as an intention and result of the father’s behaviour.[42] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [107].[43] ibid [108]; affidavit, ms m, 30 july 2021, annex b.[44] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [110], annex -28.[45] affidavit, dr o, 30 july 2021, [6].[46] ibid [11]-[13].[47] affidavit, ms m, 30 july 2021 (n 42), 9, annex b.[48] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [11].[49] exhibit m3, 1.[50] exhibit f5, [8]; exhibit i3, [8].[51] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020, [16].[52] ibid [12].[53] ibid [20]; mother’s case outline, 2. the mother’s caveat with respect to equal shared parental responsibility (seeking sole parental responsibility with respect to major long-term decisions in relation to the children’s education) does not appear in her alternative proposal in exhibit m1, and was conceded by mr scarlett on the mother’s behalf during final submissions. see also exhibit f5 (n 49), [1]; further amended response, 31 may 2021, annex a, [1]; the father and the icl agree that there should be an order for equal shared parental responsibility in any event. i note that the father’s proposal in the event that the mother may relocate, exhibit f1, does not propose the terms of an order with respect to parental responsibility.[54] exhibit f1, [1]; exhibit m1, [3]. the father’s proposal does not explicitly include words to this effect but, by necessary implication, he agrees to the children living with the mother if she is permitted to relocate to darwin.[55] exhibit f5 (n 49), [2].[56] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [11]; exhibit f1 (n 53), [1].[57] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [17]; exhibit f1 (n 53), [1.5].[58] exhibit f1 (n 53), [2].[59] exhibit m1 (n 53), [7]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [5]; exhibit i3 (n 49), [5].[60] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [13]; exhibit f1 (n 53), [2].[61] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [7], [8]; exhibit m1 (n 53), [10]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [9]; exhibit i3 (n 49), [9]. the father’s alternative proposal, exhibit f1, did not contain orders to that effect. all proposed orders are the same except for that contained within the mother’s primary proposal in which, in summary, she expressly includes an injunction against denigrating through social media in addition to the injunction against doing so in the presence or hearing of the children.[62] exhibit m1 (n 53), [4]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [7]; exhibit i3 (n 49), [7].[63] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [5].[64] ibid [19]; exhibit m1 (n 53), [12]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [14]; exhibit i3 (n 49), [14]. the mother’s primary proposal does not specify the time at which the other parent must be contacted and only requires details of the child’s treating medical practitioner or facility. her alternative proposal specifies that the notification must be immediate. the father’s primary proposal (and the icl’s proposal) specifies that the contact shall be ‘forthwith’, if possible by phone, and inform of the nature of the emergency and details of the treating professional or facility.[65] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [10].[66] exhibit f5 (n 49), [15]; exhibit i3 (n 49), [15].[67] exhibit m1 (n 53), [11]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [10]-[11].[68] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [17]; exhibit f1 (n 53), [1.5].[69] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [18].[70] ibid [20].[71] ibid [24]; further amended response, 31 may 2021 (n 52), [18].[72] amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [21]-[25]; further amended response, 31 may 2021 (n 52), [18], [20].[73] further amended response, 31 may 2021 (n 52), [19], [21]; amended initiating application, 14 january 2020 (n 50), [26].[74] only order [17] of the further amended response is extracted below as [18]-[21], concerning overseas travel, have already been addressed in these reasons. it is also unnecessary to extract in full the terms of the s 106a order sought which, in summary, allows a registrar of this court to execute deeds, documents or instruments to give effect to the orders if a party has failed to do the same and the registrar has been provided with evidence thereof.[75] exhibit f5 (n 49), [3(a)(i)], [3(b)(i)]. i note that where the extract above says ‘first thursday of each school term’ the document itself refers to the ‘first friday of each school term’. i have amended the text of the document to reflect the reality of the father’s proposal since, in my view, and in the context of the orders as proposed, it is impossible for him to have amended the first-mentioned instance of the word ‘friday’ without also wishing to amend the second-mentioned instance thereof.[76] extracts of this document throughout these reasons shows the text exactly as it appeared in the document itself. this includes instances in which parts of certain words were not visible in the copy provided in court.[77] affidavit, ms r, 30 july 2021, [6]-[7].[78] ibid [8].[79] ibid [9].[80] ibid [11].[81] ibid [13]-[17].[82] ibid [23]-[24].[83] ibid [25].[84] scott & scott [1994] famca 12, [53]-[54]. their honours qualify that if an appellate court determines that such evidence was in the circumstances of the case wrongly, unreasonably or perversely rejected it may overturn the primary decision on an error of fact. their honours explain the basis of this principle in the rule in browne v dunn, specifically the aspect therein relating to the weight to be afforded to evidence unchallenged in cross-examination. their honours further explain that the existence or otherwise of an error of fact depends on the circumstances of the case and whether the primary judge gave reasons for rejecting the evidence in question (e.g. whether the evidence is inherently credible or incredible).[85] affidavit, ms t, 30 july 2021, [44]-[45].[86] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), annex -1, -3, -7, -18.[87] affidavit, mr v, 30 july 2021, [5].[88] affidavit, ms m, 30 july 2021 (n 42) 9, annex b.[89] ibid 10, annex b.[90] ibid.[91] ibid.[92] ibid 11, annex b.[93] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), 2.[94] ibid [66].[95] ibid [75].[96] ibid [80].[97] ibid [90].[98] ibid [86].[99] ibid [89].[100] ibid [91].[101] family law act 1975 (n 40) s 60ca.[102] ibid s 65d(1).[103] withers & russell [2016] famca 793, [315]-[318] at which watts j confirms that there is no preferred approach, there being ‘more than one suggested pathway through the legislature’.[104] mrr & gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [6]-[9] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[105] morgan & miles [2007] famca 1230, [72]-[73]. see also fitzroy & fitzroy [2009] famca 954, [16]; hill & weston [2021] fedcfamc1f 174, [124].[106] withers & russell (n 102), [318], at which his honour specifies that the ‘holistic’ task of the court is one ‘where the respective proposals of the parties are compared and the advantages and disadvantages to the child are weighed so that ultimately an order is made in the child’s best interests’. see also u & u (n 1), [42], at which their honours remark that the trial judge ‘fell into error in not separately evaluating the proposals of each parent’ and that ‘this was a fundamental error of the kind that, in other fields of jurisprudence, is identified as a constructive failure to exercise discretion’. their honours do not suggest that the parties’ proposals be compartmentalised and assessed with respect to each s 60cc factor and, instead, say that a trial judge must separately evaluate each party’s proposal in relation to the child’s best interests as a whole.[107] family law act 1975 (n 40) s 60ca.[108] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, [144] (kirby j).[109] australian constitution s 92; cole v whitfield [1988] hca 18; (1988) 165 clr 360, 393 (mason cj, wilson, brennan, deane, dawson, toohey and gaudron jj), in which the high court explains that the freedom of trade and commerce is fundamentally different to the freedom of intercourse, saying that ‘there is no reason in logic or commonsense for insisting on a strict correspondence between the freedom guaranteed to interstate trade and commerce and that guaranteed to interstate intercourse’. see also the discussion of gleeson cj, mchugh and gummow jj in ams v aif (n 107), 177-179, with respect to cole v whitfield and subsequent jurisprudence, and in relation to the legitimate bounds of legislative power and the need to exercise discretionary power proportionately to the objects of the legislation.[110] ams v aif (n 107), [162] (kirby j).[111] sampson & hartnett (no 10) [2007] famca 1365, [47], at which their honours state that ‘the purpose of a coercive order is more to create a situation, rather than choose between situations that already exist’. see also [43] and [58] for discussion of the appropriate power to be used in making a coercive order and the rarity of such an order.[112] hill & weston (n 104), [120]-[123].[113] tabac & kelmer [2016] fcca 1937, [112].[114] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140. [115] briginshaw & briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336, 361-362.[116] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, [26]; mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [115].[117] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102, [36].[118] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [82], [90].[119] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [27]-[35].[120] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [12]-[27].[121] ibid [186]-[194].[122] ibid [139].[123] ibid [141].[124] ibid [234], [235], [237].[125] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [87].[126] murphy & murphy [2007] famca 795, [318]-[319].[127] isles & nelissen [2021] fedcfamc1f 295, [267].[128] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [36]-[59].[129] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [51]-[52].[130] ibid [33].[131] ibid [35]-[39].[132] ibid annex -7, the most pertinent of which is dated 3 september 2017 for fathers’ day.[133] ibid [34].[134] exhibit m4 (n 22), 10.[135] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [43], [58], [65], [67]-[68].[136] exhibit m2, 2-3.[137] ibid 7.[138] ibid 14, 30.[139] ibid 21.[140] ibid 69.[141] ibid 36-37.[142] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [149].[143] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8) annex -2, most pertinently at pages 53, 63, and 68.[144] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [149]-[159].[145] ibid [42]-[43].[146] exhibit m3 (n 48), 2.[147] ibid 5.[148] ibid 20.[149] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [196]-[205].[150] bondelmonte & bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662, 673-674.[151] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [15]-[20].[152] exhibit m2 (n 135), 69-70.[153] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [78]-[80].[154] exhibit m2 (n 135), 16.[155] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [90]. i again refer to mr e’s evidence that the older children see the mother as their ‘primary parent’ and, if the mother did not wish to relocate, would not have expressed views in favour of the mother’s primary proposal.[156] affidavit, dr o, 30 july 2021 (n 44), [43]-[44], [75], [81].[157] ibid [76].[158] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [190]-[191].[159] affidavit, ms s, 30 july 2021, [34].[160] affidavit, mr joyner, 30 july 2021 (n 2), [227(c)].[161] ibid [231].[162] family report, family consultant mr e, 29 january 2021 (n 6), [87].[163] ibid [89].[164] ibid [58].[165] ibid [89].[166] affidavit, ms joyner, 2 august 2021 (n 8), [10]-[12].[167] exhibit f1 (n 53), noting that [1]-[2] of that document includes his proposals as to notice periods and time but not with respect to sharing costs.[168] family law act 1975 (n 40) s 61b.[169] ibid s 61c.[170] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346, [39], at which the full court clarifies the difference between pre-separation parental responsibility and post-separation parental responsibility as it results from an order: ‘we therefore consider it clear that there is a difference between parental responsibility which exists as a result of s 61c and an order for shared parental responsibility, which has the effect set out in s 65dac. in the former, the parties may still be together or may be separated. there will be no court order in effect and the parties will exercise the responsibility either independently or jointly. once the court has made an order allocating parental responsibility between two or more people, including an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the major decisions for the long-term care and welfare of children must be made jointly, unless the court otherwise provides’.[171] koyroyshs & koyroyshs [2020] famca 626, [84] (harper j), at which his honour cites marvel & marvel (no 2) [2009] famcafc 101 and states that ‘if the presumption applies, an order for equal shared parental responsibility will generally be made, thus displacing s 61c and triggering consideration of the provisions of s 65daa’, and further stated his own view that trial judges should order equal shared parental responsibility when the presumption applies.[172] ibid [85].[173] boyce & boyce [2015] famcafc 60, [21]-[22] (bryant cj, ryan and kent jj).[174] dundas & blake [2013] famcafc 133, [57], [61] (bryant cj, may and ainslie-wallace jj). see also withers & russell (n 102), [426]-[428], in which the presumption was rebutted on the basis of the parties’ ongoing disagreements about major long-term issues, to the extent that an order for equal shared parental responsibility would not be in the best interests of the children subject to those proceedings.[175] robertson & sento [2009] famcafc 49, [41]. his honour dissented on limited grounds; i have extracted his reasoning because his assessment is consistent with the wording of s 61da(2), and with the concept of the presumption as a legal mechanism which does not prevent an order being made in pursuance of s 60ca.[176] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60daa(1). see also the meaning of ‘reasonable practicality’ (sub-s (5)).[177] ibid s 65daa(2). see also what constitutes ‘substantial and significant time’ (sub-ss (3), (4)).[178] exhibit i3 (n 49), [10], [11], [13]; exhibit f5 (n 49), [12].