last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
spalla & spalla [2022] fedcfamc2f 551
orders
until further order, the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
1a. the points of claim filed and served by the applicant on 31 january 2022 be struck out. particulars   the points of claim do not specify any relief sought. (b) the points of claim fail to disclose a cause of action. (c) the points of claim do not disclose a cause of action or any remedy sought relevant to the parties to the family law proceedings. (d) to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not plead any relevant legislation. (e) to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not disclose any offence or unlawful act in respect of which it is alleged the parties conspired. (f) “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth).   the points of claim do not disclose a cause of action or any remedy sought relevant to the parties to the family law proceedings. (d) to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not plead any relevant legislation. (e) to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not disclose any offence or unlawful act in respect of which it is alleged the parties conspired. (f) “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth).   to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not plead any relevant legislation. (e) to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not disclose any offence or unlawful act in respect of which it is alleged the parties conspired. (f) “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth).   to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not disclose any offence or unlawful act in respect of which it is alleged the parties conspired. (f) “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth).   “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth).
1b. in the event, the points of claim are not struck out: (a) the respondent serve a request for further and better particulars of the points of claim within 7 days, (b) the applicant answer the request for further and better particulars within 7 days of receipt of the request. 1c. in the event, the points of claim are not struck out, pursuant to family law rules 2004 rule 19.05, order that the applicant give security for costs in respect of the applicant’s case in the sum of $44000. particulars   the respondent serve a request for further and better particulars of the points of claim within 7 days, (b) the applicant answer the request for further and better particulars within 7 days of receipt of the request.   the applicant answer the request for further and better particulars within 7 days of receipt of the request.   applicant’s financial statement dated 26 august 2021, (b) allegation of fraud made during hearing 10 september 2021, (c) letter marjason and marjason, solicitors to zali burrows alleging fraud dated 18 october 2021, (d) points of claim filed and served 31 january 2021 request for further and better particulars of the allegation contained in letter of 18 october 2021. in respect of paragraphs 1 and 2, does the narrative in those paragraphs allege a fraud? if so: (a) does the applicant allege this “fraud” was civil or criminal, (b) what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   letter marjason and marjason, solicitors to zali burrows alleging fraud dated 18 october 2021,   does the applicant allege this “fraud” was civil or criminal, (b) what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,   what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,   who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,   is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,   if someone benefited financially, who and for how much, (f) who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,   who suffered is it alleged a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour,  when did they occur, (ii) where did they occur, (iii) who was present, (iv) what was the substance and effect of any such conversations, (h) in what way could this benefit be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (i) in what way could the alleged detriment be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (j) do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected. with respect to paragraph 3, does the narrative in that paragraph allege a fraud? if so: (a) does the applicant allege this “fraud” was civil or criminal, (b) what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so: (i) when did they occur, (ii) where did they occur, (iii) who was present, (iv) what was the substance and effect of any such conversations, (h) in what way could this benefit be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (i) in what way could the alleged detriment be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (j) do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected. with respect to paragraph 3, does the narrative in that paragraph allege a fraud? if so: (a) does the applicant allege this “fraud” was civil or criminal, (b) what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so: (i) when did they occur, (ii) where did they occur, (iii) who was present, (iv) what was the substance and effect of any such conversations, (h) in what way could this benefit be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (i) in what way could the alleged detriment be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (j) do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected. the applicant pay the respondents’ costs of and incidental to this application. such further or other orders as this honourable court deems fit.  in what way could this benefit be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (i) in what way could the alleged detriment be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (j) do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected.   in what way could the alleged detriment be relevant to a matrimonial cause, (j) do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected.   do any documents exist and if so, please provide a copy or advise where it or they may be inspected.   does the applicant allege this “fraud” was civil or criminal, (b) what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   what are the facts and circumstances the applicant alleges amount to deception or dishonesty, (c) who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   who is it alleged acted deceptively or dishonestly, (d) is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   is it alleged someone benefited financially, (e) if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   if someone benefited financially, who and for how much? (f) who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   who is it alleged suffered a detriment as a result of the alleged behaviour, (g) was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:   was the applicant present at any relevant conversations, if so:
respondent’s orders sought
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
part c: issues in dispute inapplication in a proceeding strike out pleading / summary dismissal pursuant to fcfcoa (family law) rules 2021 rule 10.09, security for costs pursuant to part 12.2 applicant provide particulars part d: outline of contentions strike out application the respondent asks the court to strike out the applicant’s points of claim filed 31 january 2022 and amended points of claim filed 24 march 2022 pursuant to fcfcoa (family law) rules 10.09. relevant events occurred in new south wales. uniform civil procedure rules 2005 reg 15.3 is as follows:
15.3 allegations of behaviour in the nature of fraud. a pleading must give particulars of any fraud, misrepresentation, breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence on which the party relies. in addition to the points of claim and amended points of claim the applicant has provided particulars on two occasions: letter marjason to zali burrows dated 18 october 2021 (zali burrows sworn 16 december 2021 para 1, annexure a), letter marjason to zali burrows dated 5 november 2021 (zali burrows sworn 16 december 2021 para 3, annexure c).
none of the documents identifies a fraud, let alone a criminal conspiracy. on 16 march 2022, the applicant agreed to confine the claim for fraud to recitals in deed ([ms d] 19 october 2020 para 45 annexure d) relating to date of end of relationship. the deed is dated 31 january 2014. the only relevant recital reads: “ii. [mr spalla] and [ms spalla] are married but separated.” this is a matter of evidence and does not amount to fraud or criminal conspiracy. it does not require the deed to be set aside. the respondent’s application makes clear the deficiencies perceived in the applicant’s amended points of claim. the amended points of claim do not specify any relief sought. this is somewhat cured by the new paragraph 19: “the applicant seeks declaratory relief setting aside the deed to the extent that it represents any evidence of a separation or prior distribution of marital assets” although in a pleading, it usually appears as an order properly drafted at the beginning of the documents under “relief claimed”. however, the declaration described relates only to evidence and is not a cause of action. lindon v commonwealth (no 2) [1996] hca 14, (1996) 136 alr 251, (1996) 70 aljr 541 (6 may 1996) the amended points of claim fail to disclose a cause of action.
it seems as though paragraph 15 may disclose a cause of action, that is, the deed is unenforceable and should be set aside, however the basis for setting aside the deed is far from clear in the document. such a cause of action would be between the parties (of which the [insurer e] is not one) and no facts to support such a conclusion are pleaded. the evidence simply does not support the setting aside of the deed. paragraph 16 suggests a fraudulent misrepresentation but does not particularise what that misrepresentation was, in circumstances where the applicant signed the document, himself. ebner & pappas [2014] famcafc 229, (27 november 2014). paragraph 17 suggests some form of undue influence but again, does not particularise how this came about, again, in circumstances where the applicant signed the document, himself and clearly had independent legal advice. ([ms d] 17 march 2022 paragraph 11 annexure d). the allegation of fraud in the absence of evidence is scandalous and possibly defamatory. legal practitioners have responsibilities under the legal profession uniform law australian solicitors’ conduct rules 2015, particularly rule 34. mr shortland signed the certificate of lawyer on the amended points of claim but of course, he relied on what the applicant told him. as for paragraph 18 of the amended points of claim, clause 2.7 of the deed makes it clear that the responsibility to comply with the deed lies with the applicant. it is the applicant who is in default and he cannot sheet this home to the respondent:
“2.7 within 28 days of settlement, [mr spalla] shall.....”. paragraphs 2.8 and 2.9 are to the same effect. the amended points of claim do not disclose a cause of action or any remedy sought relevant to the parties to the family law proceedings. paragraph 19 really seeks a finding as to the state of the evidence rather than a remedy or relief. it does not seek to set aside the document. to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not plead any relevant legislation. the events took place in sydney and are therefore governed by new south wales law. ucpr reg 15.3.
criminal conspiracy is not a crime defined as such in the crimes act 1900. it is not the conspiracy which is the crime, itself, but the actions the subject of the agreement. it is not a common law remedy. further, the alleged victim, [insurer e], is not a party to the proceedings, nor likely to be. to the extent the points of claim allege “criminal conspiracy”, they do not disclose any offence or unlawful act in respect of which it is alleged the parties conspired. conspiracy requires an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act with the intention of carrying it out. it is the intention to carry out the crime which constitutes the necessary mens rea for the offence: yip chiu-cheung v r [1994] ukpc 2, (1994) 99 cr app r 406 at 410, per lord griffiths, r v wilson (unrep, 12/08/94, nswcca). it is hard to see how an act “by its nature designed to limit or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek to recover the amount contained in the writ” (paragraphs 9, 11, 12(a),14) amounts to “a criminal conspiracy”. “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” is not an offence recognised by the crimes act 1900 (nsw) nor by the criminal code act 2002 (act) nor by the criminal code act 1995 (cth). given the range of civil remedies available should a person put assets beyond a creditor’s reach, it is hard to see how “an agreement designed to limit, or otherwise minimise the capacity of [insurer e] to seek and recover the amount contained in the judgment” could possibly be a fraud: family law act 1975 section 106b, bankruptcy act 1966 sections 120 and 121, conveyancing act 1919 (nsw) section 37a. in addition, the documents produced on subpoena by [insurer e] make it clear [insurer e] was still pursuing the further $50,000.00. in summary, the date of separation in the deed is no more than a matter of evidence, not a fraud nor a conspiracy nor a crime. the applicant has needlessly delayed proceedings and caused untold distress by making allegations which have no legal or factual basis. the applicant has failed to properly particularise the serious allegations of fraud, to the point of his claims being frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process. re luck [2003] hca 70, (2003) 203 alr 1, (2003) 78 aljr 177 (4 december 2003). the amended points of claim have no reasonable prospects of success. spencer v commonwealth of australia [2010] hca 28 (1 september 2010)
security for costs if the matter proceeds, the respondent seeks security for costs pursuant to part 12.2 the applicant’s financial means
the applicant’s financial statement dated 26 august 2021 shows: total weekly income $ 762.00 your personal expenditure $ 650.00 total value of property owned by you $1,000.00 the prospects of success or merits of the application, the discussion of the claim above show limited, if any, prospects of success. meanwhile, the respondent is held captive by the applicant’s baseless allegations. the genuineness of the application, given the applicant’s counsel told the court at the beginning of the trial that the allegation of fraud was not being pursued and given the manner in which it was raised at abut 3pm on the second day of hearing, there is a serious issue as to whether the applicant is genuine or vexatious. whether the applicant’s lack of financial means was caused by the respondent’s conduct, the respondent says not, as do her daughter, son and daughter in law who all give evidence of money given to the applicant. the evidence shows that in 2012 when the [v street, suburb o] house was sold and the [t street, suburb u] house was purchased, the net received from the sale of [v street, suburb o] was $169,543.22 + $91,000 deposit = $260,543.22 less commission and deductions.
the respondent’s evidence is that the applicant took half that amount and went to [country b]. meanwhile, the respondent reinvested what she had in the [t street, suburb u] house. whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding, this may be the case but it should be weighed against the oppressive nature of the proceedings. whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, it does not. whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,
neither party does, although there is some suggestion the [insurer e]may have pursued the applicant for at least the 6 year imitation period. whether the applicant ordinarily resides outside australia,
he does not but has close ties to [country b] and cash in [country b]. the likely costs of the proceeding, the respondent will likely have to pay a further $71,000 on top of $36,970 already paid ([ms d] 17 march 2022 para 5-6.). whether the applicant is a corporation, the applicant is not a corporation. whether a party is receiving legal aid, the respondent is not in receipt of legal aid. any other relevant matter. the respondent obtained an avo against the applicant in early 2022. the proceedings should be stayed while the applicant provides the security for costs sought.
summary the respondent respectfully asks this honourable court to make the orders sought.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
outline of principle
117 costs (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and
12.02 application for security for costs (1) a respondent may apply for an order that the applicant in the proceeding give security for the respondent’s costs. (2) in deciding whether to make an order, the court may consider any of the following matters:   the applicant’s financial means, (b) the prospects of success or merits of the application, (c) the genuineness of the application, (d) whether the applicant’s lack of financial means was caused by the respondent’s conduct, (e) whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding, (f) whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, (g) whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid, (h) whether the applicant ordinarily resides outside australia, (i) the likely costs of the proceeding, (j) whether the applicant is a corporation, (k) whether a party is receiving legal aid, (l) any other relevant matter.   whether the applicant’s lack of financial means was caused by the respondent’s conduct, (e) whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding, (f) whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, (g) whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,   whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding, (f) whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, (g) whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,   whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, (g) whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,   whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,   in subrule (1): respondent includes an applicant who has filed a reply because orders in a new cause of action were sought in the response. 12.03 order for security for costs if the court orders a party to give security for costs, the court may also order that, if the security is not given in accordance with the order, the application or response of the party be stayed.
... it is not necessary to establish that there are special circumstances. however, it is necessary to establish that there are justifying circumstances. the decision to order security for costs is discretionary, both as to whether to order security, and as to the amount to be secured.   the circumstances of those behind the proceedings and whether it is reasonable for those persons to satisfy an order for security, (2) the bona fides and prospects of success of the proceedings, (3) whether the plaintiff is impecunious and whether the defendant’s conduct has caused or contributed to this impecuniosity. (4) whether the plaintiff is in effect a defendant because, for example, it has been forced to litigate to halt self-help measures by the defendant, (5) whether it will be oppressive to order security for costs or such an order will prevent the plaintiff from pursuing the proceedings, (6) whether the proceedings raise a matter of public importance, (7) whether there has been an admission, offer or payment into court, (8) whether there has been any delay in bringing the application for security which has occasioned prejudice, (9) the cost of enforcement, (10) the costs of the proceedings, ... given the unfettered nature of the discretion the factors are at best guidelines to its exercise.”  ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added.)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
consideration and disposition  pursuant to the wife’s amended application in a proceeding, filed 9th february 2022, within 21 days, the husband is to provide further and better particulars to the wife regarding the claim of fraud concerning the date of separation as recorded in the deed of january 2014. copies of those “particular” are to be filed with the court within 7 days of them being provided to the wife.
associate: dated: 2 may 2022
dated: 2 may 2022
[1] paragraphs 3 and 4 seeking particulars appear to be duplicates of each other.[2] in the marriage of luadaka [1998] famca 1520; (1998) 24 fam lr 340. the decision in luadaka was followed approvingly in a later full court decision in evans v rochford [2003] famca 314; (2003) 30 fam lr 336.[3] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117. simply for completeness, i note that at [72] – [73], the full court outlined considerations regarding indemnity costs. there is no suggestion that such matters are, or should, be considered in the present matter for the purposes of the current application.[4] g.e. dal pont, the law of costs (fifth edition) (sydney: lexisnexis australia, 2021) chapters 28 (“nature of security for costs orders”) & 29 (“discretion to order security for costs”).[5] transcript (9th september 2021) pp.9 – 13.