last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
calderon & shepherd [2022] fedcfamc2f 606
orders
the court orders that:
discharge of prior orders
equal shared parental responsibility
live with
spend time with   during school term time: (i) commencing on friday 13 may 2022, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on non-school days on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00am on non-school days on monday, (ii) commencing on wednesday 18 may 2022, each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm on non-school days until the commencement of school or 9.00am on non-school days on thursday, (b) for one half of the child’s school holiday periods as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement for the first half of the child’s school holidays in even numbered years, and for the second half of the child’s school holidays in odd numbered years, (c) for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (d) from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (f) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   commencing on friday 13 may 2022, each alternate weekend from after school or 3.00pm on non-school days on friday until the commencement of school or 9.00am on non-school days on monday, (ii) commencing on wednesday 18 may 2022, each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm on non-school days until the commencement of school or 9.00am on non-school days on thursday,  ) commencing on wednesday 18 may 2022, each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm on non-school days until the commencement of school or 9.00am on non-school days on thursday,   for one half of the child’s school holiday periods as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement for the first half of the child’s school holidays in even numbered years, and for the second half of the child’s school holidays in odd numbered years, (c) for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (d) from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (f) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (d) from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (f) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (e) from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (f) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (f) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   from 10.00am until 6.00pm on mother’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the mother’s care pursuant to these orders,   for one half of the child’s school holiday periods as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement for the second half of the child’s school holidays in even numbered years, and for the first half of the child’s school holidays in odd numbered years, (b) from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (c) from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (e) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on father’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father care pursuant to these orders,   from 10.00am christmas day until 10.00am boxing day in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, (c) from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (e) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on father’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father care pursuant to these orders,   from 7.00pm christmas eve until 10.00am christmas day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, (d) for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (e) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on father’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father care pursuant to these orders,   for such period as is agreed in writing between the parents on the child’s birthday in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and failing agreement from after school until 6.00pm on school days, or if on a weekend or public holiday, from 2.00pm until 6.00pm. (e) from 10.00am until 6.00pm on father’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father care pursuant to these orders,   from 10.00am until 6.00pm on father’s day in each year that the child is not ordinarily in the father care pursuant to these orders,   each school holiday period shall commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of required school attendance of the child and shall conclude at the commencement of school on the first day of required school attendance for the child, (b) changeover is to occur at 5.00 pm on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period and shall, where applicable, include public holidays and pupil free days, (c) in the event that there are two consecutive mid-point days, then changeover is to occur at 5.00 pm on the first of those two mid-point days.   changeover is to occur at 5.00 pm on the mid-point day between the first and last day of the defined school holiday period and shall, where applicable, include public holidays and pupil free days, (c) in the event that there are two consecutive mid-point days, then changeover is to occur at 5.00 pm on the first of those two mid-point days.   in the event that there are two consecutive mid-point days, then changeover is to occur at 5.00 pm on the first of those two mid-point days.
changeovers  neither parent will enter the other’s home, (b) each parent and any other person who may be present will behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent, (c) each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (d) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (e) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent, (c) each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (d) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (e) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (d) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (e) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (e) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.
general orders
ongoing treatment
restraints  altering the child’s usual place of residence outside of the greater sydney (greater capital city statistical area), as classified by the australian bureau of statistics (‘greater sydney’), (b) consuming alcohol in quantities that would lead to them having a blood alcohol level exceeding the then current lawful limit from time to time for drivers holding class c drivers licenses in the state of nsw when the child is in their respective care and for a period of 24 hours prior to such time taking place, (c) consuming any prescription medication other than as prescribed, (d) consuming any illicit substance, (e) physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so, (f) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   consuming alcohol in quantities that would lead to them having a blood alcohol level exceeding the then current lawful limit from time to time for drivers holding class c drivers licenses in the state of nsw when the child is in their respective care and for a period of 24 hours prior to such time taking place, (c) consuming any prescription medication other than as prescribed, (d) consuming any illicit substance, (e) physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so, (f) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   consuming any prescription medication other than as prescribed, (d) consuming any illicit substance, (e) physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so, (f) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   consuming any illicit substance, (e) physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so, (f) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so, (f) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, (g) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, (h) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, (i) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, and (j) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.
continuation of independent children’s lawyer’s appointment
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon   affidavit of mother filed 29 october 2021, (b) affidavit of maternal grandmother filed 29 october 2021, (c) affidavit of maternal grandfather filed 29 october 2021, (d) family report of ms c, family consultant, dated 11 february 2021, (e) tender bundle, see exhibit b.   affidavit of maternal grandmother filed 29 october 2021, (c) affidavit of maternal grandfather filed 29 october 2021, (d) family report of ms c, family consultant, dated 11 february 2021, (e) tender bundle, see exhibit b.   affidavit of maternal grandfather filed 29 october 2021, (d) family report of ms c, family consultant, dated 11 february 2021, (e) tender bundle, see exhibit b.   family report of ms c, family consultant, dated 11 february 2021, (e) tender bundle, see exhibit b.   tender bundle, see exhibit b.   affidavit of father filed 29 october 2021, (b) family report (see above), (c) father’s written submissions dated 29 april 2022.   family report (see above), (c) father’s written submissions dated 29 april 2022.   father’s written submissions dated 29 april 2022.   child dispute conference memorandum dated 3 august 2020, (b) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 21 september 2020, (c) family report (see above), (d) icl’s tender bundle, see exhibit c.   child inclusive conference memorandum dated 21 september 2020, (c) family report (see above), (d) icl’s tender bundle, see exhibit c.   family report (see above), (d) icl’s tender bundle, see exhibit c.   icl’s tender bundle, see exhibit c.   exhibit a: family report dated 11 february 2021, child dispute conference memorandum dated 3 august 2020, and child inclusive conference memorandum dated 21 september 2020, (b) exhibit b: mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: icl’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: three certificates of the father from d centre, e counselling and f counselling, (e) exhibit e: report of ms g, (f) exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit b: mother’s tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: icl’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: three certificates of the father from d centre, e counselling and f counselling, (e) exhibit e: report of ms g, (f) exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit c: icl’s tender bundle, (d) exhibit d: three certificates of the father from d centre, e counselling and f counselling, (e) exhibit e: report of ms g, (f) exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit d: three certificates of the father from d centre, e counselling and f counselling, (e) exhibit e: report of ms g, (f) exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit e: report of ms g, (f) exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit f: orders of judge myers dated 15 march 2022, (g) exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.   exhibit g: orders of judicial registrar altavilla dated 30 november 2021.
evidence
the mother’s trial affidavit
affidavit of ms q the maternal grandmother
affidavit of mr s the maternal grandfather
affidavit of psychologist ms g dated 20 july 2020
the father’s trial affidavit
oral evidence
child dispute conference held on 16 june 2020
family report
141. x loves both of her parents equally, and is confident that she is loved by them. she believes that her father can protect her. she perceives that her mother cares for her. she has at times been frightened by her mother’s erratic behaviour. 142. x loves her grandparents, but gave special mention to her paternal grandfather, who is ‘a great pop’. 143. x feels loved, supported and cared for by her aunty ms l, who is her father’s ex-sister-in-law and housemate. using projective techniques, x ranked aunty ms l closer to her than either of her parents. it was not clear whether this should be taken literally, or whether she was avoiding having to choose between her parents. 144. x has a number of cousins to whom she feels close. notable among these are her maternal aunt ms ll’s oldest child, mm and her paternal aunt ms l’s child ee.
150. having her wish for equality of outcome did not prevent x from giving straightforward answers about things she has witnessed, for example, witnessing ‘fighting’ after people have been drinking, experiencing not being returned, as agreed, to the receiving parent, experiencing her mother threatening that she would die. x said that she was ‘scared’ or ‘frightened’ by many of the experiences she has had, and needed the reassurance of her carers that she would be safe.
151. safety, rather than child-attachments, appears to be the most significant factor in this assessment, and was a recurring theme in the assessment. it is uncontested that the mother has mental health issues. what is contested is whether the mother’s mental health is well-managed. she does not appear to be under the care of a psychiatrist, and her medication is apparently monitored by her gp. although her mental health may be much improved, it may be time for the mother to consult with a psychiatrist, to have her diagnosis and medication reviewed by a suitably qualified person.
152. it does appear that ms calderon has issues with emotional regulation from time to time, and many of the narratives relating to family violence feature either the mother’s acting-act behaviours, which have the potential to cause serious harm, or self-harm attempts, which also have the potential to cause serious harm. it appears that x has witnessed some of these events.
153. another safety issue relates to the parents’ use of drugs and/or alcohol. each of the parents claims to have clean drug tests, yet there are allegations that the father is using cocaine. it appears that the mother drinks alcohol, which may be contraindicated while she is taking medication. there has been a very recent occasion in which ms calderon had an alcohol-fuelled argument with her boyfriend that made x ‘scared’. ms calderon needs to realise that this is not ok, and is in fact is poor parenting. both parents should be restrained from using any drugs or alcohol while x is in their care.
155. in relation to shared care, which is x’s preference, there are several contraindications to this. firstly, the parents do not live in close geographical proximity to one another. secondly, the parents have a conflictual relationship with one another and communicate poorly with one another. for instance, the father has just made a unilateral decision to take x away, and cancel the next occasion of x spending-time-with her mother, with no consultation or forewarning. this begs the question of whether mr shepherd will be able to abide by parenting orders in the future. shared care is not an option for these parents.
156. in relation to parental responsibility, it is noted that both parents expressed a wish for sole parental responsibility, although ms calderon revised this to a wish for shared parental responsibility in interview. although there has been poor communication between the parents to date, it is assessed that an order for sole parental responsibility risks x being separated from a parent, who could choose to move x away from the other parent, or otherwise make unilateral decisions that may affect her continuing to have a close and loving relationship with both parents. shared parental responsibility with third party mediation, if necessary, is recommended for these parents.
159. it is recommended that x remains in her father’s primary care, and that she spends five overnights with her mother each fortnight. that is, every second weekend from friday after school until monday morning, when x will be picked up from school on friday afternoon and returned to school by her mother and/or maternal grandmother, and the parents do not come into contact with one another. in addition, she should spend one week-day after school until she is returned to school the next morning by her mother and/or maternal grandmother.
160. it appears that drugs and alcohol may occasionally be used by one or both parents, and for x’s safety, it is recommended that there be a restraint in the orders on either of the parents using any drugs or alcohol at all while x is in their care.
so there seemed to be plenty of violence within the mother’s life. did the mother stress any insight to you about that? no. i don’t believe that she did. her accounts were just her version of, you know, why things happened. so she never said anything like yes, this is bad for me, to fight for the child, and i need to change my life? no. could i just have a quick look at my notes, please. of course? i mean, she said she was seeing a psychologist, that she had depression and bipolar, so she’s aware that she has a mental health condition. i did ask her how she perceived that x was coping. she said, “i think she will need help when she is older because of her father,” so in that sense i guess she is shifting the blame. he just likes to be in control. she said it was unfair because she raised the child because the father was in jail and she had done jail visits. no, i can’t say that during the interview the mother did show any insight into the impact on x, but, to be fair, i suppose the only opportunity i gave her for that was asking her how x was coping, and it is telling that she then shifted the whole blame of the impact on x on the father.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration 1] in mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, brown j considered ordinary definitions of the term “meaningful” and observed:  ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.  2] in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship” and said:  8]... the court should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...  3] the enquiry is a prospective one, looking forward for the children in the context of parental relationships.
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views  the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child  the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis  the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs  the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant  if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right  the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary  neither parent will enter the other’s home, (c) each parent and any other person who may be present will behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent, (d) each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (e) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (f) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will behave in a civil and courteous manner to the other parent, (d) each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (e) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (f) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will conduct themselves in a child focussed manner, (e) each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (f) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   each parent and any other person who may be present will limit their conversation to matters that specifically pertain to immediate matters of the child passing from one parent’s care to the other, (f) neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.   neither parent nor any other person who may be present will discuss issues of any controversy between them.
associate: dated: 11 may 2022
dated: 11 may 2022