last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carver & munshi [2022] fedcfamc2f 607
orders
the court orders that:
caveat withdrawal  the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at d street, suburb e, and (b) the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at b street, suburb c.   the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at b street, suburb c.
business  in the husband’s name, and (b) in the name of the husband and/or or in the name of f pty ltd, company g or any other business which they were involved in operating (relevant business), and/or (c) in the name of the wife in connection with any relevant business or other business dealings of the husband,   in the name of the husband and/or or in the name of f pty ltd, company g or any other business which they were involved in operating (relevant business), and/or (c) in the name of the wife in connection with any relevant business or other business dealings of the husband,   in the name of the wife in connection with any relevant business or other business dealings of the husband,
including but not limited to all claims, demands, proceedings and judgements and the husband make all payments, including but not limited to all costs, repayments, interest, taxes or other liabilities, as and when they fall due.
assurances
finalisation  each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party at the date of these orders save as provided for in these orders. (b) each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other. (c) each party retain their possession and interest in their respective motor vehicles. (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears. (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband. (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other. (c) each party retain their possession and interest in their respective motor vehicles. (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears. (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband. (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain their possession and interest in their respective motor vehicles. (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears. (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband. (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears. (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband. (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband. (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein. (g) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge davis
overview of proceeding
backround
18. upon the sale, the proceeds be applied as follows:-   firstly to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgages secured by westpac on the [b street, suburb c] property being:- (i) westpac equity access loan bsb [...76] account number [...57], and   secondly, to discharge the mortgages secured by westpac on the [b street, suburb c] property being:- (i) westpac equity access loan bsb [...76] account number [...57], and   westpac equity access loan bsb [...76] account number [...57], and   westpac rocket repay account #[...95], (c) thirdly, the balance, if any, to be held on trust by the wife’s solicitors in an interest bearing account in the parties’ joint names, until further order or agreement in writing between the parties. in relation to the property situate at [d street, suburb e] in the state of victoria (“the [d street, suburb e] property”):- (a) the husband shall do all acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to ensure that the rental income received is immediately applied to the mortgage encumbering the [d street, suburb e] property, and (b) the husband is solely liable for all outgoings of the [d street, suburb e] property including all instalments pursuant to the mortgage, rates and taxes, insurance, bills and like apportionable outgoings of whatsoever nature and kind and ensure that all payments are made as and when they fall due.   thirdly, the balance, if any, to be held on trust by the wife’s solicitors in an interest bearing account in the parties’ joint names, until further order or agreement in writing between the parties.   the husband shall do all acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to ensure that the rental income received is immediately applied to the mortgage encumbering the [d street, suburb e] property, and (b) the husband is solely liable for all outgoings of the [d street, suburb e] property including all instalments pursuant to the mortgage, rates and taxes, insurance, bills and like apportionable outgoings of whatsoever nature and kind and ensure that all payments are made as and when they fall due.   the husband is solely liable for all outgoings of the [d street, suburb e] property including all instalments pursuant to the mortgage, rates and taxes, insurance, bills and like apportionable outgoings of whatsoever nature and kind and ensure that all payments are made as and when they fall due.
20. both parties be and are hereby restrained from:- (a) dealing with, disposing of or encumbering or further encumbering any assets in his or her name, in joint names or in his or her control save:-   dealing with, disposing of or encumbering or further encumbering any assets in his or her name, in joint names or in his or her control save:-  in the course of day to day living, (ii) in the ordinary course of business, or (iii) with the prior written consent of the other party or order of this court, and (b) paying funds to their parents save with the prior written consent of the other party or order of this court.  i) with the prior written consent of the other party or order of this court, and   paying funds to their parents save with the prior written consent of the other party or order of this court.
orders ultimately sought by the parties
final property orders proposed by the husband
1. that all previous property orders be and are hereby discharged.
caveat withdrawal that within 14 days of the date of these orders the wife do all such acts and things to withdraw at her sole expense any caveat in her name or filed on her behalf secured over any property in the husband’s name, including but not limited to: (a) the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at [d street, suburb e], and (b) the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at [b street, suburb c]. business that the husband retain all interest in the business [f pty ltd] including all trading names (“[company g]”) (‘the business’) operated by the above entity including but not limited to all stock, equipment, bank accounts and good will associated with the business. that within 48 hours of the making of these orders the wife provide to the husband’s solicitors the log in details including passwords to the business instagram account and any other social media accounts which are linked with the business and the husband to have sole control of these accounts to the exclusion of the wife going forward. that the husband be liable for and indemnify the wife and keep her indemnified, against any liability incurred in the husband and/or the wife’s name or in any business’ name to which the husband and/or the wife was an officeholder at any time and for any other business dealings of the husband, including but not limited to all claims, demands, proceedings and judgements and the husband make all payments, including but not limited to all costs, repayments, interest, taxes or other liabilities, as and when they fall due. superannuation equalisation that paragraphs 6 to 9 inclusive of these orders are binding on [super fund o] ("the trustee") in its capacity as trustee of [super fund o] ("the superannuation fund"). pursuant to section 90xt(1)(a) of the family law act 1975, whenever a splittable payment becomes payable in respect of the wife’s, [ms munshi], interest in the superannuation fund, the trustee shall pay to the husband, [mr carver], the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $45,242.60 and there should be a corresponding reduction in the entitlement of the person to whom a splittable payment would have been made but for these orders.   the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at [d street, suburb e], and (b) the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at [b street, suburb c].   the caveat dated 17 november 2021 filed over the property situate at [b street, suburb c].
8. that order 7 has the effect from the operative time. the operative time for the purpose of these orders is the fourth business day after the day on which a sealed copy of these orders is served on the trustee of the superannuation fund.
retention of assets and liabilities the husband retain absolutely unto himself free from all claim by the wife: the property situate at [b street, suburb c] vic (“the [b street, suburb c] property”, the property situate at [d street, suburb e], vic (‘the [d street, suburb e] property’), his motor vehicle, a [motor vehicle 1], his superannuation, funds standing to credit in all bank accounts in his name or in the name of the business, all chattels currently in his possession. the wife retain absolutely unto herself free from all claim by the husband: any interest she may have in the property situate at [m street, suburb n], (‘the [m street, suburb n] property’), her motor vehicle, a [motor vehicle 2], funds standing to credit in all bank accounts her name, her superannuation, save for the split as otherwise provided for in these orders, all chattels currently in her possession. each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, including but not limited to:
a. all mortgages, all personal loans, including the loan from the husband’s parents [ms p] and [mr q], c. all business loans, and d. all credit cards.
assurances the husband and wife do all acts and things and give all consents and execute all documents and writings necessary to give effect to the orders made. in the event that either party refuses or neglects to execute a deed and/or instrument in compliance with these orders, the registrar of the federal circuit court of australia at melbourne is hereby appointed pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 to execute all deeds and/or instruments in the name of the husband and/or wife and do all acts and things to give viability and operation to the deeds and/or instruments, and in the event of default, the defaulting party pay the complying party’s legal costs of and incidental to such request and production of the documents to the registrar, or application to the court. finalisation unless otherwise specified in these orders and except for the purpose of enforcing the payment of any moneys under these or any subsequent orders:- each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party at the date of these orders save as provided for in these orders, each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other, each party retain their possession and interest in their respective motor vehicles, any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the husband, all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner named therein each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed. notations a. for the avoidance of doubt, any obligation of the wife to reimburse the husband for expert reports obtained and paid by him in the first instance during the course of these proceedings has been satisfied by the terms of these orders. each party is liable for one half of the cost of any outstanding report fees as at 15 december 2021. that pursuant to s81 of the family law act 1975 these orders are intended to finally determine the financial relationship between the parties and avoid the need for further proceedings between them.
... the husband pay spouse maintenance to the wife in a quantum deemed just and equitable by this honourable court. ... property that the registrar of this honourable court be forthwith appointed to execute all deeds and documents as may be necessary to place the following properties on the market for sale:   [b street, suburb c] in the state of victoria ..., and (b) [d street, suburb e. (“sale of properties”) that within 14 days of these ... orders, the parties do all such acts and things as may be necessary to request the president of the real estate institute of victoria appoint a selling agent. pending the sale of the properties, the husband shall be solely liable for all outgoings of the properties, including but not limited to, all instalments pursuant to the mortgage, rates, and taxes, insurance bills and apportionable outgoings of whatsoever nature and kind and ensure that all payments are made as they fall due.
26. upon the sale of the properties, the proceeds be applied as follows:   firstly to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly to discharge the mortgages secured by the properties, (c) thirdly, the sum of $450,000 to the wife, (d) the balance to the husband. the husband otherwise indemnify and continue to indemnify the wife with respects to the liabilities of [f] pty ltd. unless otherwise specified in these orders and except for the purpose of enforcing the payment of any monies under these or any subsequent orders: (a) each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party at the dates of these orders save as provided for in these orders, (b) each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other, (c) each party retain their possessions and interest in their respective motor vehicle, (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party at the dates of these orders save as provided for in these orders, (b) each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other, (c) each party retain their possessions and interest in their respective motor vehicle, (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain their respective superannuation to the exclusion of the other, (c) each party retain their possessions and interest in their respective motor vehicle, (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain their possessions and interest in their respective motor vehicle, (d) any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any money standing to the credit of the parties in a bank account are to be retained by the party in whose name the account appears, (e) any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any money standing to credit any joint accounts of the parties is to be retained by the wife, (f) all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   all insurance policies are to become the sole property of the owner therein, (g) each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for an[d] indemnify the other against any liability in their sole name including but not limited to any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
29. that the husband pay the wife’s costs.
evidence
evidence relied upon by mr carver  affidavit of mr carver affirmed on 15 october 2021 (b) trial affidavit of mr carver affirmed on 7 july 2021, (c) financial statement filed by mr carver on 7 july 2021, (d) reply affidavit of mr carver affirmed 15 september (together with pages that had been missing from it and were emailed to the court on 30 september 2021), (e) affidavit of mr r (property valuer) affirmed on 30 june 2021, (f) affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   trial affidavit of mr carver affirmed on 7 july 2021, (c) financial statement filed by mr carver on 7 july 2021, (d) reply affidavit of mr carver affirmed 15 september (together with pages that had been missing from it and were emailed to the court on 30 september 2021), (e) affidavit of mr r (property valuer) affirmed on 30 june 2021, (f) affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   financial statement filed by mr carver on 7 july 2021, (d) reply affidavit of mr carver affirmed 15 september (together with pages that had been missing from it and were emailed to the court on 30 september 2021), (e) affidavit of mr r (property valuer) affirmed on 30 june 2021, (f) affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   reply affidavit of mr carver affirmed 15 september (together with pages that had been missing from it and were emailed to the court on 30 september 2021), (e) affidavit of mr r (property valuer) affirmed on 30 june 2021, (f) affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of mr r (property valuer) affirmed on 30 june 2021, (f) affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of mr s (b street, suburb c building surveyor) sworn/affirmed on 1 september 2021, (g) affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of ms t (architect) affirmed 12 june 2020, (h) affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of mr u (builder) affirmed 24 september 2021, (i) affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of ms p affirmed 10 september 2021, (j) affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   affidavit of mr q affirmed/sworn on 11 september 2021, and (k) subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   subpoenaed material from: (i) dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.   dr w dated 16 july 2020, (ii) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.  ) dr y, (iii) company z, and (iv) company ab.  i) company z, and (iv) company ab.  ) company ab.
mr carver’s oral evidenceevidence in chief  the revenue projections:
...were not in any way close to being realistic. they were ... numbers provided, i guess, in the business report to the bank in order, i suppose, to try and gain finance. i would classify them as wildly unrealistic, you know, in the order of, you know, apparently $1.8 million in revenue within three years, which is, you know, i would classify as just being just absolutely unattainable and certainly not in any way realistic.   to achieve the revenue projections required the clinic to attain certain accreditations which would:
... better attract health professionals due to the multiple ways in which accreditation is required to increase the quality of your clinic in general through hr practices, complaints, it services.   mr carver added that the accreditation process had been delayed until the ongoing covid-19 lockdown finishes. (at the time at which mr carver gave his evidence, on 30 september 2021, melbourne lockdown 6 was ongoing.) (d) projected revenue was overstated, amongst other things, because ongoing covid-19 restrictions made it difficult to licence medical professionals to utilise the consultation rooms available at company g. many medical professionals were working remotely in the lockdown period. (e) projected costs, including the following, were understated: (i) cleaning fees, given that covid-19 clearing procedures have inflation of cleaning fees, (ii) accounting costs, with mr carver giving evidence than estimated $481 per month is actually “approximately $10,000 to 12,000 a year, (iii) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:   projected revenue was overstated, amongst other things, because ongoing covid-19 restrictions made it difficult to licence medical professionals to utilise the consultation rooms available at company g. many medical professionals were working remotely in the lockdown period. (e) projected costs, including the following, were understated: (i) cleaning fees, given that covid-19 clearing procedures have inflation of cleaning fees, (ii) accounting costs, with mr carver giving evidence than estimated $481 per month is actually “approximately $10,000 to 12,000 a year, (iii) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:   projected costs, including the following, were understated: (i) cleaning fees, given that covid-19 clearing procedures have inflation of cleaning fees, (ii) accounting costs, with mr carver giving evidence than estimated $481 per month is actually “approximately $10,000 to 12,000 a year, (iii) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:   cleaning fees, given that covid-19 clearing procedures have inflation of cleaning fees, (ii) accounting costs, with mr carver giving evidence than estimated $481 per month is actually “approximately $10,000 to 12,000 a year, (iii) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:  ) accounting costs, with mr carver giving evidence than estimated $481 per month is actually “approximately $10,000 to 12,000 a year, (iii) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:  i) computer and software costs, with mr carver’s evidence being that an estimate of $466.00 per month actually cost “approximately $1,650 per month”, (iv) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:  ) insurance costs, which the plan quotes at $500 per month, and mr carver’s evidence stating that they were in fact “approximately $12,000 to $13,000 a year”, (v) business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:   business legal fees, estimated as $250 a month were less than the “initial set up fees for all that was, probably about $6,000...”, (vi) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:  ) rent and rates, which were quoted as $8,600 per month, with mr carver’s evidence being that the “current rental is $9,000 per month with rates being $1,600 a quarter, and (vii) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:  i) debt reduction, as to which mr carver said:
interest and debt repayments were posited to be $13,500 a month. ... so approximately – so in terms of debt repayments currently – thanks to some reduced interest rates it’s currently sitting at about $6000 a month. so that was actually less.
cross examination   mr carver accepted that he had seen the business plan before meeting with the bank for the purposes of obtaining a business loan for f pty ltd for the purpose of establishing the company g business. (b) when pressed on whether he had expressed concerns about underquoted figures in the business plan at his meeting with the bank, mr carver conceded that, “no, i did not express my concerns at the time during the meeting. no.”. (c) mr carver gave inconsistent evidence on whether he discussed any changes to the business plan with his wife: (i) initially, he gave evidence that he did not discuss any changes, giving reasons that he was assured “that as she was a professional she was the one with the expertise”, and that he “... was not in a position to attempt to convince her of any changes to the business plan”. (ii) subsequently, he gave evidence that he “attempted to” raise concerns “just a little bit after seeing the plan itself”. (d) mr carver said that, at the clinic where he was previously employed, his “pure billings” annually were approximately $450,000. he said that this was distinct from his taxable income, which he put at the mid $250,000s because the clinic would take approximately “40 percent” of the pure billings. (e) mr carver also said that he expected that his initial f pty ltd earnings would “decrease significantly in the first few years”, whilst he built up the practice and that he accepted this result because he wanted to practice in his own way. (f) mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   when pressed on whether he had expressed concerns about underquoted figures in the business plan at his meeting with the bank, mr carver conceded that, “no, i did not express my concerns at the time during the meeting. no.”. (c) mr carver gave inconsistent evidence on whether he discussed any changes to the business plan with his wife: (i) initially, he gave evidence that he did not discuss any changes, giving reasons that he was assured “that as she was a professional she was the one with the expertise”, and that he “... was not in a position to attempt to convince her of any changes to the business plan”. (ii) subsequently, he gave evidence that he “attempted to” raise concerns “just a little bit after seeing the plan itself”. (d) mr carver said that, at the clinic where he was previously employed, his “pure billings” annually were approximately $450,000. he said that this was distinct from his taxable income, which he put at the mid $250,000s because the clinic would take approximately “40 percent” of the pure billings. (e) mr carver also said that he expected that his initial f pty ltd earnings would “decrease significantly in the first few years”, whilst he built up the practice and that he accepted this result because he wanted to practice in his own way. (f) mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   mr carver gave inconsistent evidence on whether he discussed any changes to the business plan with his wife: (i) initially, he gave evidence that he did not discuss any changes, giving reasons that he was assured “that as she was a professional she was the one with the expertise”, and that he “... was not in a position to attempt to convince her of any changes to the business plan”. (ii) subsequently, he gave evidence that he “attempted to” raise concerns “just a little bit after seeing the plan itself”. (d) mr carver said that, at the clinic where he was previously employed, his “pure billings” annually were approximately $450,000. he said that this was distinct from his taxable income, which he put at the mid $250,000s because the clinic would take approximately “40 percent” of the pure billings. (e) mr carver also said that he expected that his initial f pty ltd earnings would “decrease significantly in the first few years”, whilst he built up the practice and that he accepted this result because he wanted to practice in his own way. (f) mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   initially, he gave evidence that he did not discuss any changes, giving reasons that he was assured “that as she was a professional she was the one with the expertise”, and that he “... was not in a position to attempt to convince her of any changes to the business plan”. (ii) subsequently, he gave evidence that he “attempted to” raise concerns “just a little bit after seeing the plan itself”.  ) subsequently, he gave evidence that he “attempted to” raise concerns “just a little bit after seeing the plan itself”.   mr carver said that, at the clinic where he was previously employed, his “pure billings” annually were approximately $450,000. he said that this was distinct from his taxable income, which he put at the mid $250,000s because the clinic would take approximately “40 percent” of the pure billings. (e) mr carver also said that he expected that his initial f pty ltd earnings would “decrease significantly in the first few years”, whilst he built up the practice and that he accepted this result because he wanted to practice in his own way. (f) mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   mr carver also said that he expected that his initial f pty ltd earnings would “decrease significantly in the first few years”, whilst he built up the practice and that he accepted this result because he wanted to practice in his own way. (f) mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   mr carver said that he did not expect his income to return to the level of his previous employment for “approximately four to five years.” (g) as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:   as to the choices made in the plan, mr carver said that:
in terms of the type of clinic, it was – the choices she made were – increased the cost of all the fit-outs from the expected cost that one would expect from a normal clinic. but because she wanted some sort of bespoke or – i’m not sure, as high-class – as you will see in the business plan, she mentions things like the 35 lobby of a high-end hotel, those sort of choices about everything from beginning of the design through to construction – increased the cost significantly.
i was unaware that it was an apartment owned by her parents, until i was informed of that fact by my parents, in about november or december 2019, and it was at that stage that it was – her father had admitted to my parents, during a phone call, that the apartment in m street, suburb n was not actually owned by ms munshi. until that time, she had maintained to everyone, not just me – to everyone that knew her – that that apartment was owned by her. that was – that was her ongoing statements.
... [ms munshi] would often tell a story of when she bought the apartment, how much she paid, when she first moved in, what mortgage repayments she was paying. she made it very clear to everyone that she – that it was her apartment that she had purchased – was paying the mortgage on. there was no mention that her parents were involved in any way, and it was only at the end of 2019 that i learned any different.
so at the moment my primary focus is paying down debt. so at the moment i would hopefully after the sale of b street, suburb c, would be able to use that to reduce my debt burden. ... well, i suppose after the rectification works, the intention would be at some stage to try and pay down my debt. [emphasis added.]   mr carver initially gave evidence that it was “completely incorrect” that ms munshi had deposited her salary into the b street, suburb c offset account. (b) mr carver then accepted that ms munshi did put money in the offset account albeit “[s]poradically and not in very large amounts.” (c) when pressed about whether ms munshi had deposited approximately $358,786.00 into the westpac offset account, mr carver admitted that he had not checked and that as a result he did not know.   mr carver then accepted that ms munshi did put money in the offset account albeit “[s]poradically and not in very large amounts.” (c) when pressed about whether ms munshi had deposited approximately $358,786.00 into the westpac offset account, mr carver admitted that he had not checked and that as a result he did not know.   when pressed about whether ms munshi had deposited approximately $358,786.00 into the westpac offset account, mr carver admitted that he had not checked and that as a result he did not know.
i’ve been in contact with ...[anz, the business loan provider,] on a regular basis and they do make regular inquiries as to my current financial situation and i have informed them that, at this stage, i’m unable to give them any further details due to current proceedings so i’m not able to answer whether or not they would – if i was to have any influx of that sort of money would ask that i repay any of that loan immediately.
so due to the financial stresses with the opening of the business and being almost completely bankrupt, i asked both – i asked westpac to defer both of those loans for a period of over 12 months and they – they stated that was fine but, obviously, at the end of that period, the deferred payments would be added to the mortgage.
initially, that was what i had hoped but it quickly became a – a project run by ms munshi to the exclusion of everyone else.
i was informed at the end of 2019 by everyone involved in the project, including staff, tradesmen, architect, that they would no longer work with ms munshi and if she was involved in any way, they would stop work and proceed – proceed with legal proceedings against me.
i placed all my trust in ms munshi’s ability to manage the project. i had no reason for the majority of the project to doubt that it wasn’t going well. ... well, as seen in the affidavit from the – in recollection from the architect, ms munshi’s plans went – quickly went from a normal clinic with a normal fit-out to using the very expensive materials, custom joinery, everything needed to be bespoke. the costs of the fit-out ballooned significantly during the time that she was running the – the – the project.   mr carver conceded he had “discussions” where he was told what was happening but that he had no input, (b) mr carver said that “ms munshi was in no mood to accept any input or criticism, especially as the project went on.”   mr carver said that “ms munshi was in no mood to accept any input or criticism, especially as the project went on.”
well, the fit-out alone was close to 1.1. then there was close to $100,000 worth of fees to the architect. there was also approximately –well, close to six to eight months of ongoing wages. there was $9000 a month for over a year for rent of the property. there was – which is obviously $120,000. there was significant amounts of money spent on it fit-out, on servers, on equipment, which is all very expensive, fridges, you know, $10,000 worth of refrigeration equipment. it basically all added up to a significant amount.
re-examination   his amended application filed 7 july 2021 sought to discharge all previous property orders, including orders which require the immediate sale of b street, suburb c. he attributed this to complications involved with the sale. as i have observed above, mr carver gave evidence and led affidavit evidence from to the effect that remediation work on the property was required. mr carver contended that he did not have the money to have such works carried out at the moment. (b) he confirmed that the d street, suburb e had lost $17,000.00 in 2019 and similar amounts each year before that. (c) he said that, as well as the impact of the covid-19 pandemic, building patient demand is a slow process because “[p]atients generally take a very long time to start seeing other health professionals or new health professionals”. (d) mr carver gave evidence that notwithstanding that part g of his financial statement, which concerned personal expenditure, in fact recorded a mixture of personal and business expenses, his personal tax return for the year end 30 june 2021 did not include business expenses.   he confirmed that the d street, suburb e had lost $17,000.00 in 2019 and similar amounts each year before that. (c) he said that, as well as the impact of the covid-19 pandemic, building patient demand is a slow process because “[p]atients generally take a very long time to start seeing other health professionals or new health professionals”. (d) mr carver gave evidence that notwithstanding that part g of his financial statement, which concerned personal expenditure, in fact recorded a mixture of personal and business expenses, his personal tax return for the year end 30 june 2021 did not include business expenses.   he said that, as well as the impact of the covid-19 pandemic, building patient demand is a slow process because “[p]atients generally take a very long time to start seeing other health professionals or new health professionals”. (d) mr carver gave evidence that notwithstanding that part g of his financial statement, which concerned personal expenditure, in fact recorded a mixture of personal and business expenses, his personal tax return for the year end 30 june 2021 did not include business expenses.   mr carver gave evidence that notwithstanding that part g of his financial statement, which concerned personal expenditure, in fact recorded a mixture of personal and business expenses, his personal tax return for the year end 30 june 2021 did not include business expenses.
evidence of mr carver’s mother  the $400,000.00 loan was transferred to the parties’ offset account on 4 december 2019. (b) mr carver sent a written acknowledgement to her regarding the $400,000. amongst other things, that acknowledgement stated:   mr carver sent a written acknowledgement to her regarding the $400,000. amongst other things, that acknowledgement stated:
this loan amount will be repaid asap in 2020, including accumulated interest.   although the loan was supposed to be repaid by december 2020, mr carver informed his father and her that he was unable to pay it at that time because of a court order. (d) she took at face value mr carver’s obligation to repay the $400,000, together with interest, on or before 13 october 2021. ms p added that she did not “believe that ... [mr carver was] not true to his word”. however, she would not engage in speculation about whether he would be able to pay.   she took at face value mr carver’s obligation to repay the $400,000, together with interest, on or before 13 october 2021. ms p added that she did not “believe that ... [mr carver was] not true to his word”. however, she would not engage in speculation about whether he would be able to pay.
evidence of mr u
3. from the commencement of the project until around november/december 2019 [ms munshi (' ms munshi')] was the primary contact through whom i would receive instructions and would liaise with in regards to the build. 4. i experienced [ms munshi's] behaviour to change dramatically from around october 2019. from this period onwards i experienced [ms munshi] to become aggressive, rude, and her mood appeared to me to be unstable. her mood would often change quickly and dramatically. 5. around october 2019 [ms munshi] began making allegations that the architect involved in the project, [ms t ('ms t')], and i had made a series of errors such as the incorrect classification of the clinic and the flooring. this was inaccurate, and i attempted to explain this to [ms munshi] but found her difficult to deal with. 6. [ms munshi] ceased paying invoices as required on behalf of [f pty ltd] from about october 2019. 7. on 8 november 2019 [ms munshi] sent me a series of harassing messages regarding works completed for the project. i was alarmed by this and so alerted the architect, [ms t], of my concerns. i forwarded screenshots of these messages to [ms t], and i understand they are annexed to an affidavit from her in these proceedings.
evidence of [ms t]
mishandling of [company g] project by [ms munshi] on 2 august 2019 a simple works contract was executed by [company g], with [ms munshi] signing in her role as [company g’s] representative. [ms munshi] was supposed to have secured sufficient funding for the project prior to signing. prior to the signing of the contract [ms munshi] gave me the distinct impression she had considerable wealth, as well as financial backing. i now view this to essentially be delusions of grandeur. on 18 october 2019 i emailed [ms munshi] to confirm that her payment of the builder's progress payment 01 ($382,365.50) was due on 21 october 2019. on 21 october 2019 [ms munshi] texted me to advise that she had been hit by a bus door, resulting in a head injury. during the period from 21 october 2019 to 28 october 2019 [ms munshi] persisted with claims that her head injury was so traumatic that she was unable to engage properly with the project team, including pay the outstanding payments. we were all of course concerned and sympathetic, and so continued with the project without payment on 'good faith'. on 28 october 2019 we all received an email from the builder, [mr u] of [company ac] (‘[mr u’]), that he was unable to continue to work due to lack of funds, and would have to suspend his role in the project. ... on 5 november 2019, [ms munshi] emailed to request a site tour for her investors. the implication seemed to be that these investors would be the means via which the non-payment issue would be resolved, and so [mr u] and i agreed. [ms munshi] had previously spoken of her 'investors' but had always been vague in regards to the details. these investors never attended, i never saw any documentation or correspondence from these investors, and i never met them. on 8 november 2019 at 8:37am [ms munshi] issued a group email to advise parties involved in the [company g] project that she was unable to email and take calls at this time due to health related issues. i was alarmed by this email, as was [mr u] the builder. [mr u] called me to express his anxiety relative to the lapsed payment, and what was becoming in both his and my view a series of concerning behaviours by [ms munshi]. on 8 november 2019 at 10.42am i texted [mr carver] to seek his participation in the project, however, he responded to advise that we should speak to [ms munshi] as she was the primary contact. i understand from subsequent conversations with [mr carver], that he brought this text to [ms munshi's] attention & she responded by assuring him that we could not be trusted as we had made some terrible mistakes, however she had it all in hand and did not require his involvement. it was my understanding that [mr carver] continued to be [x's] primary carer at that time. ... on 22 november 2019 a mediation was held on site from 4pm in order to address the issues with the [company g] project, with the primary issue being [ms munshi's] escalating behaviour. the meeting was attended by [ms munshi], [mr carver] and [ms ad] ([f pty ltd]), [mr u] & [mr ae] ([company ac]), myself and [mr af] ([ag] architects) and [mr u’s] neighbour [mr ah] who had met [ms munshi] via the real estate agent and had initially introduced her to [mr u]. [ms munshi] had emailed everyone a proposed meeting agenda earlier in the day which was laced with accusations of non-compliance. prior to the meeting, both [company ac] and [ag architects] had reviewed the compliance items with the building surveyor who had confirmed them to be irrelevant. furthermore, the building surveyor noted that [ms munshi's] accusations of non-compliance effectively amounted to self-sabotage of the project. [ms munshi] attempted to control the meeting by focusing on what she claimed to be compliance issues. however, [mr u] raised the issue of [ms munshi's] dishonesty and her breach of contract relative to non-payment by tabling a letter of demand he had issued earlier in the day. this prompted the other attendees to express their frustration about [ms munshi's] behaviour. [mr carver] calmly listened to everyone firstly, and after hearing all views expressed his sincerest apology, and his commitment to rectifying the situation, particularly the outstanding payments. [mr carver's] response caused [ms munshi] to promptly 'blow up' and 'storm out'. [mr carver] reiterated his earlier statement following [ms munshi's] departure and confirmed his intention to become more involved the [company g] project. following the removal of [ms munshi] from her role in the [company g] project, i can confirm that the project has progressed smoothly and successfully. there were no compliance issues, all payments were rectified, and the business is now open and operational without issue.
evidence relied upon by [ms munshi]  affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 19 october 2021 (b) affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 13 july 2021, (c) financial statement filed by ms munshi on 13 july 2021, (d) affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 24 september 2021, (e) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (f) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 13 july 2021, (c) financial statement filed by ms munshi on 13 july 2021, (d) affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 24 september 2021, (e) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (f) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   financial statement filed by ms munshi on 13 july 2021, (d) affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 24 september 2021, (e) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (f) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of ms munshi sworn on 24 september 2021, (e) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (f) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (f) affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of dr y sworn on 30 october 2021, (g) affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of ms aj sworn on 19 july 2021, (h) affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of mr ak sworn on 8 july 2021, (i) affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   affidavit of mr k sworn 24 september 2021, (j) subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   subpoenaed material from: (i) anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.   anz filed on 18 january, (ii) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.  ) ahpra filed 25 june 2021, and (iii) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.  i) westpac filed on 6 july 2021.
ms munshi’s oral evidence
evidence in chief  confirmed that the contents of her affidavits were true and correct but for the affidavit affirmed 24 september 2021, which mis-described her two superannuation accounts. in this regard, she gave evidence that the total value of each fund was correct – if the names ascribed to them in that affidavit were switched. (b) identified a discrepancy in her financial statement. ms munshi listed her centrelink benefit as $87.00 per week but that this was actually $264.00 each fortnight. in the liability section, ms munshi had listed her unpaid tax as $3571 whereas the correct figure was $2,800 (c) at the time of trial, she was employed on a temporary contract for four or five days a week paid at $810 per day.   identified a discrepancy in her financial statement. ms munshi listed her centrelink benefit as $87.00 per week but that this was actually $264.00 each fortnight. in the liability section, ms munshi had listed her unpaid tax as $3571 whereas the correct figure was $2,800 (c) at the time of trial, she was employed on a temporary contract for four or five days a week paid at $810 per day.   at the time of trial, she was employed on a temporary contract for four or five days a week paid at $810 per day.   the $400,000 loan from mr carver’s parents, and (b) loans ms munshi listed as a liabilities in her financial statement. ms munshi characterises that liability as a loan from her father made in 2018.   loans ms munshi listed as a liabilities in her financial statement. ms munshi characterises that liability as a loan from her father made in 2018.   she accepted that mr carver had to repay the $400,000 to his parents. i extract below the relevant exchange between mr hall and ms munshi in this regard.
now, in these proceedings, on – i think it was thursday of last week, you signed a court order that requires [mr carver] to repay his parents the sum of $400,000 plus interest at a prescribed methodology of calculating interest, but he has to pay the whole of that money back to them?---yes. yes. so you acknowledge that that amount is in fact owing by – well, on the document, he owes them that money, and he has to pay it back?---yes.   mr carver may or may not have known of the borrowings from her parents of $21,000 referred to in [52] of her affidavit of 13 july 2021 as “loan owing to my parents (post – separation)”. she said that mr carver may have known about this because she used some of the borrowings to pay for household item. however, she accepted that mr carver was not part of any conversation with her parents in connection with the loan. (c) her reference in that affidavit to a joint liability of $31,000 in the previous line item of that affidavit is a reference to the balance owing of the $52,000 borrowed from her father in 2018. however, despite the fact that she had referred to that liability as joint, mr carver was not part of any conversation with her father relating to that loan. she also said that the money went into her bank account. however, she then said it went into the parties, offset account.   her reference in that affidavit to a joint liability of $31,000 in the previous line item of that affidavit is a reference to the balance owing of the $52,000 borrowed from her father in 2018. however, despite the fact that she had referred to that liability as joint, mr carver was not part of any conversation with her father relating to that loan. she also said that the money went into her bank account. however, she then said it went into the parties, offset account.   the latest version of the plan was the version 3 draft plan dated 7 november 2019. she said that the cover statement for that plan said as follows:
at [company g], the patient experience is unlike any other [health] clinic and more akin to a boutique hotel or airline lounge, with a café, artwork and unique aesthetics that are full to the brim with personality that mirrors the artistic, unconventional and diverse spirit of the local area.   by december 2019 she was no longer involved in the project. (c) the anz was sent version 2 and version 3 of the draft plan. in one of the parties’ consultations with the bank, which was of approximately one hours’ duration, approximately 25 minutes of the meeting was spent looking at the version 3 of the plan. (d) she had no qualifications or experience in the health care field and no other tertiary qualifications. ms munshi confirmed that she had a non-tertiary qualification in project management which was accredited by professional bodies.   the anz was sent version 2 and version 3 of the draft plan. in one of the parties’ consultations with the bank, which was of approximately one hours’ duration, approximately 25 minutes of the meeting was spent looking at the version 3 of the plan. (d) she had no qualifications or experience in the health care field and no other tertiary qualifications. ms munshi confirmed that she had a non-tertiary qualification in project management which was accredited by professional bodies.   she had no qualifications or experience in the health care field and no other tertiary qualifications. ms munshi confirmed that she had a non-tertiary qualification in project management which was accredited by professional bodies.
so the document says that but also, if you – if you see how i did some of the numbers, we also implied – and we didn’t include saturday figures for the health care staff to – to make sure that we counteracted that
because [mr carver] and i were having a lot of arguments at the time, and i was trying to work out a solution before both [mr al] and i went to [mr carver] with the next steps.   initially, she stated:
yes. i was joking around because [mr carver’s] dad had just mentioned to me that he had just come into some money because his father just died, and i didn’t mean to joke. i think – i feel horrible reading that now, because i think [mr q] and i were talking about putting money towards [x]’s education.   then, specifically in relation to the $400,000 mentioned in the email, which was the same amount subsequently lent by mr carver’s parents, ms munshi said:
that’s just a coincidence. i – it wasn’t, you know – it was just a coincidence. actually, it was a coincidence, because when we were looking at the anz loans, it was an unsecured loan and a secured loan, and with the secured loan, the amount was between 300 to 400k as a bridging loan, but we ended up getting an unsecured loan so, ultimately, we didn’t need the 400k if we got the unsecured loan. ... no. no, because the 400 was actually also – if you take a look at my father’s property, i had a chat with dad. probably a day before sending this email, and the 400 was what i talked to dad about in getting him to secure 400 for [mr carver] and i.
because we – i was talking to him and i was joking to him about how we lived there for a while ... yes. yes, about – yes, not joking, but when we were just talking about living arrangements and stuff like that. so 100 per cent, hand on my heart, i did not say, you know, a – i didn’t want him to assume that. and i did correct him on that. because i did also say, “what if we added mum and dad’s property to it as well?”
mr ak’s oral evidence  he bought m street, suburb n in 1999. (b) ms munshi moved into m street, suburb n in 2009 as a rent paying tenant. (c) ms munshi paid a below market rent of $850 per month. (d) mr carver moved into the m street, suburb n property in 2014 and mr ak did not receive any rental payments from him. (e) ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n property. (f) mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   ms munshi moved into m street, suburb n in 2009 as a rent paying tenant. (c) ms munshi paid a below market rent of $850 per month. (d) mr carver moved into the m street, suburb n property in 2014 and mr ak did not receive any rental payments from him. (e) ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n property. (f) mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   ms munshi paid a below market rent of $850 per month. (d) mr carver moved into the m street, suburb n property in 2014 and mr ak did not receive any rental payments from him. (e) ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n property. (f) mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   mr carver moved into the m street, suburb n property in 2014 and mr ak did not receive any rental payments from him. (e) ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n property. (f) mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n property. (f) mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   mr carver knows ms munshi has no interest in the m street, suburb n. (g) he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   he visited mr carver and ms munshi in or about january or february 2019, and mr carver then asked whether he could sell the m street, suburb n property to help fund the practice. (h) he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   he had not agreed to sell m street, suburb n but was willing to put it up as security for a loan to the practice. (i) in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   in or about 7 april, he had gifted the husband and wife $20,000. (j) in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   in or about 17 january 2018, mr ak had lent ms munshi $52,663.10 for “ongoing expenses and needs”. (k) he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   he and other family members had undertaken extensive renovations on the b street, suburb c. (l) although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   although mr carver and ms munshi paid for “most” of the building materials, he and his cousin provided unpaid labour to the job on every weekend for approximately six months.   ak] said that their contract was with [ms munshi]: you know the tenants that are living there right now?---yes. have they – they’ve signed a lease, haven’t they?---they signed the lease with [ms munshi]. yes. and when does that expire – do you know when that lease expires, or you don’t know?--no. i don’t know. they will let me know when it expires for the pay. when they pay they call me that rent pay forward to your account. do you know what the word lease means? do you know what a lease is?---like a rent. yes. yes. well, we say a lease is an agreement by one person with another to say, “you can live in my house if you pay this money”, basically. do you agree?---yes. yes. okay. so there’s a lease now at the moment for the current tenants, isn’t there?---yes. yes. the tenant, yes. do you know when that lease will end?---pardon? do you know when that lease will finish?---i don’t know. because [ms munshi] said. “let them stay in there until they go”. okay. so are you saying the lease is finished but they’re just staying in there month 20 after month now?---yes. yes. that ..... okay. so the lease has expired but they’re staying in month to month?---yes. i think - - -
the valuation evidence – mr k
mr k’s reports  a business valuation report dated 4 march 2021 (first valuation report), (b) a business valuation report dated 30 june 2021 (second valuation report), (c) a supplementary letter dated 30 june 2021 which identified some “minor mistakes” in the second valuation report (30 june 2021 supplementary letter), (d) a third valuation report dated 15 october 2021 (third valuation report), and (e) a final valuation report on 8 november 2021 (final valuation report).   a business valuation report dated 30 june 2021 (second valuation report), (c) a supplementary letter dated 30 june 2021 which identified some “minor mistakes” in the second valuation report (30 june 2021 supplementary letter), (d) a third valuation report dated 15 october 2021 (third valuation report), and (e) a final valuation report on 8 november 2021 (final valuation report).   a supplementary letter dated 30 june 2021 which identified some “minor mistakes” in the second valuation report (30 june 2021 supplementary letter), (d) a third valuation report dated 15 october 2021 (third valuation report), and (e) a final valuation report on 8 november 2021 (final valuation report).   a third valuation report dated 15 october 2021 (third valuation report), and (e) a final valuation report on 8 november 2021 (final valuation report).   a final valuation report on 8 november 2021 (final valuation report).
mr k’s oral evidence
mr k’s oral evidence on 5 october 2021
in attaining this value, major assumptions have been made about the future viability of the practice and the ability to meet the targets of the strategic plan, together with the ability to expire considerable debt associated with the comprehensive fit-out of 12 rooms.   the projected expansion rate of medical professionals was unrealistic until patient demand picks up, (b) the clinic was not accredited and obtaining accreditation had proved problematic which made it uncertain when the process would be compete, and (c) covid-19 lockdowns have delayed the accreditation process by 12 months.   the clinic was not accredited and obtaining accreditation had proved problematic which made it uncertain when the process would be compete, and (c) covid-19 lockdowns have delayed the accreditation process by 12 months.   covid-19 lockdowns have delayed the accreditation process by 12 months.
i don’t think the number of medical professionals and the holdup that’s probably been caused by both covid and lack of accreditation actually interferes with my valuation based on that first year’s revenue.
it’s common ground that that business plan document was written – i think, it’s common ground that it was written principally by ms munshi. on my client’s evidence, she was the sole author of the document, in which he had no input at all. but what she, herself has agreed is that the document was written with a view to persuading prospective lenders to lend money
well, the way i was doing this was take three different ways of getting to a value and then taking the midpoint. so, the three – the – the value i got to after i’d sent that email, after – after looking at the comparison of the internal accounts with the statutory accounts – i came up with a multiplied value which was less than the value i had stated in the email, and the midpoint, therefore, was less, and i came up with about 360,000. but i do, sort of, like to emphasise that, really, i should be looking at it in more detail. ... well, i will explain the – the variances between the internal accounts and the statutory accounts. they all relate to expenses. now, the expenses between the two look virtually identical – within $1000. but actually, the components of those expenses are actually very different. for example, wages of nearly 94,000 have been reversed out. now, i don’t understand that. how did that happen? if they were charged up as wages in the internal accounts but then management fees of 45,000 appear that weren’t in the internal accounts. extra rental se[e]ms to have been accrued. legal fees, which i’m pretty certain are family law fees, have been reversed out, and there’s quite a few other smaller adjustments – quite a few of them. there was no depreciation or immediate write-off in the internal account, that has been processed, as you often expect, in the statutory accounts. so there are a considerable number of differences between the internal accounts i used for the purposes of the report, and these accounts that i received last thursday evening. so there are still – there are still issues, really, with investigating one or two of these balances.
it’s ... the third, fourth and fifth months of the 2021 year. and the total of sales over three months is 126,000 near enough. so, that’s 126,000 for three months versus, near enough, 100,000 for one month in june 2021. ... i would certainly have to consider that very definitely as the going trend. i think i would need more information on who was involved in generating this income.
19 october 2021  for reasons evidenced in the wife’s extensive affidavit of 19 october 2021, the day of the hearing: (i) the husband had failed to make full and frank disclosure to ms munshi’s representatives, (ii) there were deficiencies with the material the husband provided to mr k, and (iii) ms munshi was unaware of discussions that had taken place at a conference between mr carver, mr k and the business accountants. (b) mr k’s final analysis had been emailed to the parties at 10:15pm on the previous evening. (c) the husband’s assertion of a negative asset pool was not common ground. (d) significant issues arose from mr k’s letter dated 16 october 2021 which stated that there are issues with how data was entered on the xero accounting system. ms wheeler submitted that the letter stated that “this is a serious and substantial matter that needs to be raised before the court”. mr k’s letter says, amongst other things, that: (i) those problems made some asset and liability figures difficult to reconcile with bank records for the purposes of the businesses’ valuation, (ii) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   the husband had failed to make full and frank disclosure to ms munshi’s representatives, (ii) there were deficiencies with the material the husband provided to mr k, and (iii) ms munshi was unaware of discussions that had taken place at a conference between mr carver, mr k and the business accountants.  ) there were deficiencies with the material the husband provided to mr k, and (iii) ms munshi was unaware of discussions that had taken place at a conference between mr carver, mr k and the business accountants.  i) ms munshi was unaware of discussions that had taken place at a conference between mr carver, mr k and the business accountants.   mr k’s final analysis had been emailed to the parties at 10:15pm on the previous evening. (c) the husband’s assertion of a negative asset pool was not common ground. (d) significant issues arose from mr k’s letter dated 16 october 2021 which stated that there are issues with how data was entered on the xero accounting system. ms wheeler submitted that the letter stated that “this is a serious and substantial matter that needs to be raised before the court”. mr k’s letter says, amongst other things, that: (i) those problems made some asset and liability figures difficult to reconcile with bank records for the purposes of the businesses’ valuation, (ii) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   the husband’s assertion of a negative asset pool was not common ground. (d) significant issues arose from mr k’s letter dated 16 october 2021 which stated that there are issues with how data was entered on the xero accounting system. ms wheeler submitted that the letter stated that “this is a serious and substantial matter that needs to be raised before the court”. mr k’s letter says, amongst other things, that: (i) those problems made some asset and liability figures difficult to reconcile with bank records for the purposes of the businesses’ valuation, (ii) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   significant issues arose from mr k’s letter dated 16 october 2021 which stated that there are issues with how data was entered on the xero accounting system. ms wheeler submitted that the letter stated that “this is a serious and substantial matter that needs to be raised before the court”. mr k’s letter says, amongst other things, that: (i) those problems made some asset and liability figures difficult to reconcile with bank records for the purposes of the businesses’ valuation, (ii) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   those problems made some asset and liability figures difficult to reconcile with bank records for the purposes of the businesses’ valuation, (ii) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.  ) on 30 june 2021, the xero system records the anz loan as negative $624,021.00 whereas the bank feed shows a balance of negative $14,211.00, (iii) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.  i) this created a variance between the bank feed and the xero accounts of $893,812.00, (iv) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.  ) as a consequence, a net balance sheet liability of negative $299,545.00 would became a net asset of $594,267.00, (v) mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   mr k then confirms loan amounts directly with the anz and westpac banks, which changes the net liabilities from negative $1,644,293 to negative $712,866.00, (vi) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.  ) mr k expresses the view that this change is accounted for because an accountants have rolled a number of balances into a “shareholders loan”, resulting in the balance sheet liabilities including a shareholders loan for $877,638.00, (vii) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.  i) mr k also raises the possibility that mr carver has been able to reduce his debt and that he may be due repayment of the shareholder’s loan, but adds that further investigation would be needed to clarify this situation. (e) given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   given that mr k’s letter of 16 october 2021 raised the possibility that the value of the business may be higher than is reflected in his third valuation report, ms wheeler argued that that mr k should justify his use of the future maintainable earnings methodology. (f) ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   ultimately, this further analysis may support the conclusion that there was a positive net asset pool. (g) in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   in all of the circumstances, an adjournment was required in order to afford the wife procedural fairness.   mr k final valuation analysis had not been sent to the other side at 10pm the previous evening, rather what was sent was a single page letter from mr k confirming that the final valuation and analysis which had been sent to the parties on 15 october 2021. (b) his client accepts mr k’s revised valuation evidence on its face. (c) there is a 100 page report documenting the precise documents that the husband had supplied to mr k. (d) it is not common ground that mr k requires any further information. (e) the matter should proceed because the valuation is a single expert valuation that is only $6,000 more than the previous valuation. (f) the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   his client accepts mr k’s revised valuation evidence on its face. (c) there is a 100 page report documenting the precise documents that the husband had supplied to mr k. (d) it is not common ground that mr k requires any further information. (e) the matter should proceed because the valuation is a single expert valuation that is only $6,000 more than the previous valuation. (f) the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   there is a 100 page report documenting the precise documents that the husband had supplied to mr k. (d) it is not common ground that mr k requires any further information. (e) the matter should proceed because the valuation is a single expert valuation that is only $6,000 more than the previous valuation. (f) the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   it is not common ground that mr k requires any further information. (e) the matter should proceed because the valuation is a single expert valuation that is only $6,000 more than the previous valuation. (f) the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   the matter should proceed because the valuation is a single expert valuation that is only $6,000 more than the previous valuation. (f) the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   the future maintainable earning method used by mr k is the preferred method because other methods such as the net asset method produced a negative valuations. (g) all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   all additional documents sought had already been provided by mr carver.   the methodology used and the reasons for its choice, (b) the business valuer’s opinion of value, (c) the materials, including any communications from the parties or their representatives (data), that were relied upon for the purposes of making the valuation, and (d) the business valuer’s reasoning process from the data to his conclusions.   the business valuer’s opinion of value, (c) the materials, including any communications from the parties or their representatives (data), that were relied upon for the purposes of making the valuation, and (d) the business valuer’s reasoning process from the data to his conclusions.   the materials, including any communications from the parties or their representatives (data), that were relied upon for the purposes of making the valuation, and (d) the business valuer’s reasoning process from the data to his conclusions.   the business valuer’s reasoning process from the data to his conclusions.
conclusions expressed in mr k final valuation report
3 conclusions 3.1 this is the fourth valuation report with respect to this matter. 3.2 the first report was based on very limited information relating to about two months of operations of the health centre and three (later) monthly bas statements. 3.3 the second report was based on internal xero accounts (profit and loss, balance sheet and the general ledger). these were found later, to be materially inaccurate. 3.4 the third report was based on draft financial statements prepared by external accountants, [an accountants], who included some of the xero balances (notably the anz bank loan at -$624,021, which proved to be inaccurate and the westpac altitude black credit card [debit balance] which proved to be a credit card in the name of [mr carver] and not [f pty ltd]). 3.5 this report is based on a second draft financial of statements from an accountants which excludes the altitude black credit card, includes the anz bank loan balance (-$797,933) and restates the shareholder's loan at -$592,148, some $285,490 lower than the first draft. 3.6 further bank statements both for [f pty ltd] and for [mr carver] in his personal capacity were then provided. [the original bank feed information found in xero online had been found to be significantly out-of-date]. 3.7 this issues in this this case have arisen because of serious inaccuracy in the xero accounting ledger held by [f pty ltd]. 3.8 at the closure of the previous hearing it was determined that: the value of the business on the basis of capitalisation of future maintainable earnings was $352,000 (and the reasons for this value are given in the third report). this value would be retained unless: it could be demonstrated that net assets of the business exceeded $352,000, then a net asset valuation would be used. 3.9 (a net asset basis is typically taken when no value can be determined for future maintainable earnings or where future maintainable earnings, when capitalised, are less than the value of net assets). 3.10 the liabilities of the business of [f pty ltd] had been intermingled with the personal liabilities of [mr carver] in the xero accounting ledger and again, in the first draft of financial statements prepared by an accountants. 3.11 the second draft of financial statements detailed only those liabilities of [f pty ltd]. 3.12 the shareholder's loan - amount due to the shareholder ($592,148 in the second draft) represents funds injected into the business by [mr. carver]. $400,000 (of this) pertained to a loan taken out with [ms p] and [mr q]. the remainder would have been financed through various other accounts held by [mr. carver], including credit card accounts. 3.13 the assets (fit-out) of the practice cost approximately $1.2 million financed by the anz bank loan (in the name of [f pty ltd]) and the shareholder (who had borrowed $400,000 from ms p and mr q] ). 3.14 however, irrespective of these financing arrangements, if the shareholder's loan ($592,148) is added back to the net liabilities of the practice [appendix lll(ii)] the adjusted net assets would be $292,603 which is less than the value calculated in the third report ($352,000) based on a capitalisation of future maintainable earnings basis. 3.15 (maintainable earnings had been calculated by taking an average of three methods - ebitda of maintainable earnings, cents in the dollar based on turnover and discounting future profit after 4 years). 3.16 net assets does not exceed the last valuation, the value taken is, therefore, $352.000. [errors in original.]
mr k evidence on 19 november 2021  f pty ltd had spent approximately $1,129,000.00 to fit out the premises for use as a medical practice. (b) he is not an expert for the purposes of valuing fit out and equipment on the second hand market. (c) the company’s net liabilities are $299,545. (d) the shareholder’s loan, listed in the final valuation report as $592,148.00, is a liability which the business owes to mr carver. it is made up of: (i) approximately $420,000.00 that mr carver largely contributed to the business fit out but ultimately owes to ms p and mr q by order of this court dated 29 september 2021, and (ii) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources. (e) the shareholder loan should not be added back to because this would, in effect, count mr carver’s contribution twice. (f) even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   he is not an expert for the purposes of valuing fit out and equipment on the second hand market. (c) the company’s net liabilities are $299,545. (d) the shareholder’s loan, listed in the final valuation report as $592,148.00, is a liability which the business owes to mr carver. it is made up of: (i) approximately $420,000.00 that mr carver largely contributed to the business fit out but ultimately owes to ms p and mr q by order of this court dated 29 september 2021, and (ii) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources. (e) the shareholder loan should not be added back to because this would, in effect, count mr carver’s contribution twice. (f) even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   the company’s net liabilities are $299,545. (d) the shareholder’s loan, listed in the final valuation report as $592,148.00, is a liability which the business owes to mr carver. it is made up of: (i) approximately $420,000.00 that mr carver largely contributed to the business fit out but ultimately owes to ms p and mr q by order of this court dated 29 september 2021, and (ii) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources. (e) the shareholder loan should not be added back to because this would, in effect, count mr carver’s contribution twice. (f) even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   the shareholder’s loan, listed in the final valuation report as $592,148.00, is a liability which the business owes to mr carver. it is made up of: (i) approximately $420,000.00 that mr carver largely contributed to the business fit out but ultimately owes to ms p and mr q by order of this court dated 29 september 2021, and (ii) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources. (e) the shareholder loan should not be added back to because this would, in effect, count mr carver’s contribution twice. (f) even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   approximately $420,000.00 that mr carver largely contributed to the business fit out but ultimately owes to ms p and mr q by order of this court dated 29 september 2021, and (ii) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources.  ) various other contributions made by mr carver to the business from unknown sources.   the shareholder loan should not be added back to because this would, in effect, count mr carver’s contribution twice. (f) even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   even if the shareholder’s loan was added back, the net assets method would still produce a business value which is less than the future maintainable income method. that is, according to the final valuation report, the net asset method with add backs produces the sum of negative $299,545 plus $592,148.00 which equals a net asset value of $292,603. on the other hand, the future maintainable income method produces the higher value of $352,000. (g) mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   mr k gave evidence that – after having considered the further information provided pursuant to my orders of 19 october 2021 – he was satisfied that those figures were reliable.   he confirmed that the first valuation report applies a multiple of 2.5 to the adjusted net operating profit and that benchmark was normally a multiple of between 3 and 5. (b) the first valuation report justifies the 2.5 multiple as follows:   the first valuation report justifies the 2.5 multiple as follows:
6.27 because the business is a start-up, a conservative multiple has to be applied to the projected surplus income. a multiple of 2.5 has been applied to the "surplus" (maintainable earnings). 6.28 this gives a value (value to the owner) of $190,675. the multiple reflects the risks of the new business. against this there are the advantages of the fit-out and the years of experience of the practitioner in other practices. a multiple below the range of 3 to 5 (for established practices) has been selected.   in that valuation report the multiple selected is for a start-up, whereas the common benchmark is applicable to more established practices. mr k also explained that his first valuation report relied upon incomplete data and specifically that figures for depreciation and amortisation were missing. (d) his second valuation report introduces benchmarking from company au to the effect that a multiple of 3 to 9 could be used. (e) as to the benchmarking from company au:   his second valuation report introduces benchmarking from company au to the effect that a multiple of 3 to 9 could be used. (e) as to the benchmarking from company au:   as to the benchmarking from company au:
it’s actually shown on their website, where they’re discussing valuation in health practices. they seem to specialise in professional practices. and they were talking about a range of anything from three to nine on an ebitda basis. but of course, we’re talking about businesses at all levels of development. so if a practice has been established 30 years, has got a very good, strong historical record, it is certain to have a higher multiple than one that has been in existence for, say, 18 months.   the second valuation report uses an ebit value only, as the figures for depreciation, and amortisation were not available, and an ebit multiple calculation will always be higher than an ebitda multiple calculation which is reduced by the inclusion of amounts for depreciation and amortisation (da). (g) mr k conceded that he had mistakenly listed the multiple in the second valuation report as 2.5 when it should have been 1.5 to allow for depreciation and amortisation figures that were unavailable to him at that time. as a result, the multiple should have been lowered to account for the impact of that missing information. mr k illustrated this point with the following example:   mr k conceded that he had mistakenly listed the multiple in the second valuation report as 2.5 when it should have been 1.5 to allow for depreciation and amortisation figures that were unavailable to him at that time. as a result, the multiple should have been lowered to account for the impact of that missing information. mr k illustrated this point with the following example:
if i – if i had earnings calculated on an ebit basis of $100, if i then apply the multiple of two, i would get future maintainable earnings of – sorry, not future maintainable earnings – capitalisation of future maintainable earnings of $200. two times 100. if it was on an ebitda basis and i had a figure on ebitda of 150, because i added back depreciation and amortisation, and i apply the multiple of 1.33, i would get $200. i would get the same figure, but the multiples would be different. the ebitda multiple would be 1.33. the ebit multiple would be two.   the limited amount of actual information available for the first and second valuations reports meant that those valuations were of limited use and the weight accorded them should reflect that. (i) ultimately he was content to stick with the multiple of 1.5 despite any assumptions about the business putting on additional consultant medical professionals. as part of his answer, mr k described the “multiple” as follows:   ultimately he was content to stick with the multiple of 1.5 despite any assumptions about the business putting on additional consultant medical professionals. as part of his answer, mr k described the “multiple” as follows:
a multiple is a measure of risk. the lower the risk the higher the multiple. it doesn’t matter whether that’s an ebitda a month or an ebit multiple. so the – how the multiple is set is a view taken by any valuer as to the future risk of the business. this is a very young business, it’s a start-up business. it’s looking quite good from the point of view of fees so far but it’s very limited – it’s a very limited timeframe. if i was given a practice that had been in operation for 20, 30 years – i’m thinking of my own practice that i go to. they’ve been together for about probably 40 years and there is eight of them. i would have a great deal more confidence in valuing my own clinic with so much history behind it than a practice that is literally a start-up. so i – i have to mitigate this, i have to say i’m looking – i’m looking at – at the future. there are indications that things are going reasonably well but it is very much in a start-up phase. it is only a sole practitioner, there are plans to expand and there are expectations of taking on, you know, consultant medical professionals, expanding the practice. but that hasn’t occurred yet. now, a lot of people go into business and it doesn’t work out. so what am i supposed to think in terms of a practitioner? are they safer than many other businesses? well, i would say – i would have to say you would think so because it takes a long time to qualify as a medical professional. there are certain barriers to entry – excuse me – into that industry, which you would expect would reduce the risk going into the future of not earning a reasonable amount. but it’s still very much a young business. so if i look at published information which says we can go anywhere between three and nine of a practice, it doesn’t tell you what that practice is. it could have been around 30 years, it could be highly successful and it can prove itself. so i have mitigated that multiple because the business is so new. and i would have to do that with any business, not just a practice.   the nature of a multiple, was as follows:
i have to explain that the multiple is very much a discretionary part of the whole process. it’s definitely not a science and when you sometimes see software packages advertise that say “here, you can automate your valuation”, it leaves out a very important component which is human discretion. the fledging nature of the business, the fact that there was and still is substantial debt, that the expectations of the owner have not really been achieved to date. that was to have a clinic with several practitioners in the practice. i looked at ibis world, which is a well-known worldwide research organisation, with regard to the future – the expected future performance of practices in australia. so, it’s – i reached the conclusion with a number of – for a number of different reasons. this is – like, i suppose we’re back to the human element in determining a multiple.   his 1.5 multiplier was not too low:
i don’t – i don’t believe so. i believe it’s based on risk as a young business. there is still a lot of – i mean, some of these assumptions are a little bit speculative in terms of, you know, employing contract staff. it still has a sufficient risk to keep that multiple as low as 1.5. ... i would say it would be very difficult to increase it without further history. that means literally let’s leave it two or three years and you will get a different result. ... ... the multiple i have selected is 1.5 because of the risks – perceived future risk because it’s a new business. ... as i mentioned before, the – the multiple is a function of risk, so that risk takes in – well, assessment of that risk takes in – we normally take in a number of factors including how long the business has been operating, what are the – what is the financial position of the business? because obviously, if a business for example is in financial difficulties, that risk level is going to go higher. now, i’m not talking about this particular business. i’m talking about any particular business. that risk will go higher. so, there’s a number of – a number of things that go into the assessment of risk, and that then translates to a multiple. ... i have give[n] a reason for my multiple based on the fact that it is a very new business, it’s a start-up business, and it has a considerable amount of debt. it has got a long way to go to develop the plans and the expectations it appears to have. ... and i [am] not going to change the multiple. [emphasis added]
there was some correspondence, email correspondence going back and forth between the two solicitors on that day, [15 october 2021 when the report shared with the parties], which continued after i had actually released my report, concerning the level of liability and what the liabilities were, and i think ao & associates were complaining that they had never had, despite several requests, you know, a breakdown of what was originally about 1.6 million liabilities, which came out of the internal accounting system. 1.6 million. they had never had a breakdown of those liabilities. so that – i suppose that led to my curiosity as to what else there might be in the online xero package. and i went into the banking area, which is not the general ledger, and started digging a bit deeper, and i found that the balances made no sense when compared to – or some of the balances made no sense when compared to the actual ledger itself.
i looked at the xero balances in the ledger compared to the bank feeds, which were – you know, as it turned out were substantially out of date, and got a variance of 893,000. and this concerned me even more. i looked – because it will give you information at the moment you go in, 16 october – or close to the moment you go in – i looked at 16 october as well and found that there was very little difference between the two dates, in actual fact, if you’re doing the comparison. so i then started to convince myself, i suppose, that there could be adjusted net assets of 594,000. now, that is not correct, but i – and then that worried me greatly, because at that point i would start to have to think maybe this should be on a net assets basis and not a future maintainable earnings basis for the purposes of valuation.
submissions
applicant’s opening submissions at trial  it is the husband’s core submission:
... that the way these parties come before the court with the assets that they own in their respective names and their liabilities that no order is warranted pursuant to section 79(2) of the act. my client is more than $240,000 in net debt on current assets. he has $35,000 in superannuation. at the high point of his case, the wife has assets of $52,000 and over $100,000 in superannuation.   stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108 (stanford v stanford), amongst other things, stands for the proposition that:
... there is no presumption of a right to a property settlement in property proceedings. that’s not the way it starts. it starts with looking at what there is and considering whether there’s any proper basis for an alteration of those interests. and it would be my clear submission that there’s no basis for that.   as to the duration of the relationship and the parties contributions:  t was a relatively short relationship between the parties. cohabitation commenced in 2014. my client had initial savings of $107,000. his parents shortly thereafter gifted him a sum of $50,000, which case law confirms there’s no doubt that that would be credited to him in the assessment of contributions. the wife makes an assertion of a contribution of, i think, $20,000 some time shortly after the purchase in the husband’s name of a property in [b street, suburb c]. there are some other minor claims in relation to what we refer to as extraneous contributions during the relationship. but the most significant one of all would be that right towards the very end my client’s parents lent a sum of $400,000 to bail out a flagging and distressed business development plan that was underway and in deep difficulty in terms of liquidity. ... and my client’s direct economic contributions towards the relationship significantly exceeds those of the wife.   as to the respective incomes of the parties:
my client’s income was in excess of 200. there was a 265, a 222 and 228, in the mid to upper-mid 200,000 mark for five of the financial years that coincide with the relationship. and only much more recently in the context of moving into a self-employed capacity has the husband’s income fallen below the $100,000 mark. by contrast, the highest level of income of the wife earned during the relationship was a sum of $100,000 in the first year. the next year it was 67,000. we don’t have disclosure on 2016/17, but the following two years no tax returns were lodged by virtue of not having an obligation to lodge a return due to the lack of relevant income. ... [and] the wife’s earnings in the final year of cohabitation of $49,000. so broadly speaking,   as to the parties future needs:
so if one looks at future needs, the main things that we’re going 10 to be looking at under section 75(2), firstly, are age, state of health, income earning capacity and care of children. and on the age front the parties are of comparable ages. health. the parties have got comparable states of health. income. the wife’s current income, i note with some – i’m quite impressed to note that the wife is currently earning $810 per hour working as a contractor. she works five hours per week for a return of $4100. in a fortnight she earns $8200 by working 10 hours. that’s according to her payslips. as a result, her hourly rate is $500 more than the husband, who charges out at $320 per hour or $80 per quarter hour for a consultation. ... so it’s not a case where her income is either beleaguered by the care of the child or by a lack of relevant skills or accreditation or recognition within the workforce. her income greatly exceeds that of the husband, who in 2021 has an assessable income of $68,000. ... in the 2020 financial year the husband’s income was $73,000.   the court should not make the spousal maintenance orders sought by the wife having regard to the fact that her earning capacity was high.
closing submissions
wife’s closing submissions
income earning capacity
20.19 the wife gave evidence that the cost of childcare for her was around 264 per fortnight and that she was receiving child support, originally of around $87 per week. she said that child support had gone up and she agreed it was now$147 per week. she had a tax debt of 2,800 these were her amendments to her financial statement in evidence in chief 20.20 she gave evidence that she was no longer employed by employer ap and after around 6 weeks of no employment her current gross income was 810 per day. she said she tried to work five days a week, but it was between 4 and 5 days and that her contract for her current job ends in november 2021. it was put to her that, if she was offered an extension of the contract would she take it and she answered yes but that answer was on the basis that she did not want to work that sort of job ongoing but was trying to pay off her legal fees. we repeat, there was simply no evidence that she had or was likely to receive an extension of her contract 20.21 she gave evidence that she has no tertiary qualifications that she had done some small courses “days or hours” and that she developed the draft business plan taken to the anz bank (who provided the husband with an unsecured loan) with the assistance of a digital agency. [references omitted. errors in the original.]
7. the wife was born in 1976, is now 45 and is a [professional]. she has historically earned income ranging between 60k to 100k in contractual roles in project management she does not have university qualifications she has the care of young x, now just three years old. she was out of the work force in a paid capacity from late 2017 until february 2021 she has no sick or annual leave entitlements as she is a casual contractor. her current contract is with [super fund o] commencing in august 2021 and ending in january 2022. whilst she was cross examined on her continuing in that role “if it was offered” no evidence was led by the husband that the wife had been or was likely to receive an offer to extend her contract. indeed, her evidence was that whilst she would take an extension if it was offered her current position was onerous and left her little time for her son. she is entitled as a matter of law to take up her role as the resident parent and primary carer to the child. [references omitted. errors in the original.]
3. ...his financial records showed) that he has capacity to earn income of at least $265,000 or more per annum. ( he earned this prior to embarking on his dream of setting up his own practice) 4. ....it matters little that a valuer of the business “ascribes” to the husband a lesser salary. the test at law is his capacity to earn income which he has demonstrated. ... 6. the husband’s income earning capacity is not “capitalized in the value of the business” the business makes income from not only the husband but from rental and or commission and or licensing arrangements with other professionals whom form part of what is known to the public as “[company g]” [references omitted. emphasis in the original. errors in the original.]
11. the wife says that her father gifted 20k to the purchase of the fmh and this was paid to the h’s bank account and in 2015 to 2016. that is conceded in the outline of case for the husband. the husband says his parents gifted 50k to assist in the purchase and that he had savings of 107k that went to the purchase of assets. that was conceded by the wife in the case. the wife says her parents and family did a large renovation on the fmh. the husband alleges the works done were not of standard and that it might cost up to 60k to repair for sale. he does not deny the work was done. again, his evidence in this regard was scant. the wife says that the reality is neither party can afford to keep that property and it should be sold “as is”. orders were made for the sale of the fmh and that has not occurred we say the husbands reasons for same were scant and not supported. in short, he has not complied with court orders and does not come to this trial with “clean hands” 12. the wife maintained she was the primary carer to the party’s child, that she was the homemaker and that she contributed all of her income and efforts to the family constituted by her the husband and the child. whilst the husband maintains he was an equal care giver to the child, there was no real cross examination of the wife on that point. the husband was cross examined on the wife’s position, and he maintained that he was an equal home maker and carer. that evidence is against his own evidence of the alleged long hours he spent in practice and in the face of the child orders he agreed to does not sit. the wife’s evidence should be preferred [references omitted. emphasis in the original. errors in the original.]
negative asset pool argument
13. in and around 2017 to 2019 the parties decided to invest in the husbands “dream” of his own practice. it is unclear even to date, at the end of the trial, just how much has been spent on that “dream” the husband seeks to retain same, and says the “net assets of the parties are “negative” due to the large “debt” for this practice and as such the wife should not receive any property settlement whatsoever, save and except what is in her possession. 14. there is argument as to the value of the business and the single expert accountant chosen to provide a valuation of same has provided now not less than four values (plus other attempts) for the business due to, we say, tardy and late discovery by the husband even to the point of during the trial 15. in any event we say whatever that value is determined to be, by the court, and we do not accept the opening submission of mr. hall for the husband that the court is bound to accept the valuation of the valuer, one must be cognizant of these matters
15.1 the business value “to the husband” who will continue to practice there and has chosen to do so 15.2 the business value “to the husband “ includes its ongoing value of providing taxation relief and other benefits to the husband, (prestige, the opportunity to expand, employ other medical professionals and or medical professionals or have them on license or other arrangements, the ability to run vehicles and the like, through the business, to claim depreciation to reduce taxation payable ,to use the business accounts to pay for renovations and to deduct these as an expense to the business, indeed to claim his parents “ loan” as a business expense) 15.3 if the business has been “overcapitalized” then under the principles of townsend, kowaliw and the line of authorities that follow, then why would not one add back the moneys the husband claims to have expended on this business? one approach might be to take the husband’s varied figures (up to 1.6 million he says he has spent on the business) and let him keep it at that “value” as it is he, who should bear that financial burden of a business he now says has caused enormous debt and not the wife. we expand on this principle further below. whilst this is not a classic “add back” case, it is clear from the authorities that the categories of same are not limited. in any event under 75(2) (o) the money the husband says has been expended is moneys that he borrowed for “his dream”. 15.4 the husband claims he took over managing the project in december 2019 (para 116 h aff 6/7/2021) and, on his own evidence, the wife has been excluded from the business and its accounts since then.
16. on 26 july 2017 the parties purchased a property at [d street, suburb e] with an existing lease and a tenant 17. in early 2019 a patient of the husband died and on any view the husband was then unemployed until he commenced his own practice. 18. the business opened its doors on 11 may 2020 we say it is not fully developed as per its plans. the husband proffered a plan of the property via his counsel late in the proceedings. the wife had no opportunity to view the property as she has been locked out and maintains that there is space at the back of the property that remains undeveloped. if one compares the plan the husband provided and the plan the wife had in her business plan there is a discrepancy in the number of rooms in the practice. there is little more evidence than that before the court if one looks closely at the plan the husband provided then the space marked ... is empty 19. as set out above there have been now over eight attempts to value the business based due to the tardiness and late provision of discovery by the husband. one only needs to look at his case outline to see the “schedule of discovered documents” to see that many bank statements still had not been provided at the time of trial [references omitted. emphasis in the original. errors in the original.]
m street, suburb n
credit issues  the husband’s evidence is totally unreliable. (b) accordingly, amongst other things, i should prefer the evidence of the wife and her father to the extent that it is inconsistent with that of the husband. (c) likewise, accordingly, i should find that the husband has made inadequate disclosure to mr k. moreover, much financial information which the husband did in fact provide to mr k was unreliable. amongst many other things, the wife identified the conflation by the husband of his personal and business expenses in this regard. she also pointed to the unreliability of the figures for administrative and other costs which the husband supplied to mr k. (d) in turn, these matters undermine the factual foundation for, and therefore the reliability of, mr k’s valuation. (e) in any event, the methodology adopted by mr k in his valuation was unsound. the court is not bound by that valuation and should this regard the value which produces as unreliable.[2]   accordingly, amongst other things, i should prefer the evidence of the wife and her father to the extent that it is inconsistent with that of the husband. (c) likewise, accordingly, i should find that the husband has made inadequate disclosure to mr k. moreover, much financial information which the husband did in fact provide to mr k was unreliable. amongst many other things, the wife identified the conflation by the husband of his personal and business expenses in this regard. she also pointed to the unreliability of the figures for administrative and other costs which the husband supplied to mr k. (d) in turn, these matters undermine the factual foundation for, and therefore the reliability of, mr k’s valuation. (e) in any event, the methodology adopted by mr k in his valuation was unsound. the court is not bound by that valuation and should this regard the value which produces as unreliable.[2]   likewise, accordingly, i should find that the husband has made inadequate disclosure to mr k. moreover, much financial information which the husband did in fact provide to mr k was unreliable. amongst many other things, the wife identified the conflation by the husband of his personal and business expenses in this regard. she also pointed to the unreliability of the figures for administrative and other costs which the husband supplied to mr k. (d) in turn, these matters undermine the factual foundation for, and therefore the reliability of, mr k’s valuation. (e) in any event, the methodology adopted by mr k in his valuation was unsound. the court is not bound by that valuation and should this regard the value which produces as unreliable.[2]   in turn, these matters undermine the factual foundation for, and therefore the reliability of, mr k’s valuation. (e) in any event, the methodology adopted by mr k in his valuation was unsound. the court is not bound by that valuation and should this regard the value which produces as unreliable.[2]   in any event, the methodology adopted by mr k in his valuation was unsound. the court is not bound by that valuation and should this regard the value which produces as unreliable.[2]   there was no basis to apply the multiple chosen by mr k. (b) although he was provided with a floor plan and accreditation documents, mr k accepted that he did not spend a great deal of time on them. (c) mr k used three methodologies “without a clear and cogent pathway to same in the body of his reports leaving the reader guessing as to the factual matrix and the basis of his conclusions”. (d) mr k to make enquiries into the husband’s use of the $400,000 loaned by the husband’s parents.   although he was provided with a floor plan and accreditation documents, mr k accepted that he did not spend a great deal of time on them. (c) mr k used three methodologies “without a clear and cogent pathway to same in the body of his reports leaving the reader guessing as to the factual matrix and the basis of his conclusions”. (d) mr k to make enquiries into the husband’s use of the $400,000 loaned by the husband’s parents.   mr k used three methodologies “without a clear and cogent pathway to same in the body of his reports leaving the reader guessing as to the factual matrix and the basis of his conclusions”. (d) mr k to make enquiries into the husband’s use of the $400,000 loaned by the husband’s parents.   mr k to make enquiries into the husband’s use of the $400,000 loaned by the husband’s parents.
32.2 on the basis of the matters set out above we submit the following
32.3 the husband to retain the business and all liabilities associated with it 32.4 the balance of assets net of liabilities to be divided between the parties on the basis of 55% to the wife and 45% to the husband
32.3 see below adjusted asset list for the wife (the difference between this and her case outline is attributing a value to the business) (see also discussion re parent loan)
“discussion” by wife in her written submissions
32.5 on the basis that the husband’s parents’ loan, the business and the business debts are property of the husband and it is a matter for him to deal with those as he sees fit then at 55/45 to the wife, 32.6 gross real assets become 2,610,809 32.7 gross debts without the two business loans of 797,932 and 13,730 become 1,893,920 32.8 net assets become $716,888 x 55% = net to wife 394,288 32.9 the wife has 8,806 (bank) 8,000 (car) and debts (52,000) to her parents net (35,914) 32.10 the husband would pay to the wife 394,288 +35,914 = 430,202 32.11 alternatively, the wife would keep the fmh at b street, suburb c (net 1,400,000 less 20,807 less 759,625 = 619,566) and she would pay the husband 619,566 -430,202 = 189,364 within 90 days 32.12 otherwise, we say that neither party has sought a superannuation splitting order and whilst the wife has more superannuation than the husband at present it is just and equitable for all the reasons above that there be no splitting order why does the husband get the business and the debt (and why do we leave out his parent’s debt)? 33. part viii aa of the act provides the court not only with the power to bind a third party but to allocate debt as between spouses and a third party under section 79 and or 114. see section 90ae and 90af of the act. see 90ta or 90sm and 90ss in relation to defacto couples 34. kowaliw and kowaliw makes it clear that a debt can be allocated to one spouse in a property settlement ... [references omitted. emphasis and errors in the original.]
husband’s closing submissions
overview
overview of submissions 6. the court will be invited to find that:   the parties have no jointly owned property, (b) the husband has net debts of $224,934.67 (c) the wife has modest assets and negligible liabilities, (d) the parties’ legal cost liabilities are not part of the divisible property pool, (e) the wife has $125,402 in superannuation (including $20,000 that she admitted spending on legal costs) and the husband has $34,908.80. ...   the parties’ legal cost liabilities are not part of the divisible property pool, (e) the wife has $125,402 in superannuation (including $20,000 that she admitted spending on legal costs) and the husband has $34,908.80.   the wife has $125,402 in superannuation (including $20,000 that she admitted spending on legal costs) and the husband has $34,908.80.   the parties’ superannuation be equalised. (b) the interim order for the sale of b street, suburb c be discharged. (c) all extent applications for alteration of property interests be discharged.   the interim order for the sale of b street, suburb c be discharged. (c) all extent applications for alteration of property interests be discharged.   all extent applications for alteration of property interests be discharged.
credit submissions
... whilst there were some basic errors in his financial statement, it was apparent that these were just the result of misunderstanding that business liabilities paid by the husband were accounted for in the financial statements of the company business rather than the court financial statement. these errors were cleared up during the testing of the husband’s evidence and re-examination. entering the total value of his superannuation in the expenditure section was an obvious and innocent error and the true superannuation value was not the subject of any dispute. there was nothing deliberate about those mistakes, which were cleared up during the testing of his evidence.   there were inconsistencies in the wife’s written and oral evidence about the amount of superannuation which she had at the commencement of the parties’ relationship. (b) the wife’s written and oral evidence about whether she owned m street, suburb n beneficially, or had represented herself as owning that property was inconsistent and implausible. (c) the wife’s written and oral evidence about the $400,000 lent by the husband’s parents was inconsistent with the evidence not only of the husband but ms p. to the extent of that inconsistency the evidence of the husband and ms p should be preferred. in any event, the wife’s evidence with respect to this issue was implausible and should be rejected. (d) the evidence of mr ak, the wife’s father about m street, suburb n, is of little weight. amongst other things, whispering could be heard from his end when he gave that evidence and, ultimately, he accepted that his wife was in the room with him at that time.   the wife’s written and oral evidence about whether she owned m street, suburb n beneficially, or had represented herself as owning that property was inconsistent and implausible. (c) the wife’s written and oral evidence about the $400,000 lent by the husband’s parents was inconsistent with the evidence not only of the husband but ms p. to the extent of that inconsistency the evidence of the husband and ms p should be preferred. in any event, the wife’s evidence with respect to this issue was implausible and should be rejected. (d) the evidence of mr ak, the wife’s father about m street, suburb n, is of little weight. amongst other things, whispering could be heard from his end when he gave that evidence and, ultimately, he accepted that his wife was in the room with him at that time.   the wife’s written and oral evidence about the $400,000 lent by the husband’s parents was inconsistent with the evidence not only of the husband but ms p. to the extent of that inconsistency the evidence of the husband and ms p should be preferred. in any event, the wife’s evidence with respect to this issue was implausible and should be rejected. (d) the evidence of mr ak, the wife’s father about m street, suburb n, is of little weight. amongst other things, whispering could be heard from his end when he gave that evidence and, ultimately, he accepted that his wife was in the room with him at that time.   the evidence of mr ak, the wife’s father about m street, suburb n, is of little weight. amongst other things, whispering could be heard from his end when he gave that evidence and, ultimately, he accepted that his wife was in the room with him at that time.   he accepted that the wife’s father advanced them $20,000. (b) it was agreed that the husband had $107,000 in savings at the commencement of the parties’ relationship which he had contributed. (c) it was also agreed that he contributed a gift from his parents of $50,000. (d) although the he declared an income of between $200,000 and $300,000 in the years 2014-15 until 2018-19, it reduced significantly in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to approximately $73,000 and $68,000 respectively. the wife’s income had increased from $60,000 to $100,000 in the early years of the relation to an estimate of approximately $150,000 in 2020-21. (e) he accepted that the wife’s family had contributed to renovations at b street, suburb c. however, he submitted that the husband led the unchallenged evidence of mr s to the effect that this work was defective. (f) it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   it was agreed that the husband had $107,000 in savings at the commencement of the parties’ relationship which he had contributed. (c) it was also agreed that he contributed a gift from his parents of $50,000. (d) although the he declared an income of between $200,000 and $300,000 in the years 2014-15 until 2018-19, it reduced significantly in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to approximately $73,000 and $68,000 respectively. the wife’s income had increased from $60,000 to $100,000 in the early years of the relation to an estimate of approximately $150,000 in 2020-21. (e) he accepted that the wife’s family had contributed to renovations at b street, suburb c. however, he submitted that the husband led the unchallenged evidence of mr s to the effect that this work was defective. (f) it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   it was also agreed that he contributed a gift from his parents of $50,000. (d) although the he declared an income of between $200,000 and $300,000 in the years 2014-15 until 2018-19, it reduced significantly in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to approximately $73,000 and $68,000 respectively. the wife’s income had increased from $60,000 to $100,000 in the early years of the relation to an estimate of approximately $150,000 in 2020-21. (e) he accepted that the wife’s family had contributed to renovations at b street, suburb c. however, he submitted that the husband led the unchallenged evidence of mr s to the effect that this work was defective. (f) it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   although the he declared an income of between $200,000 and $300,000 in the years 2014-15 until 2018-19, it reduced significantly in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to approximately $73,000 and $68,000 respectively. the wife’s income had increased from $60,000 to $100,000 in the early years of the relation to an estimate of approximately $150,000 in 2020-21. (e) he accepted that the wife’s family had contributed to renovations at b street, suburb c. however, he submitted that the husband led the unchallenged evidence of mr s to the effect that this work was defective. (f) it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   he accepted that the wife’s family had contributed to renovations at b street, suburb c. however, he submitted that the husband led the unchallenged evidence of mr s to the effect that this work was defective. (f) it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   it was not contested, that the wife played no role in the business after december 2019. the husband submitted that he reduced debts by $169,850 and this included payments of $10,000 to the husband’s parents as per the orders of 29 september 2021. (g) it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.   it was his post-separation contributions which were responsible for the final valuation report’s conclusion that the f pty ltd has a future maintainable earnings valuation of $352,000.
section 75(2) matters  the parties are in good health, evidence regarding the health was not challenged. (b) the wife’s previous mental health issues are have been treated effectively, (c) the “husband would ... walk away with net debt well in excess of $200,000”, and (d) in circumstances of a net negative property pool, it makes no sense for “the wife to expect to receive a property settlement.”   the wife’s previous mental health issues are have been treated effectively, (c) the “husband would ... walk away with net debt well in excess of $200,000”, and (d) in circumstances of a net negative property pool, it makes no sense for “the wife to expect to receive a property settlement.”   the “husband would ... walk away with net debt well in excess of $200,000”, and (d) in circumstances of a net negative property pool, it makes no sense for “the wife to expect to receive a property settlement.”   in circumstances of a net negative property pool, it makes no sense for “the wife to expect to receive a property settlement.”
65. in biltoft & biltoft [1995] famcafc 45, (1995) flc 92-614, the full court of the family court of australia discussed the general issue of what is encompassed by the term “property” in s79, in the context of whether it should be approached on the basis of gross or net property. their honours said (at p 82,124):
“a general practice has developed over the years that, in relation to applications pursuant to the provisions of s 79, the court ascertains the value of the property of the parties to a marriage by deducting from the value of their assets the value of their total liabilities. in the case of encumbered assets, the value thereof is ascertained by deducting the amount of the secured liability from the gross value of the asset ... where the assets are not encumbered and moneys are owed by the parties or one of them to unsecured creditors, the court ascertains the value of their property by deducting from the value of their assets the value of their total liabilities, including the unsecured liabilities.” ... “in some cases there are sufficient uncertainties as to the alleged liability to lead the court to disregard it entirely or partly (e.g. a loan from a parent of the party not likely to be enforced, af petersens (supra), quirk (1983) unreported). in other cases, the court may take the view that because of the circumstances surrounding the incurring of the liability it ought in justice and equity to be wholly or partly disregarded in determining the appropriate order to make under sec. 79 as between the parties to the marriage. such a result could be reached where a spouse had incurred a liability in deliberate or reckless disregard of the other party's potential entitlement under sec. 79.”  street, suburb n] – financial resource the court is invited to find that the [m street, suburb n] property is a financial resource for the wife, for the reasons set out above during the discussion of credit. further, the wife admitted that the configuration of the [m street, suburb n] property would be suitable for her and x to live in. further, it would be equally practicable, geographically, for the wife to live at the [m street, suburb n] property as her current residential tenancy in [suburb aq].
wife’s reply submissions  a statement of which amounts were agreed between the parties and which were amounts still in dispute. (that statement contained inaccuracies. for example, it asserts that the estimated value of the business at $1,173,330 appeared agreed, which it is not.) (b) the husbands post-separation reduction of debt should not be taken into account. this is because there has also been an increase in debt by mortgage drawdowns as well as the rental proceeds from [d street, suburb e] which ought be added back. (c) the $52,663 lent to the wife by her father cannot be ignored and should be treated in the same way as the husband’s parent’s $400,000 loan. the wife’s submissions also highlight that $80,000 of the husband’s parent’s loan had not been spent on the business. (d) the credit of the husband’s parents was not the major issue. rather, the issue with respect to the loan $400,000 was how much of it went to the business and whether the husband bears responsibility for its repayment. (e) when giving his evidence, the wife’s father was not being coached by the wife’s mother. (f) given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   the husbands post-separation reduction of debt should not be taken into account. this is because there has also been an increase in debt by mortgage drawdowns as well as the rental proceeds from [d street, suburb e] which ought be added back. (c) the $52,663 lent to the wife by her father cannot be ignored and should be treated in the same way as the husband’s parent’s $400,000 loan. the wife’s submissions also highlight that $80,000 of the husband’s parent’s loan had not been spent on the business. (d) the credit of the husband’s parents was not the major issue. rather, the issue with respect to the loan $400,000 was how much of it went to the business and whether the husband bears responsibility for its repayment. (e) when giving his evidence, the wife’s father was not being coached by the wife’s mother. (f) given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   the $52,663 lent to the wife by her father cannot be ignored and should be treated in the same way as the husband’s parent’s $400,000 loan. the wife’s submissions also highlight that $80,000 of the husband’s parent’s loan had not been spent on the business. (d) the credit of the husband’s parents was not the major issue. rather, the issue with respect to the loan $400,000 was how much of it went to the business and whether the husband bears responsibility for its repayment. (e) when giving his evidence, the wife’s father was not being coached by the wife’s mother. (f) given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   the credit of the husband’s parents was not the major issue. rather, the issue with respect to the loan $400,000 was how much of it went to the business and whether the husband bears responsibility for its repayment. (e) when giving his evidence, the wife’s father was not being coached by the wife’s mother. (f) given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   when giving his evidence, the wife’s father was not being coached by the wife’s mother. (f) given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   given the sale of her investment property in suburb ar, it is logical the wife’s contributions included some capital as well as being the primary child are and homemaker. (g) the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.   the husband did not establish that the defects to b street, suburb c would cost $60,000 to remedy.
20. ...the husband requires the court to find firstly a “negative asset pool” and secondly ignore the matters raised in biltoft & biltoft (1995) flc 92-614, (1995) famca 45 at paras 52, “in other cases, the court may take the view that because of the circumstances surrounding the incurring of the liability it ought in justice and equity to be wholly or partly disregarded in determining the appropriate order to make under sec. 79 as between the parties to the marriage. such a result could be reached where a spouse had incurred a liability in deliberate or reckless disregard of the other party's potential entitlement under sec. 79 (kimber and kimber [1980] famca 48, (1981) flc 91-085, kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092, antmann and antmann [1980] famca 64, (1980) flc 90-908, af petersens (supra)). complex issues can arise in regard to liabilities to third parties (see, e.g. pockran and crewes, pockran [1982] famca 65, (1983) flc 91-311). of course, the court cannot ignore the fact that there is or may be a liability, the effect is simply that it does not consider that the other spouse should be called upon to in effect "contribute" to the liability by having that spouse's fair share in the parties' property reduced by virtue of its existence. the effect may be that the party who has incurred the liability will be left to meet it out of whatever funds remain to that party after satisfying the property order made under sec. 79 (af petersens (supra))." 21. further, there is clear and unambiguous authority for a party receiving an asset and the debt associated with it. see for instance antmann m and antmann m (1980), flc 90-908, (1980) famca 64 (at para 30,31). 22. as to the argument about net property, we say this is addressed in our submissions. the husbands argument is premised on the basis the court must or will find that the net assets of the parties are negative and that therefore the parties are in fact only arguing about liability. we have set out in our submissions the reasons why that argument is flawed. see antmann above as to the issue of whom may bear the debt. 23. as to the wife’s debts to her parents, the husband was cross examined on this point as set out in our submissions, he made bold statements regarding same without checking the bank statements. [errors and emphasis in the original. that is, the emphasis is wife’s submissions and not the cases extracted therein.]
adjusted lists of assets and liabilities
husband’s adjusted list
wife’s adjusted list
consideration
79 alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them—altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them—altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:  an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and  either or both of the parties to the marriage, or ...
to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
...   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
“property” means: (a) in relation to the parties to a marriage or either of them—means property to which those parties are, or that party is, as the case may be, entitled, whether in possession or reversion, or
72 right of spouse to maintenance   a party to a marriage is liable to maintain the other party, to the extent that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, if, and only if, that other party is unable to support herself or himself adequately whether: (a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or (c) for any other adequate reason,   by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, (b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or (c) for any other adequate reason,   by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or (c) for any other adequate reason,   for any other adequate reason,
having regard to any relevant matter referred to in subsection 75(2).
75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and  ) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to: a party to the marriage, or (ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.
...
the operation of s 79 [35] it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that “[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order”. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two subsections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. [36] the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds. and while the power given by s 79 is not “to be exercised in accordance with fixed rules”, nevertheless, three fundamental propositions must not be obscured. [37] first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. so much follows from the text of s 79(1)(a) itself, which refers to “altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property”. [emphasis in original] the question posed by s 79(2) is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. [38] second, although s 79 confers a broad power on a court exercising jurisdiction under the act to make a property settlement order, it is not a power that is to be exercised according to an unguided judicial discretion. in wirth v wirth per dixon cj observed that a power to make such order with respect to property and costs “as [the judge] thinks fit”, in any question between husband and wife as to the title to or possession of property, is a power which “rests upon the law and not upon judicial discretion”. and as four members of this court observed about proceedings for maintenance and property settlement orders in r v watson, ex parte armstrong:
the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as “palm tree justice”. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down.  ] because the power to make a property settlement order is not to be exercised in an unprincipled fashion, whether it is “just and equitable” to make the order is not to be answered by assuming that the parties’ rights to or interests in marital property are or should be different from those that then exist. all the more is that so when it is recognised that s 79 of the act must be applied keeping in mind that “[c]ommunity of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common law”. questions between husband and wife about the ownership of property that may be then, or may have been in the past, enjoyed in common are to be “decided according to the same scheme of legal titles and equitable principles as govern the rights of any two persons who are not spouses”. the question presented by s 79 is whether those rights and interests should be altered. [40] third, whether making a property settlement order is “just and equitable” is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised “in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down”. to conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act. [41] adherence to these fundamental propositions in exercising the power in s 79 gives due recognition to “the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage” identified in s 43(1)(a) as a principle to be applied by courts in exercising jurisdiction under the act. if the parties have made a financial agreement about the property of one or both of the parties that is binding under pt viiia of the act, then, subject to that part, a court cannot make a property settlement order under s 79. but if the parties to a marriage have expressly considered, but not put in writing in a way that complies with pt viiia, how their property interests should be arranged between them during the continuance of their marriage, the application of these principles accommodates that fact. and if the parties to a marriage have not expressly considered whether or to what extent there is or should be some different arrangement of their property interests in their individual or commonly held assets while the marriage continues, the application of these principles again accommodates that fact. these principles do so by recognising the force of the stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of that husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage. the fundamental propositions that have been identified require that a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interests during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4). [43] by contrast, the bare fact of separation, when involuntary, does not show that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. it does not permit a court to disregard the rights and interests of the parties in their respective property and to make whatever order may seem to it to be fair and just. [44] when, as in this case, the separation of the parties is not voluntary, the bare fact of separation does not demonstrate that the husband and wife have any reason to alter the property interests that lie behind whatever common use they may have made of assets when they were able to and did live together. common use of some assets may very well continue, as it did here when the husband made provision for the wife’s care and accommodation. past arrangements that the parties have made about their property interests on the assumption, expressed or implicit, that those arrangements were sufficient and appropriate during the continuance of their marriage are not necessarily falsified. if both parties are competent, it can still be assumed that any necessary or desirable adjustment can be made to their property interests consensually. and if one of the parties has become incompetent it is not to be assumed that the other party lacks the will and ability to make those necessary or desirable adjustments. [45] contrary to the submissions of the husband in this court, there may be circumstances other than a voluntary separation of the parties marking the breakdown of their marital relationship in which a court may be satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. for example, demonstration of one party’s unmet needs that cannot be answered by a maintenance order may well warrant the conclusion that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. it may be that there are circumstances other than need. [46] as has already been emphasised, nothing in these reasons should be understood as attempting to chart the metes and bounds of what is “just and equitable”. nor is anything that is said in these reasons intended to deny the importance of considering any countervailing factors which may bear upon what, in all the circumstances of the particular case, is just and equitable. in particular, as the full court pointed out in its first judgment in this matter, the magistrate erred in not taking account of the consequences that would follow for the husband if a property settlement order were to be made in the terms which were sought on behalf of the wife. the husband would be required to sell the matrimonial home, in which he was still living, despite the needs of his wife then being met by the provision of full-time care, a further provision of money against future contingencies and the possibility, if needed, of making a maintenance order. [references omitted.]   to identify and value the net property of the parties (usually as at the date of trial), (b) to consider the contributions of the parties within paragraphs (a)-(c) of s 79(4), (c) to consider the s 75(2) factors, and (d) to consider whether the order proposed is just and equitable.   to consider the contributions of the parties within paragraphs (a)-(c) of s 79(4), (c) to consider the s 75(2) factors, and (d) to consider whether the order proposed is just and equitable.   to consider the s 75(2) factors, and (d) to consider whether the order proposed is just and equitable.   to consider whether the order proposed is just and equitable.
property pool  b street, suburb c, which had an unchallenged expert valuation of $1,400,000, (b) d street, suburb e, which had an unchallenged expert valuation of $1,100,000, and (c) his ownership of the whole of the shareholding in f pty ltd which owns and operates the business, company g which, as at the time of trial, was valued by mr k at $352,000.   d street, suburb e, which had an unchallenged expert valuation of $1,100,000, and (c) his ownership of the whole of the shareholding in f pty ltd which owns and operates the business, company g which, as at the time of trial, was valued by mr k at $352,000.   his ownership of the whole of the shareholding in f pty ltd which owns and operates the business, company g which, as at the time of trial, was valued by mr k at $352,000.   whether mr k value of the business ought be accepted. (b) the true extent of the husband’s liabilities. (c) without limiting (b) the extent to which it is appropriate to take borrowings of the husband into account in determining his asset position for the purpose, in turn of determining the parties’ asset pool.   the true extent of the husband’s liabilities. (c) without limiting (b) the extent to which it is appropriate to take borrowings of the husband into account in determining his asset position for the purpose, in turn of determining the parties’ asset pool.   without limiting (b) the extent to which it is appropriate to take borrowings of the husband into account in determining his asset position for the purpose, in turn of determining the parties’ asset pool.
the value of company g
other high order factual findings
associate: dated: 13 may 2022
dated: 13 may 2022
schedule 1 – husband’s table of assets and liabilities  gative amounts are represented in brackets)
carver and munshi – table of assets, liabilities, superannuation
assets & liabilities – of husband
value
evidentiary basis of value
real estate
b street, suburb c
$1,400,000
single expert valuation report, exhibit a7, not challenged.
westpac equity access loan a/c ...57  59,625.82)
the parties’ evidence agrees on this value. see tables at para 36 of husband’s reply affidavit (exh. a3), and para 52 of wife’s trial affidavit (exh. r4) (‘tables’)
westpac rocket repay loan ...95  0,807.23)
the parties’ evidence agrees on this value as per their tables.
d street, suburb e
$1,100,000
westpac bank bill business loan ..07  ,061,487.70)
the parties’ evidence agrees on this value as per their tables
net:
$658,079.25
the business
business company g
$352,000
concluded opinion of single expert mr k. report dated 8 november 2021
liabilities incurred to establish business:
mr q & ms p advanced 4.12.19  00,000)
tripartite consent order of 29 september 2021.
interest accrued on ms p/mr q loan  0,310.71)
evidence of ms p(exh. a6) unchallenged as to interest accrued (para 33)
less repayments made since 29.9.2021 order
$10,000
paragraph 12 of husband’s supplementary affidavit sworn & filed 15 october 2021, and second $5k payment on 3 november 2021 evidenced by anz lodgement receipt
and second $5k payment on 3 november 2021 evidenced by anz lodgement receipt
anz business loan ......76 advanced 23.12.19  97,932.73)
westpac fixed rate personal loan ...02  4,486.65)
husband’s evidence (paragraph 36 of exh a3) not challenged during xxn. wife admitted this balance is owing when shown statement during xxn.
anz f pty ltd overdraft ......82  3,730.50)
the parties’ evidence agrees on this value as per the husband’s table, and the wife’s outline of case filed 28 september 2021 (‘wife’s outline’)(p12 of 43, line item 19).  14,460.59)
miscellaneous
westpac offset account ...73
$32,738.72
motor vehicle 1
e $3,000
as above
f pty ltd trading a/c westpac ...78
$736.45
westpac office account ...23
$549.20
westpac everyday account ...81
$31.67
mastercard  ,609.57)
husband’s evidence (paragraph 36 of exh a3) not challenged during xxn.
altitude qantas credit card ......88
nil
not disputed.
liability for unpaid legal costs
disregarded
s117(1) family law act 1975, chorn & hopkins [2004] fam ca 633, paragraph 58.
subtotal:
$31,446.67
husband’s net current assets  24,934.67)
assets & liabilities – of wife
motor vehicle 2
$8,000
anz access advantage account ...48
$8,086
wife’s outline, p10 line item 4.
acc no. ...14
minimal
unpaid legal costs
s117(1) family law act 1975, chorn & hopkins [2004] fam ca 633 paragraph 58.
$16,086
addbacks
50% court expert valuation costs to july 2021
$2,208.27
real estate valuations cost $1,800, business valuations at 30.6.2021 cost $2,616.55
wife’s net current assets
$18,294.27
total net current assets  06,640.40)
superannuation
husband
super fund as
$34,908.80
total:
wife
super fund o
$81,840
super fund at
$19,000
employer ap superannuation
$4,562
superannuation the wife applied to legal costs
$20,000
$125,402
total superannuation:
$160,310
schedule 2 – wife’s table of assets and liabilities
item
asset
ownership
value (approximate)  proximate)
1.
b street, suburb c victoria (“former matrimonial home”)
husband
e$1,400,000
2.
d street, suburb e, victoria– company f*
e$1,100,000
3.
f pty ltd *
e$ at least 1,173,330
4.
anz account ending #...48
wife
5.
westpac account ending #...14
$minimal
6.
me account
nil
7.
westpac off-set account #...73
$32,738
8.
westpac everyday account #...81
9.
westpac bank day to day account #...78
10.
westpac bank “office miscellaneous costs”
11.
e$3,000
12.
motor vehicle 2 wife
e$8,000
13.
frequent flyer points
$n/k
total`
e$3,726,471
add backs
14.
rental proceeds received by husband from d street, suburb e property after payment of mortgage, rates and utilities
e$7,668
15.
increase on bank bill business loan ending #...07 (d street, suburb e mortgage) by husband on 29 april 2021 (original amount owing at separation e$1,041,487.70)
e$20,000
16.
additional drawdown by husband on westpac equity access loan #...57 since separation (original loan amount owing at separation e$729,000)
e$30,000
sub
e$57,668
total
e$3,784,139.32
liabilities
15 (sic)
westpac rocket repay home loan #...95 (former matrimonial home)
-$20,807.23
westpac bank bill business loan (d street, suburb e property)
-$1,061,487.70
17.
westpac equity access loan #...57 (former matrimonial home)
-$759,625.82
18.
anz business loan #...76
f pty ltd
-$797,932.73
19.
anz overdraft
-$13,730.50
20.
loan owing to wife’s parents
joint
e$31,000
21.
e$21,000
e -$2,705,583.98
net total
e $1,078,555.34
22.
wife’s superannuation
e$94,562
23.
husband’s superannuation
e$34,908.80
[1] mr carver relies on the affidavit of mr s of 1 september 2021 to support this contention. mr s is a building surveyor who gave affidavit evidence, amongst other things, regarding defects in work on b street, suburb c which mr carver says was performed by ms munshi’s family. [2] in support of her contention that i should not accept the conclusion expressed in mr k’s final valuation report, the wife relied on cited makita (australia) pty ltd v sprowles [2001] nswca 305; (2001) 52 nswlr 705, which she submitted was approved by the high court in dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21; (2011) 243 clr 588 at p 604.[3] stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.