last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pickett & maxwell [2022] fedcfamc2f 611
orders
until further order, the court orders that:  by using a communication app agreed by them and in default of agreement the our family wizard app, and the cost of such app is to be shared equally by the parties, or (b) by text message.   by text message.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
interim hearing
sergeant h
mr g
issues in dispute
the parties’ cases
... the icl has observed to the parents’ practitioners that the state of the parents’ evidence is essentially one of allegation and denial. (the father’s plea of guilty to the common assault of his current partner should, however, be attributed weight.) this creates difficulties for the court dealing with the untested evidence at the interim hearing. ... the information reported in the section 67zw [sic] response from tasmania police and child safety services accords significant weight. it supports the proposition that, on balance, the children may be at risk of psychological and/or physical harm in the father’s home. it reports the children feeling safe and supported in the mother’s home. in the icl’s assessment, and after now having spoken twice to the children, the court could be more comforted with the conclusion that the children’s best interests will be served on an interim basis if they remain in the mother’s care.
relevant principles – interim parenting
evaluation   some concerns have been reported to authorities about the well-being of the children in the father’s care, particularly between 2020 and late 2022, but css have not intervened and instead simply offered advice. as mr g stated, the child safety services had not made an assessment of unacceptable risk, (b) significant concerns had been raised with css and tasmania police in the past about the risk to the children from residing with the mother due to family violence in her home with multiple partners other than the father. i understand that this somehow led to the children living with the father, (c) the father was subject to a family violence order for the protection of ms j for 12 months from 7 february 2021 and they separated for a time. it appears that the conviction for common assault on 7 february 2021 resulted from the same incident which led to the family violence order, (d) the father is now charged with aggravated common assault of ms j and subject to another police family violence order,[6] arising from the same incident. i was told the father is pleading not guilty to the charge and that he and ms j continue a relationship, but the latter fact is addressed in the father’s affidavit filed 4 may 2022,[7] (e) the mother and her current partner were also subject to a police report on 19 march 2022, which police characterised as a family argument, and (f) in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   significant concerns had been raised with css and tasmania police in the past about the risk to the children from residing with the mother due to family violence in her home with multiple partners other than the father. i understand that this somehow led to the children living with the father, (c) the father was subject to a family violence order for the protection of ms j for 12 months from 7 february 2021 and they separated for a time. it appears that the conviction for common assault on 7 february 2021 resulted from the same incident which led to the family violence order, (d) the father is now charged with aggravated common assault of ms j and subject to another police family violence order,[6] arising from the same incident. i was told the father is pleading not guilty to the charge and that he and ms j continue a relationship, but the latter fact is addressed in the father’s affidavit filed 4 may 2022,[7] (e) the mother and her current partner were also subject to a police report on 19 march 2022, which police characterised as a family argument, and (f) in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   the father was subject to a family violence order for the protection of ms j for 12 months from 7 february 2021 and they separated for a time. it appears that the conviction for common assault on 7 february 2021 resulted from the same incident which led to the family violence order, (d) the father is now charged with aggravated common assault of ms j and subject to another police family violence order,[6] arising from the same incident. i was told the father is pleading not guilty to the charge and that he and ms j continue a relationship, but the latter fact is addressed in the father’s affidavit filed 4 may 2022,[7] (e) the mother and her current partner were also subject to a police report on 19 march 2022, which police characterised as a family argument, and (f) in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   the father is now charged with aggravated common assault of ms j and subject to another police family violence order,[6] arising from the same incident. i was told the father is pleading not guilty to the charge and that he and ms j continue a relationship, but the latter fact is addressed in the father’s affidavit filed 4 may 2022,[7] (e) the mother and her current partner were also subject to a police report on 19 march 2022, which police characterised as a family argument, and (f) in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   the mother and her current partner were also subject to a police report on 19 march 2022, which police characterised as a family argument, and (f) in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   in january 2022, the children made various historical allegations against the father about physical and verbal abuse, alcohol and drug abuse and continuing family violence towards ms j. the police have investigated these and the father has not been charged with a criminal offence relating to conduct towards the children.   the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010 live with the mother ms maxwell (“the mother”), (2) the children spend time with the father mr pickett (“the father”) via face-time, video-call or telephone for up to one hour on tuesday and saturday evenings between 5:00pm and 6:00pm, (3) if practicable, the father have in person time with the children on at least two occasions on weekends to be agreed and facilitated at location b, (4) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and or the personal protection of the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from denigrating or speaking negatively about the father mr pickett within the children’s hearing, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. (5) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from exposing the children to family violence, and by mandatory injunction is required to remove the children as soon as possible from any circumstance in which family violence arises in their presence. (6) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:   the children spend time with the father mr pickett (“the father”) via face-time, video-call or telephone for up to one hour on tuesday and saturday evenings between 5:00pm and 6:00pm, (3) if practicable, the father have in person time with the children on at least two occasions on weekends to be agreed and facilitated at location b, (4) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and or the personal protection of the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from denigrating or speaking negatively about the father mr pickett within the children’s hearing, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. (5) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from exposing the children to family violence, and by mandatory injunction is required to remove the children as soon as possible from any circumstance in which family violence arises in their presence. (6) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:   if practicable, the father have in person time with the children on at least two occasions on weekends to be agreed and facilitated at location b, (4) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and or the personal protection of the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from denigrating or speaking negatively about the father mr pickett within the children’s hearing, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. (5) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from exposing the children to family violence, and by mandatory injunction is required to remove the children as soon as possible from any circumstance in which family violence arises in their presence. (6) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:   pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and or the personal protection of the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from denigrating or speaking negatively about the father mr pickett within the children’s hearing, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. (5) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from exposing the children to family violence, and by mandatory injunction is required to remove the children as soon as possible from any circumstance in which family violence arises in their presence. (6) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:   pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the mother ms maxwell is restrained by injunction from exposing the children to family violence, and by mandatory injunction is required to remove the children as soon as possible from any circumstance in which family violence arises in their presence. (6) pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:   pursuant to section 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) and for the personal protection of the x born in 2009 and y born in 2010, the parents ms maxwell and mr pickett are restrained by injunction from discussing parenting issues and these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing the children to remain in the presence of any third party who is doing so. and the court notes that:
and the court notes that:   each parent will keep the other parent informed at all times of their residential address, and mobile telephone numbers, and further will inform the other parent of a change to their contact details within 48 hours of the change. (8) the mother is hereby restrained from removing the primary residence of the children x born in 2009 and y born in 2010 from her current address at c street, town d in tasmania. (9) the mother and father are to communicate with each other (in respect of the children) either:
dated: 13 may 2022
[1] case outline of the independent children’s lawyer filed 29 april 2022 at part d.[2] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346 at [68]; deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61]; marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101 at [121].[3] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61]; marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101 at [121].[4] beaton & beaton [2020] famca 297.[5] family report at [108].[6] exhibit a.[7] at para [6].[8] father’s written submissions filed 10 may 2022 at [7] and [8].[9] see [40] of these reasons