last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lucian & naraz [2022] fedcfamc2f 628
orders
the court orders that:  each alternate weekend from 5.00pm friday to 6.00pm saturday, with the first such weekend to be the weekend immediately following the date of these orders, and (b) each year when x does not wake up in the father’s care on x’s birthday –   each year when x does not wake up in the father’s care on x’s birthday –   from 4.00pm until 7.00pm on a school day, and (ii) from 10.00am until 2.00pm on a non-school day.   each year on father’s day from 9.00am to 5.00pm, (d) each year when x does not wake up in the father’s care on christmas day, from 11.00am 25 december until 6.00pm 26 december.   each year when x does not wake up in the father’s care on christmas day, from 11.00am 25 december until 6.00pm 26 december.
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction
the adjournment application
the evidence  initiating application filed 31 october 2019, (b) affidavit of ms lucian filed 29 march 2022[4], (c) affidavit of mr d filed 30 march 2022[5], (d) updating affidavit of ms lucian filed 19 april 2022[6], (e) costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, and (f) outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   affidavit of ms lucian filed 29 march 2022[4], (c) affidavit of mr d filed 30 march 2022[5], (d) updating affidavit of ms lucian filed 19 april 2022[6], (e) costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, and (f) outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   affidavit of mr d filed 30 march 2022[5], (d) updating affidavit of ms lucian filed 19 april 2022[6], (e) costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, and (f) outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   updating affidavit of ms lucian filed 19 april 2022[6], (e) costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, and (f) outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m1”, and (f) outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   outline of case document filed 27 april 2022 – marked exhibit “m2”.   amended response to initiating application filed 24 april 2022, (b) affidavit of mr naraz filed 25 april 2022[7], (c) costs notice dated 22 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”, (d) outline of case document filed 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f2”, (e) email setting out the father’s new proposal – marked exhibit “f12”, (f) various other exhibits.[8]   affidavit of mr naraz filed 25 april 2022[7], (c) costs notice dated 22 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”, (d) outline of case document filed 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f2”, (e) email setting out the father’s new proposal – marked exhibit “f12”, (f) various other exhibits.[8]   costs notice dated 22 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f1”, (d) outline of case document filed 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f2”, (e) email setting out the father’s new proposal – marked exhibit “f12”, (f) various other exhibits.[8]   outline of case document filed 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “f2”, (e) email setting out the father’s new proposal – marked exhibit “f12”, (f) various other exhibits.[8]   email setting out the father’s new proposal – marked exhibit “f12”, (f) various other exhibits.[8]   various other exhibits.[8]   costs notice dated 26 april 2022 – marked exhibit “icl1”, (b) outline of case document filed 23 april 2022 – marked exhibit “icl2”. (c) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 5 february 2020 by family consultant mr f (‘the cic’) – marked exhibit “icl3”, and (d) medical certificate dated 15 june 2021 from dr g about the father – marked exhibit “icl4”.   outline of case document filed 23 april 2022 – marked exhibit “icl2”. (c) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 5 february 2020 by family consultant mr f (‘the cic’) – marked exhibit “icl3”, and (d) medical certificate dated 15 june 2021 from dr g about the father – marked exhibit “icl4”.   child inclusive conference memorandum dated 5 february 2020 by family consultant mr f (‘the cic’) – marked exhibit “icl3”, and (d) medical certificate dated 15 june 2021 from dr g about the father – marked exhibit “icl4”.   medical certificate dated 15 june 2021 from dr g about the father – marked exhibit “icl4”.
parties’ proposals  x live with her, (b) she have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x spend time with the father each alternate friday night and on christmas night each year and at other times as agreed, (d) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, and (e) the father to have access to certain information about x   she have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x spend time with the father each alternate friday night and on christmas night each year and at other times as agreed, (d) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, and (e) the father to have access to certain information about x   x spend time with the father each alternate friday night and on christmas night each year and at other times as agreed, (d) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, and (e) the father to have access to certain information about x   changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, and (e) the father to have access to certain information about x   the father to have access to certain information about x   firstly, that changeovers occur by way of her dropping and collecting x from the father’s home unless this became impractical, (b) secondly, that on x’s birthday he spend time with the father on a school day from 4.00pm to 6.00pm and on a non-school day from 10.00am to 1.00pm, (c) thirdly, that x spend time with the father on father’s day from 9.00am to 5.00pm, and (d) finally, the omission of the ability for the parties to agree to additional time for x to spend with the father other than as specified within the orders   secondly, that on x’s birthday he spend time with the father on a school day from 4.00pm to 6.00pm and on a non-school day from 10.00am to 1.00pm, (c) thirdly, that x spend time with the father on father’s day from 9.00am to 5.00pm, and (d) finally, the omission of the ability for the parties to agree to additional time for x to spend with the father other than as specified within the orders   thirdly, that x spend time with the father on father’s day from 9.00am to 5.00pm, and (d) finally, the omission of the ability for the parties to agree to additional time for x to spend with the father other than as specified within the orders   finally, the omission of the ability for the parties to agree to additional time for x to spend with the father other than as specified within the orders   x live with the mother, (b) the mother have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x spend time with the father in the regime as sought by the mother save that if x’s birthday falls on a weekend the time should conclude at 2.00pm not 1.00pm, (d) changeovers to occur at the father’s home with the mother delivering and returning x provided that if the father moves to a residence more than a 20 kilometre radius away from the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, then changeovers revert to occurring at that restaurant, (e) provision for the father to have access to certain information about x as sought by the mother.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x, (c) x spend time with the father in the regime as sought by the mother save that if x’s birthday falls on a weekend the time should conclude at 2.00pm not 1.00pm, (d) changeovers to occur at the father’s home with the mother delivering and returning x provided that if the father moves to a residence more than a 20 kilometre radius away from the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, then changeovers revert to occurring at that restaurant, (e) provision for the father to have access to certain information about x as sought by the mother.   x spend time with the father in the regime as sought by the mother save that if x’s birthday falls on a weekend the time should conclude at 2.00pm not 1.00pm, (d) changeovers to occur at the father’s home with the mother delivering and returning x provided that if the father moves to a residence more than a 20 kilometre radius away from the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, then changeovers revert to occurring at that restaurant, (e) provision for the father to have access to certain information about x as sought by the mother.   changeovers to occur at the father’s home with the mother delivering and returning x provided that if the father moves to a residence more than a 20 kilometre radius away from the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, then changeovers revert to occurring at that restaurant, (e) provision for the father to have access to certain information about x as sought by the mother.   provision for the father to have access to certain information about x as sought by the mother.   the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live equally between the two parties on a week-about basis, (c) x spend half the school holidays with each party and at specified times on various special occasions, (d) x communicate with each of the parties every week, (e) changeovers at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, (f) provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   x live equally between the two parties on a week-about basis, (c) x spend half the school holidays with each party and at specified times on various special occasions, (d) x communicate with each of the parties every week, (e) changeovers at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, (f) provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   x spend half the school holidays with each party and at specified times on various special occasions, (d) x communicate with each of the parties every week, (e) changeovers at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, (f) provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   x communicate with each of the parties every week, (e) changeovers at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, (f) provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   changeovers at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c, (f) provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   provision for the parties to keep each other informed about various issues regarding x’s welfare, (g) an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   an injunction issue prohibiting the parties from denigrating each other to x, discussing the proceedings with x, using illegal drugs or consuming alcohol to excess when x is in their care and ensuring x is not exposed to family violence whilst in their care, (h) the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   the provision of an australian passport for x which would then support the father’s desire to take x overseas to england in 2022 (which the father later changed to 2023) to attend his paternal aunt’s wedding.   until the mother completes an anger management course and a domestic violence course or sessions of relationship counselling and produces a mental health plan regarding the management of her bipolar adjustment disorder and her mental health, x should spend time with the mother from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday on each alternate week, (b) upon completing the courses and providing the mental health plan referred to above, x should spend equal time with the parties on a week-about arrangement in accordance with x’s wishes, (c) the mother be restrained from permitting x to have contact with the maternal grandmother on an unsupervised basis, (d) all other orders as sought within his amended response to initiating application that are not otherwise in conflict with the above, with a particular reference to ensuring x is not exposed to family violence.   upon completing the courses and providing the mental health plan referred to above, x should spend equal time with the parties on a week-about arrangement in accordance with x’s wishes, (c) the mother be restrained from permitting x to have contact with the maternal grandmother on an unsupervised basis, (d) all other orders as sought within his amended response to initiating application that are not otherwise in conflict with the above, with a particular reference to ensuring x is not exposed to family violence.   the mother be restrained from permitting x to have contact with the maternal grandmother on an unsupervised basis, (d) all other orders as sought within his amended response to initiating application that are not otherwise in conflict with the above, with a particular reference to ensuring x is not exposed to family violence.   all other orders as sought within his amended response to initiating application that are not otherwise in conflict with the above, with a particular reference to ensuring x is not exposed to family violence.
chronology
this is to certify that mr naraz is receiving medical treatment and today i conducted a min mental state examination tuesday 15 june 2021. i advise he demonstrated no evidence of cognitive impairment. he obtained a perfect score of 30/30. this certificate was completed on 15/6/2021.   specific learning disorder – severe impairment in reading, writing, expression and maths, (b) assessed as functioning within the ‘low range’ of average intelligence.[31]   assessed as functioning within the ‘low range’ of average intelligence.[31]   x live with the mother, (b) x spend five nights a fortnight with the father, (c) x spend ‘week about’ time with both parties during school holidays, and (d) various other orders including the appointment of an icl and the preparation of a cic.   x spend five nights a fortnight with the father, (c) x spend ‘week about’ time with both parties during school holidays, and (d) various other orders including the appointment of an icl and the preparation of a cic.   x spend ‘week about’ time with both parties during school holidays, and (d) various other orders including the appointment of an icl and the preparation of a cic.   various other orders including the appointment of an icl and the preparation of a cic.   autism spectrum disorder (asd) : level 2 social communication and repetitive restrictive interests, (b) adhd, (c) anxiety disorder (generalised anxiety), (d) insomnia (sleep issues resolving with melatonin), (e) psychosocial stressors with family court proceedings and custody issues, and (f) academic difficulties.   adhd, (c) anxiety disorder (generalised anxiety), (d) insomnia (sleep issues resolving with melatonin), (e) psychosocial stressors with family court proceedings and custody issues, and (f) academic difficulties.   anxiety disorder (generalised anxiety), (d) insomnia (sleep issues resolving with melatonin), (e) psychosocial stressors with family court proceedings and custody issues, and (f) academic difficulties.   insomnia (sleep issues resolving with melatonin), (e) psychosocial stressors with family court proceedings and custody issues, and (f) academic difficulties.   psychosocial stressors with family court proceedings and custody issues, and (f) academic difficulties.   academic difficulties.   ritalin (long acting dose) with an increased dosage, (b) intuniv, and (c) circadin (to be taken at night).   intuniv, and (c) circadin (to be taken at night).   circadin (to be taken at night).   speech therapy at ag centre, (b) psychological interventions with ms ah, (c) occupational therapy with ms aj at ak centre, (d) placement in a special support class at s ps (yr 3).[42]   psychological interventions with ms ah, (c) occupational therapy with ms aj at ak centre, (d) placement in a special support class at s ps (yr 3).[42]   occupational therapy with ms aj at ak centre, (d) placement in a special support class at s ps (yr 3).[42]   placement in a special support class at s ps (yr 3).[42]
... just able to write his name and recognising only three letter words. he is not consistently able to recognise all the alphabets and letters signifying he may have a specific learning impairment.
the father is in denial and has taken a long time accepting x’s diagnosis. also with custody matters there are further issues and stressors in the family. i have had (sic) separate appointment with his father for counselling around regular medications and side effects profile. he was in agreement of the same.   all existing parenting orders to be discharged. (b) x to live with the mother. (c) the mother to have sole parental responsibility. (d) x to spend time with the father as follows: (i) from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday each alternate weekend for 12 months, and (ii) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday. (e) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c noting that if the father does not arrive within 30 minutes of the scheduled start time, then x will not see his father that weekend. (‘the may 2021 orders’).   x to live with the mother. (c) the mother to have sole parental responsibility. (d) x to spend time with the father as follows: (i) from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday each alternate weekend for 12 months, and (ii) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday. (e) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c noting that if the father does not arrive within 30 minutes of the scheduled start time, then x will not see his father that weekend. (‘the may 2021 orders’).   the mother to have sole parental responsibility. (d) x to spend time with the father as follows: (i) from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday each alternate weekend for 12 months, and (ii) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday. (e) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c noting that if the father does not arrive within 30 minutes of the scheduled start time, then x will not see his father that weekend. (‘the may 2021 orders’).   x to spend time with the father as follows: (i) from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday each alternate weekend for 12 months, and (ii) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday. (e) changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c noting that if the father does not arrive within 30 minutes of the scheduled start time, then x will not see his father that weekend. (‘the may 2021 orders’).   from 10.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday each alternate weekend for 12 months, and (ii) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday.  ) from 23 may 2022, from end of school friday (or 5.00pm if a non-school day) until 5.00pm sunday.   changeovers to occur at the mcdonalds restaurant at suburb c noting that if the father does not arrive within 30 minutes of the scheduled start time, then x will not see his father that weekend. (‘the may 2021 orders’).  he may 2021 orders’).
she said that as a result, the father has dramatically reduced his use of such language but that at times when the father becomes angry or upset (about things that do not necessarily involve the mother) he will impulsively resort to such language.[45] another way he gets around swearing is to send text messages using the word “c***” instead of a swear word.
“i can say the sky is blue and he will say it is green and go into detail about why”
....your son is actually dying and distraught at not spending more time with his daddy but you won’t even do right by him this once... ...ps you can only lie so long till the truth trips you...and the boy is smart he knows the score you continue to keep him away from me based on lies as a ongoing form of abuse and he will hate you ... and even more when his old enough to understand what you done and how...and believe me that time will come... i’ll keep those texts and show him when his old enough to understand and decide for himself how he feels about your actions.   she can then guarantee that the changeover will happen on time, and (b) as x leaves her car and walks up to the father who is inside his home, she never has to engage with the father and knows that the medication is in her son’s hand to give directly to the father.   as x leaves her car and walks up to the father who is inside his home, she never has to engage with the father and knows that the medication is in her son’s hand to give directly to the father.   a medical condition, (b) adhd, and (c) anxiety.   adhd, and (c) anxiety.   anxiety.
“fearful that the mother would end up with x and there is violence...100% may god strike me down...1000,100000% believe that x is being exposed to family violence.”   zactin – ½ tab 7.30pm (anti-anxiety mood stabiliser), (b) circadin – 7.30pm (melatonin for sleep difficulties), (c) ritalin – 6.30am (monday to friday).   circadin – 7.30pm (melatonin for sleep difficulties), (c) ritalin – 6.30am (monday to friday).   ritalin – 6.30am (monday to friday).
it has a lot of different bad effects on x including giving him headaches, making him irritable, sometimes making him nauseous and at times results in even more severe anxiety than before he was prescribed the medication.[60]   it gave x a chance to fall back into his usual routine (including going to bed at an earlier time than what can happen when he stays up with the father) so that when he attends school on the monday he is alert and ready to learn, (b) as recently as march 2022, the school had expressed concerns to her that they could tell when x had spent the weekend with the father because of his behaviours on the monday,[63] (c) when x missed his medication it was very obvious from his behaviour on his return to her home, with for example, x being very aggressive, especially towards t and included behaviours such as yelling, pushing and hitting his younger brother leading to the mother engaging in strategies including restraining x or isolating him,[64] (d) following on from that issue, once his medication regime resumed, it only took another couple of days and nights for his adverse behaviours to abate meaning that if x came home saturday, she had saturday and sunday nights to get x back to a state where he could effectively attend school rather than being kept at home on the monday.[65]   as recently as march 2022, the school had expressed concerns to her that they could tell when x had spent the weekend with the father because of his behaviours on the monday,[63] (c) when x missed his medication it was very obvious from his behaviour on his return to her home, with for example, x being very aggressive, especially towards t and included behaviours such as yelling, pushing and hitting his younger brother leading to the mother engaging in strategies including restraining x or isolating him,[64] (d) following on from that issue, once his medication regime resumed, it only took another couple of days and nights for his adverse behaviours to abate meaning that if x came home saturday, she had saturday and sunday nights to get x back to a state where he could effectively attend school rather than being kept at home on the monday.[65]   when x missed his medication it was very obvious from his behaviour on his return to her home, with for example, x being very aggressive, especially towards t and included behaviours such as yelling, pushing and hitting his younger brother leading to the mother engaging in strategies including restraining x or isolating him,[64] (d) following on from that issue, once his medication regime resumed, it only took another couple of days and nights for his adverse behaviours to abate meaning that if x came home saturday, she had saturday and sunday nights to get x back to a state where he could effectively attend school rather than being kept at home on the monday.[65]   following on from that issue, once his medication regime resumed, it only took another couple of days and nights for his adverse behaviours to abate meaning that if x came home saturday, she had saturday and sunday nights to get x back to a state where he could effectively attend school rather than being kept at home on the monday.[65]
the family report
42. ...at this assessment, the father appeared nervous, and his narrative was disorganised and often contradictory. he would be adamant about his account of events, but often when challenged he would suddenly recall a different chain of events, and then would proceed to deliver these new acts in minute detail. he became quickly agitated if he was interrupted or cut short. he clutched hold of his car keys throughout the interview.
the applicable law
... in summary, in dealing with any parenting application by a person interested in the care, welfare or development of a child, a court will determine that application applying the relevant provisions of part vii to determine whether making (or not making) a parenting order would be in the child's best interests.   emphasis)
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary. relevantly for the issues raised in this appeal, he noted that rather than referring to “the briginshaw test” it was now more appropriate to refer to s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (“the evidence act”). section 140 provides as follows: section 140   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: (a) the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: (a) the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the gravity of the matters alleged.   the nature and degree of the risk, and (b) whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.   whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.
evaluation of the evidence - section 60cc
section 60cc(2)
section 60cc(3)(a)
section 60cc(3)(b)
section 60cc(3)(c)
section 60cc(3)(d)  x is a vulnerable child with complex medical, behavioural and learning needs that require consistency, (b) the mother is x’s primary attachment figure, (c) x has a close and loving relationship with both parties, and (d) x would be crushed if he did not live with the mother.   the mother is x’s primary attachment figure, (c) x has a close and loving relationship with both parties, and (d) x would be crushed if he did not live with the mother.   x has a close and loving relationship with both parties, and (d) x would be crushed if he did not live with the mother.   x would be crushed if he did not live with the mother.
section 60cc(3)(e)
section 60cc(3)(f)  in october 2020, the child expert recorded (and i accept) the father’s unwillingness to fully accept x’s diagnosis of asd and his relaxed attitude towards giving x his prescribed medication.[92] (b) in february 2021, dr z reported that the father was in denial and has taken a long time accepting x’s diagnosis (which included a diagnosis of general anxiety disorder). dr z acknowledged that she had spoken separately to the father for counselling around regular medications and side effects profile. he was in agreement with same. (c) despite dr z’s report, the father’s evidence and/or cross-examination did not wholeheartedly embrace x’s diagnosis of anxiety but appeared to minimise this diagnosis by accepting that his son may have some social/anxiety issues. he appeared to reject the mother’s oral evidence about how their son does not like crowded areas (such as school grounds) or queues (such as waiting in lines to go into classrooms). the father said that he does not see these behaviours during the time he has with x. his attitude is of concern because x has been prescribed zactin to treat his anxiety diagnosis. (d) the icl made a submission that during the course of the trial the father had referred to dr z as ‘the mother’s paediatrician’ instead of referring to her as ‘x’s paediatrician’. (e) despite the contents of the family report, the father tells the court that he still has somewhat limited information about asd because his lived experience is with adhd.   in february 2021, dr z reported that the father was in denial and has taken a long time accepting x’s diagnosis (which included a diagnosis of general anxiety disorder). dr z acknowledged that she had spoken separately to the father for counselling around regular medications and side effects profile. he was in agreement with same. (c) despite dr z’s report, the father’s evidence and/or cross-examination did not wholeheartedly embrace x’s diagnosis of anxiety but appeared to minimise this diagnosis by accepting that his son may have some social/anxiety issues. he appeared to reject the mother’s oral evidence about how their son does not like crowded areas (such as school grounds) or queues (such as waiting in lines to go into classrooms). the father said that he does not see these behaviours during the time he has with x. his attitude is of concern because x has been prescribed zactin to treat his anxiety diagnosis. (d) the icl made a submission that during the course of the trial the father had referred to dr z as ‘the mother’s paediatrician’ instead of referring to her as ‘x’s paediatrician’. (e) despite the contents of the family report, the father tells the court that he still has somewhat limited information about asd because his lived experience is with adhd.   despite dr z’s report, the father’s evidence and/or cross-examination did not wholeheartedly embrace x’s diagnosis of anxiety but appeared to minimise this diagnosis by accepting that his son may have some social/anxiety issues. he appeared to reject the mother’s oral evidence about how their son does not like crowded areas (such as school grounds) or queues (such as waiting in lines to go into classrooms). the father said that he does not see these behaviours during the time he has with x. his attitude is of concern because x has been prescribed zactin to treat his anxiety diagnosis. (d) the icl made a submission that during the course of the trial the father had referred to dr z as ‘the mother’s paediatrician’ instead of referring to her as ‘x’s paediatrician’. (e) despite the contents of the family report, the father tells the court that he still has somewhat limited information about asd because his lived experience is with adhd.   the icl made a submission that during the course of the trial the father had referred to dr z as ‘the mother’s paediatrician’ instead of referring to her as ‘x’s paediatrician’. (e) despite the contents of the family report, the father tells the court that he still has somewhat limited information about asd because his lived experience is with adhd.   despite the contents of the family report, the father tells the court that he still has somewhat limited information about asd because his lived experience is with adhd.
section 60cc(3)(h)
section 60cc(3)(i)  the father has poor emotional regulation (if he didn’t mean his words to be unkind), or (b) the father is lying and meant every word of it, demonstrating he has no insight into the mother’s capacity to be a good and protective parent.   the father is lying and meant every word of it, demonstrating he has no insight into the mother’s capacity to be a good and protective parent.
section 60cc(3) (j), (k)
conclusion – parental responsibility
conclusion – care arrangements  the parties’ are unable to negotiate issues in dispute in a respectful and co-operative manner, [96] (b) the father’s impaired capacity to support x’s physical and medical needs, (c) the father’s poor attitude towards the responsibilities of parenthood, and (d) the impact on x of such a sudden change in his circumstances would be devastating.   the father’s impaired capacity to support x’s physical and medical needs, (c) the father’s poor attitude towards the responsibilities of parenthood, and (d) the impact on x of such a sudden change in his circumstances would be devastating.   the father’s poor attitude towards the responsibilities of parenthood, and (d) the impact on x of such a sudden change in his circumstances would be devastating.   the impact on x of such a sudden change in his circumstances would be devastating.   despite a diminution in the time that x spends with the father (from five nights a fortnight to one night a fortnight since the may 2021 orders), there was no persuasive evidence that x’s relationship with the father had changed, with the father telling the court that his son continues to model/mirror him just as he was observed to do by the child expert in october 2020. (b) x will benefit from having a strong relationship with both his parents, (c) the father has some limitations to his capacity to support all of x’s needs, including his ability to comply with his son’s medication regime. if the overnight time happens on a friday night, ritalin is not required to be administered and any adverse effects arising from x not being administered his other medication will be ameliorated because i accept that the mother can ensure that he returns to his routine for two nights before resuming a new school week, (d) the risk of x being exposed to his father’s negative attitudes towards the mother will be constrained by his limited time in his father’s household, (e) x’s relationship with the mother and t will remain secure.   x will benefit from having a strong relationship with both his parents, (c) the father has some limitations to his capacity to support all of x’s needs, including his ability to comply with his son’s medication regime. if the overnight time happens on a friday night, ritalin is not required to be administered and any adverse effects arising from x not being administered his other medication will be ameliorated because i accept that the mother can ensure that he returns to his routine for two nights before resuming a new school week, (d) the risk of x being exposed to his father’s negative attitudes towards the mother will be constrained by his limited time in his father’s household, (e) x’s relationship with the mother and t will remain secure.   the father has some limitations to his capacity to support all of x’s needs, including his ability to comply with his son’s medication regime. if the overnight time happens on a friday night, ritalin is not required to be administered and any adverse effects arising from x not being administered his other medication will be ameliorated because i accept that the mother can ensure that he returns to his routine for two nights before resuming a new school week, (d) the risk of x being exposed to his father’s negative attitudes towards the mother will be constrained by his limited time in his father’s household, (e) x’s relationship with the mother and t will remain secure.   the risk of x being exposed to his father’s negative attitudes towards the mother will be constrained by his limited time in his father’s household, (e) x’s relationship with the mother and t will remain secure.   x’s relationship with the mother and t will remain secure.
associate: dated: 18 may 2022
dated: 18 may 2022
[1] unless otherwise specified any reference to legislation shall be a reference to the family law act 1975 (cth)[2] out of respect for each person’s personal preference about how they may wish to be identified in terms of their preferred honorific, persons (other than the parties or children of either party) shall be referred to by their surname only.[3] re: f (litigants in person guidelines) [2001] famca 348[4] for convenience, references to any content within the affidavit of ms lucian shall be prefaced by “l” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and annexures identified alphabetically.[5] for convenience, references to any content within the trial affidavit of mr d shall be prefaced by “d” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets. [6] for convenience, references to any content within the updating affidavit of ms lucian shall be prefaced by “2” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and annexures identified alphabetically[7] for convenience, references to any content within the affidavit of mr naraz shall be prefaced by “n” followed by the numbered paragraph enclosed within square brackets and annexures identified alphabetically[8] booking history of the mother at k hospital, edb date 20 april 2012 - marked exhibit “f3”psycho-social assessment of the mother, pg 1 of 2, edb date 20 april 2012 – marked exhibit “f4”review application funding for x at l pre-school, dated 20 may 2016 – marked exhibit “f5”psycho-social assessment of mother, edb date 24 march 2016 – marked exhibit “f6”k hospital assessment of x, pg 1 and 3, dated 3 dec 2018 – marked exhibit “f7”assessment record of ms m, dated: 23 oct 2003 – marked exhibit “f8”facs report, dated: 1 dec 2015, pg 2 of 4 – marked exhibit “f9”contact report dated: 14 dec 2015, pgs 1-2 – marked exhibit “f10”contact record pg 3 of 4, dated 14 dec 2015 – marked exhibit “f11”[9] for convenience, references to any content within the family report of ms j shall be prefaced by “fr” followed by the numbered paragraph[10] exhibit “f12”[11] n [8] – [9][12] exhibit “f8”[13] see for example n [143][14] l1 [45] – [49][15] l1 [50][16] n [97][17] n [19][18] l1 [154][19] exhibit “f9”[20] exhibits “f10” & “f11”[21] exhibit “f6”. [22] n [30][23] l1 [112][24] exhibit “f5”[25] l1 [103][26] exhibit “f7”[27] l1 [102][28] li [114][29] li [116], [123] & [146][30] l1 [113][31] fr-83[32] l1 [128[33] li [115][34] l1 [118][35] n [167][36] cic-7[37] l1 [164] & [165][38] l1 [204][39] fr-42[40] n [44] & annexure “a”[41] l1 [31] & annexure “b”[42] l1 [31] & annexure b [43] n [169][44] l1 [25][45] l1 [26][46] l1 [28][47] l1 [29][48] l1 [29] & annexure “a”[49] l1 [30], [32][50] l1 [19][51] l1 [60][52] l1 [62][53] tw1 [62][54] l1 [20][55] l1 [23][56] l2 [2], [3] & annexure a[57] see s 68la which explains the role of the icl.[58] exhibits “f3” and “f4”[59] l1 [188][60] l1 [68][61] n [119][62] l1 [89], [90][63] l1 [74] – [76][64] l1 [71] – [72][65] l1 [77], [84][66] n [187][67] fr-68[68] fr-69[69] fr-80[70] fr-80[71] fr-49[72] fr-48[73] fr-42[74] fr-52[75] fr-91[76] fr-97[77] fr-99[78] fr-91 to fr-93[79] fr-68[80] exhibit”f8”[81] see for example fr-67 to fr-73[82] fr-57, 58 & 98[83] exhibits “f4” [84] fr-98[85] see for example, fr-96[86] fr-97[87] l1 [28] – [30] & [31][88] l1 [32][89] n [127][90] n [183][91] fr-98[92] fr-97[93] see fr-78 and my previous references to the father’s medical records dated 5 march 2018 and 7 may 2018[94] see for example her evidence of handing to x zip-lock bags or plastic cups containing the medication[95] in addition to her cross examination see fr-96 and 97[96] see for example my recording of the mother saying that if she said the sky was blue, the father would say it was green and then tell her why