last updated: 30 june 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
broadley & larch [2022] fedcfamc2f 631
orders
the court orders that:  during the victorian gazetted school term 2 and school term 3 in 2022: (i) each wednesday from the conclusion of school/daycare, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school the following day, or 9.00am if a non-school day. (ii) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until sunday evening at 6.00pm. (b) from the commencement of the victorian gazetted school term 4 in 2022: (i) each wednesday from the conclusion of school/daycare, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school the following day, or 9.00am if a non-school day. (ii) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school monday morning, or 9.00am if a non-school day.   each wednesday from the conclusion of school/daycare, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school the following day, or 9.00am if a non-school day. (ii) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until sunday evening at 6.00pm.  ) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until sunday evening at 6.00pm.   from the commencement of the victorian gazetted school term 4 in 2022: (i) each wednesday from the conclusion of school/daycare, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school the following day, or 9.00am if a non-school day. (ii) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school monday morning, or 9.00am if a non-school day.   each wednesday from the conclusion of school/daycare, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school the following day, or 9.00am if a non-school day. (ii) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school monday morning, or 9.00am if a non-school day.  ) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school/daycare on friday, or 3.30pm if a non-school day, until the commencement of school monday morning, or 9.00am if a non-school day.   x and y spend time with the father for the second half, (b) z spend time with the father for the first four nights x and y spend time during the second week as per (4)(a), returning to the mother at 5.00pm on the fifth day.   z spend time with the father for the first four nights x and y spend time during the second week as per (4)(a), returning to the mother at 5.00pm on the fifth day.   from the term 1 school holidays 2023 and each odd year thereafter: (i) for the second half of the school holidays with the father. (b) from the term 1 school holidays in 2024 and each even year thereafter: (i) for the first half of the school holidays with the father.   for the second half of the school holidays with the father.   from the term 1 school holidays in 2024 and each even year thereafter: (i) for the first half of the school holidays with the father.   for the first half of the school holidays with the father.   in year 2022 and each even year thereafter: (i) for the first week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday. (b) in year 2023 and each odd year thereafter: (i) for the first week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.   for the first week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter.  ) for the second week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter.
with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday. (b) in year 2023 and each odd year thereafter: (i) for the first week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.   in year 2023 and each odd year thereafter: (i) for the first week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.   for the first week of the school holidays with the father and each alternate week thereafter, and (ii) for the second week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.  ) for the second week of the school holidays with the mother and each alternate week thereafter. with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.
with changeover to occur weekly at 6.00pm friday.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland:  for x and y: (a) in week 1: (i) during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday. (ii) from 6.00 pm on friday until 6.00 pm sunday. (b) in week 2: (i) during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday. (2) for z: (a) for a period of six weeks, every second saturday from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (b) then graduating to every second saturday from 10.00am until 5.00pm.   in week 1: (i) during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday. (ii) from 6.00 pm on friday until 6.00 pm sunday. (b) in week 2: (i) during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday.   during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday. (ii) from 6.00 pm on friday until 6.00 pm sunday.  ) from 6.00 pm on friday until 6.00 pm sunday.   in week 2: (i) during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday.   during each school term period from wednesday 6.00pm until commencement of school on thursday.   for z: (a) for a period of six weeks, every second saturday from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (b) then graduating to every second saturday from 10.00am until 5.00pm.   for a period of six weeks, every second saturday from 10.00am until 2.00pm, (b) then graduating to every second saturday from 10.00am until 5.00pm.   then graduating to every second saturday from 10.00am until 5.00pm.   until the end of july 2021, each alternate weekend from 10.00am to 5.00pm on saturday and sunday, (b) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in august from 10.00am saturday until 10.00am sunday, (c) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in october from 10.00am saturday to 2.00pm sunday, (d) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in november from 10.00am saturday to 6.00pm sunday, (e) each wednesday evening from 6.00pm to 7.00pm (so as to coincide with the two elder siblings’ time with the father) and, in the event that the father can otherwise commence such time earlier with practicable notice to the mother, then from 4.00pm onwards to 7.00pm, (f) at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in august from 10.00am saturday until 10.00am sunday, (c) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in october from 10.00am saturday to 2.00pm sunday, (d) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in november from 10.00am saturday to 6.00pm sunday, (e) each wednesday evening from 6.00pm to 7.00pm (so as to coincide with the two elder siblings’ time with the father) and, in the event that the father can otherwise commence such time earlier with practicable notice to the mother, then from 4.00pm onwards to 7.00pm, (f) at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in october from 10.00am saturday to 2.00pm sunday, (d) commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in november from 10.00am saturday to 6.00pm sunday, (e) each wednesday evening from 6.00pm to 7.00pm (so as to coincide with the two elder siblings’ time with the father) and, in the event that the father can otherwise commence such time earlier with practicable notice to the mother, then from 4.00pm onwards to 7.00pm, (f) at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   commencing on the first usual alternate weekend cycle in november from 10.00am saturday to 6.00pm sunday, (e) each wednesday evening from 6.00pm to 7.00pm (so as to coincide with the two elder siblings’ time with the father) and, in the event that the father can otherwise commence such time earlier with practicable notice to the mother, then from 4.00pm onwards to 7.00pm, (f) at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   each wednesday evening from 6.00pm to 7.00pm (so as to coincide with the two elder siblings’ time with the father) and, in the event that the father can otherwise commence such time earlier with practicable notice to the mother, then from 4.00pm onwards to 7.00pm, (f) at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   at such other or further times, and arrangements for same, as may be agreed by the parties in writing.   each alternate friday 6.00pm to sunday 6.00pm for x and y, (2) each alternate saturday 10.00am to 6.00pm sunday for z, (3) every wednesday 6.00pm to 9.00am thursday for x and y, (4) every wednesday 6.00pm to 7.00pm for z.   each alternate saturday 10.00am to 6.00pm sunday for z, (3) every wednesday 6.00pm to 9.00am thursday for x and y, (4) every wednesday 6.00pm to 7.00pm for z.   every wednesday 6.00pm to 9.00am thursday for x and y, (4) every wednesday 6.00pm to 7.00pm for z.   every wednesday 6.00pm to 7.00pm for z.
documents relied upon   affidavit of his filed on 12 january 2022, and (2) amended initiating application filed on 12 january 2022.   amended initiating application filed on 12 january 2022.   paragraphs 8 to 43 of her affidavit filed on 13 july 2020, (2) paragraphs 8 and 9 of her affidavit filed on 30 november 2021, (3) paragraph 20 of her affidavit filed on 13 may 2021, (4) the whole of her affidavit filed on 13 january 2022, and (5) amended response to initiating application filed on 13 january 2022.   paragraphs 8 and 9 of her affidavit filed on 30 november 2021, (3) paragraph 20 of her affidavit filed on 13 may 2021, (4) the whole of her affidavit filed on 13 january 2022, and (5) amended response to initiating application filed on 13 january 2022.   paragraph 20 of her affidavit filed on 13 may 2021, (4) the whole of her affidavit filed on 13 january 2022, and (5) amended response to initiating application filed on 13 january 2022.   the whole of her affidavit filed on 13 january 2022, and (5) amended response to initiating application filed on 13 january 2022.   amended response to initiating application filed on 13 january 2022.
issues in dispute
family violence
care for the children prior to separation
withholding the children  august to october 2019, (7) october to december 2019, (8) march to july 2020, (9) october to december 2021.   october to december 2019, (8) march to july 2020, (9) october to december 2021.   march to july 2020, (9) october to december 2021.   october to december 2021.
parties’ communication
our client instructs that z has returned home very tired after spending overnight time with you, suggesting that z may not be maintaining a regular bedtime when spending time with you, or that she may be unsettled during the night. we submit that, in light of her young age, it is in z’s best interest to maintain her usual sleeping routine. we ask that in future you ensure that z sleeps in a cot and that she maintains a reasonable bedtime for a child her age.
provision of information
the family report
there may have been ‘situational couple violence’ which may occur as a result of a number of factors including poor communication and poor anger management skills. the treatment which usually assist couples with this type of violence is attending anger management when they are able to learn conflict resolution and anger management.
cross-examination of the family consultant  the mother forthwith provide the father’s solicitor with contact details of the treating medical practitioners and their respective autism and adhd assessments undertaken by the medical professionals for x and y. (5) the parties do all acts and things as necessary for z to attend upon a paediatrician, occupational therapist and speech therapist with the parties to follow all reasonable advice of the medical professionals and any costs associated with same to be borne equally by the parties.   the parties do all acts and things as necessary for z to attend upon a paediatrician, occupational therapist and speech therapist with the parties to follow all reasonable advice of the medical professionals and any costs associated with same to be borne equally by the parties.
ms jardine: and very concerningly, you say until she is – this is paragraph 120: until the mother’s able to produce reported about the assessments and feedback from the above professionals in relation to z’s development, it’s difficult to assess her capacity to meet the needs of x, y, and z, including intellectual needs and day to day emotional needs. ms jardine: that’s a very serious observation, isn’t it? ms g: yes. ms jardine: and i am saying to you that now we know that the mother has not met the needs of the children in relation to their health. we know that the mother has not met the needs of the children in relation to helping them with their homework, and we know that there’s a litany of other issues which may or may not be correct in relation to the mother’s parenting, that it’s really – in your view, it’s – if the mother is – if the children are spending the majority of their time with the mother, in the long term that’s going to be on – on an ongoing basis, very damaging to the children? ms g: unless – unless ms larch is prepared to do something about that. ms jardine: well, the father’s position is that by gradually – and i – i will just reiterate it because i have been saying an awful lot of things to you today. the father’s position is that he – he wants to start from – once the court makes this order, spending from thursday to mondays with the children in one week, and overnight on a wednesday night in the other week for – for the first rest – the balance of term 1. and then in 3 ...six nights a fortnight in the balance of term 2, and then having half shared care by the end of – end of term 2 to – from then. then – then the father is going to be able to have a far greater contribution in making sure that the needs of the children are properly looked after. so their medical needs and their intellectual needs, and their emotional needs. you would agree with that, wouldn’t you? ms g: sadly, i think that it’s far more complex than that. shared care in my view, in this case, could not work because we have got two parents who are so far apart. they don’t communicate objectively or appropriately. very high conflict – remains there. the whole issue is that these two parents are not going to work together to ensure that these children are cared for as they should be cared for, and they’re not going to work together to ensure that these three children would adjust to a shared care arrangement and be able to maintain that. so, yeah, i have – i have – i can’t agree. i can’t agree with that because the – the whole issue is the high level of conflict, the lack of communication. i just don’t quite understand how – with mr broadley’s, all his good intentions, how he can make that work. ms jardine: well, it’s – if you’re saying that, ms g, and it’s quite clear the mother has had very ample opportunity to address the needs of these children, and i have identified with you in my questions that there has been substantial neglect by the mother, then would – i mean, the father’s original position was for the – and this is when this trial brain [sic] in february this year – was for the three children to – to live in his care. and i am saying this without instructions at the moment, but i have not got it – instructions since you have just said that. but it was his original position to live the majority of the time with the – with – in his care and spend alternate weekends with the mother, so he can address their emotional needs, their educational needs, their psychological needs, and their physical needs which have not been addressed at all satisfactorily by the mother. that would be a better arrangements, wouldn’t it, ms g? ms g: well, i say shared care in my opinion is not an option. her honour may have, you know, a different view on that, but i – i didn’t address the issue of the three children living with mr broadley because when i saw him, he spoke to me. when i asked his – what his proposal to court will be when they next go to court, it was for the two older children to live with him. and i do have that in writing. he was ..... that’s – that’s what i addressed in the report because i had concerns about the lack of mr broadley’s insight into separating the three children, the three siblings. so there were – i – i didn’t – i didn’t address the issue of the three children living with him, i’m sorry.
father aspergers mother intellectual disability grandfather-dm
currently living with her father and two other siblings. parents separated. both parents have equal responsibility for care and well-being of child care per family court order.
ms jardine: 10 july 2019 and there are several other pages to the same effect, ms g, which – where the medical clinic has knowledge of the mother’s intellectual disability. does – how does that change your assessment, the fact there’s a diagnose – an intellectual disability that hasn’t been revealed to the father? ms g: well, it can’t change anything because that provides no information about when she was assessed, how she was assessed, who she was assessed by. that – that tells you absolutely nothing. in fact ‑ ‑ ‑ that. i mean, is it severe? it is mild? when was it – she assessed, how, by whom? yes. i – i would need all that information. ms jardine: yes. but, ms g, this is the first time that the father has had knowledge of any medical information about that and i appreciate your – what your answer is. does that mean that there is significant questions have to be raised about the nature of this intellectual disability before you can comment as to whether that changes your assessment or otherwise? ms g: well, they lived together for how long, the mother and father, and did it concern the father when they first met and the first few years they were together i think they were fine until they started having children, so it – it just seems very strange that suddenly there’s this concern about it. no. i – you know, and until there is a great more information made available i – i really cannot make any further comment about that. ms jardine: so it could be significant or it could be totally insignificant, as far as you’re saying because you haven’t got the information? ms g: well, also, the father has just seen this in some documents. did he have concerns when they were together? you know, i – i think it raises lots of questions ms jardine it raises – yes. according to his evidence there was a lot of concerns, yes, but, as i said, the father has just seen this so the – how it impacted on him and so forth is not – i guess – yes. it’s just – just places a different complexion on the case. it’s more – i guess, the issue is now this issue has been raised, does it or can it – can you comment any further about the mother’s capacity to care for the children until? ms g: not really, no. i – i’m aware the father has raised concerns but he certainly didn’t raise any concerns about her capacity going back in the – the relationship, so ms jardine: it’s post – when the – since the relationship has finished there has been very significant issues as you’re – i’m sure you may recall, and it’s the ongoing capacity of the mother to be able to parent these children when these children have their own significant – or – well, yes, their own – have their own significant developmental issues? ms g: well, again, there are many parents who suffer intellectual disabilities and who care for their children. so, you know, i guess unless there was a complete assessment – you would need a psychological assessment as to her intellectual disability and what that may mean for her in terms of her capacity. just reading that particular paragraph i would have – i would have assumed that the mother suffers from intellectual disability was meant to be x suffers from intellectual disability but – but it – you said you’ve seen it in other pages too, but there would have to be a lot more information about ‑ ‑ ‑
children’s educational progress
parenting coordinator
conduct of the trial
ms daly: your honour, that’s why i’m saying i’m not really certain as to where we stand. my situation is this: these matters have come to light when the mother, as sought, but even prior to being requested by the court, she had started to try and get the information that seemed to be lacking on the basis of what had been put to the court previously. in doing so, she arranged to obtain the documents which clearly showed that the father had been informed about the paediatric assessments prior to saying in this court, under oath or affirmation, that he had no information. he also, as the papers will show your honour, claimed that the mother had an intellectual disability and that the children were living with him. your honour, he was always able to take the children to see this general practitioner or any other general practitioner, but he failed to do so until december ’21, and then again at the end of january this year. and so, your honour, we say that his evidence is tainted. we say that he is actually not being frank with the court, and we say that is a problem.
ms daly: your honour, my submission at the moment is these are matters are critical. nevertheless, the parties have been able to manage what is happening in a reasonable way, your honour. whatever either of them may have done or not done in the past, they are, at the present stage, cooperating to a significant degree and my submission is that that is – that is a gain and it ought not be wasted and, therefore her honour: but that’s going to be a matter – i mean, you can’t raise issues about there being, you know, real issues of non-disclosure, etcetera, and then ignore it. i mean, it’s either ms daly: well, you can’t her honour: you’re either raising it or you’re not but ms daly: well, we are raising it. her honour: and frankly, this is one of these cases – i don’t think i can recall a case where i’ve given up trying to keep track of what this case is about because it just seems to keep changing. i mean, it has just been extraordinary.
culture
orders sought in written submissions
legal principles
section 65daa(1) is expressed in imperative terms. it obliges the court to consider both the question whether it is in the best interests of the child to spend equal time with each of the parents (para (a)) and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child spend equal time with each of them (para (b)). it is only where both questions are answered in the affirmative that consideration may be given, under para (c), to the making of an order. the words in which para (c) commences (if it is) refer back to the two preceding questions and make plain that the making of an order can only be considered if the findings mentioned are made. a determination as a question of fact that it is reasonably practicable that equal time be spent with each court has the power to make a parenting order of that kind. it is a matter upon which power is conditioned much as it is where a jurisdictional fact must be proved to exist. if such a finding cannot be made, subs (2)(a) and (b) require that the prospect of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent then be considered. that subsection follows the same structure as subs (1) and requires the same questions concerning the child’s best interests and reasonable practicability to be answered in the context of the child spending substantial and significant time with each parent.
section 65daa(1) is concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible.
conclusion
associate: dated: 18 may 2022
dated: 18 may 2022
[1] see american psychiatric association autism diagnosis criteria: dsm-5, 5th edition diagnosis and statistical manual of mental disorder