last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dennis & dennis [2022] fedcfamc2f 770
orders
the court orders pending further order that:  each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) on friday until the commencement of school (or 9.00am) on monday, commencing friday 20 may 2022, and (b) each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) until the commencement of school (or 9.00am) on thursday, commencing wednesday 25 may 2022,   each alternate wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3.00pm) until the commencement of school (or 9.00am) on thursday, commencing wednesday 25 may 2022,
with such time to be supervised by the maternal grandmother ms b.  consuming any alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time that the children are in their care, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party or a member of the other party’s family, in the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting the children to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, and (c) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the children or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party or a member of the other party’s family, in the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting the children to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, and (c) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the children or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence.   discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the children or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence.   each party is restrained from cutting, bleaching, dying or otherwise altering their hair, (b) each party will provide no less than 3.8cm of hair for such testing, (c) each party is to provide the collector with a copy of these orders, (d) each party must provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before the hair collection.   each party will provide no less than 3.8cm of hair for such testing, (c) each party is to provide the collector with a copy of these orders, (d) each party must provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before the hair collection.   each party is to provide the collector with a copy of these orders, (d) each party must provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before the hair collection.   each party must provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before the hair collection.   the father’s solicitor at info@darleylegal.com (b) the mother’s solicitor at reception@gflawyers.com.au: and (c) the independent children’s lawyer at the email address to be provided by the parties to their respective collectors within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of address for service filed by the independent children’s lawyer.   the mother’s solicitor at reception@gflawyers.com.au: and (c) the independent children’s lawyer at the email address to be provided by the parties to their respective collectors within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of address for service filed by the independent children’s lawyer.   the independent children’s lawyer at the email address to be provided by the parties to their respective collectors within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of address for service filed by the independent children’s lawyer.
and to facilitate this occurring, this order is an irrevocable authority by the mother and the father to the collector to provide the results of any hair strand tests to the parties’ legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer.
the court further orders that:  to consider the factors in ss 60cc & 65daa of the family law act 1975. (b) to assess the parents (and other significant adults) (c) to assess the parents interactions (and those of other significant adults) (d) to assess the children’s developmental and emotional state. (e) to assess the relationship of the children to the parents (and other significant persons) and the wishes of the children. (f) to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to assess the parents (and other significant adults) (c) to assess the parents interactions (and those of other significant adults) (d) to assess the children’s developmental and emotional state. (e) to assess the relationship of the children to the parents (and other significant persons) and the wishes of the children. (f) to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to assess the parents interactions (and those of other significant adults) (d) to assess the children’s developmental and emotional state. (e) to assess the relationship of the children to the parents (and other significant persons) and the wishes of the children. (f) to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to assess the children’s developmental and emotional state. (e) to assess the relationship of the children to the parents (and other significant persons) and the wishes of the children. (f) to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to assess the relationship of the children to the parents (and other significant persons) and the wishes of the children. (f) to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to assess the proposals of each party as to the children’s future. (g) to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   to consider any other matter which the family consultant considers relevant to the court’s determination.   the nsw police provided that the documents sought to be produced must specifically identify the dvec recordings of the children, (b) the d clinic, (c) medicare, (d) e counselling and mediation service, (e) suburb f treatment centre, (f) nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   the d clinic, (c) medicare, (d) e counselling and mediation service, (e) suburb f treatment centre, (f) nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   medicare, (d) e counselling and mediation service, (e) suburb f treatment centre, (f) nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   e counselling and mediation service, (e) suburb f treatment centre, (f) nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   suburb f treatment centre, (f) nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   nsw health, and (g) nsw department of communities and justice.   nsw department of communities and justice.   each party is to file and exchange with each other updating affidavits from themselves and any witnesses, and (b) the independent children’s lawyer is to file and serve any affidavits they intend to rely upon.   the independent children’s lawyer is to file and serve any affidavits they intend to rely upon.
the court notes that
and the court notes in chambers
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge kearney:
introduction  x, born in 2011, (b) y, born in 2013, and (c) z, born in 2014   y, born in 2013, and (c) z, born in 2014   z, born in 2014  llectively described as ‘the children’).
precis
evidence  an application in a proceeding filed 9 may 2022, (b) an affidavit of mr dennis filed 7 may 2022, and (c) an outline of case document marked exhibit “f1”.   an affidavit of mr dennis filed 7 may 2022, and (c) an outline of case document marked exhibit “f1”.   an outline of case document marked exhibit “f1”.   a response to an application in a proceeding filed 13 may 2022, (b) an affidavit of ms dennis filed 13 may 2022, (c) an affidavit of ms b filed 13 may 2022, and (d) parts of the affidavit of ms j filed 7 may 2022, namely, paragraphs [18], [19], [25], [30] and [31].   an affidavit of ms dennis filed 13 may 2022, (c) an affidavit of ms b filed 13 may 2022, and (d) parts of the affidavit of ms j filed 7 may 2022, namely, paragraphs [18], [19], [25], [30] and [31].   an affidavit of ms b filed 13 may 2022, and (d) parts of the affidavit of ms j filed 7 may 2022, namely, paragraphs [18], [19], [25], [30] and [31].   parts of the affidavit of ms j filed 7 may 2022, namely, paragraphs [18], [19], [25], [30] and [31].
parties’ proposals  the children to live with him, (b) the children to spend supervised time with the mother at k contact centre for two hours every fortnight, with the mother to pay the costs, (c) the children to spend supervised time with the mother at other times agreed upon by the parties, (d) the mother and her servants and agents being restrained from taking the children into her care, (e) the mother being restrained from consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children spend with her or communicate with her, (f) the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the children to spend supervised time with the mother at k contact centre for two hours every fortnight, with the mother to pay the costs, (c) the children to spend supervised time with the mother at other times agreed upon by the parties, (d) the mother and her servants and agents being restrained from taking the children into her care, (e) the mother being restrained from consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children spend with her or communicate with her, (f) the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the children to spend supervised time with the mother at other times agreed upon by the parties, (d) the mother and her servants and agents being restrained from taking the children into her care, (e) the mother being restrained from consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children spend with her or communicate with her, (f) the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the mother and her servants and agents being restrained from taking the children into her care, (e) the mother being restrained from consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children spend with her or communicate with her, (f) the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the mother being restrained from consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children spend with her or communicate with her, (f) the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the appointment of an icl, (g) the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the issuing of subpoenas numbering more than five, (h) the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   the allocation of a child impact report, and (i) costs.   costs.   the children to live with her and spend time with the father, as agreed in writing, but failing agreement, for five nights a fortnight, being four nights one week, thursday after school to before school monday, and in the alternate week for one night thursday after school to before school friday, or, in the alternative, (b) the children to live with the father and spend time with the mother for four nights a fortnight, being three nights one week, friday after school to before school monday, and in the alternate week for one night wednesday after school to before school thursday, with that time to be supervised by her mother.   the children to live with the father and spend time with the mother for four nights a fortnight, being three nights one week, friday after school to before school monday, and in the alternate week for one night wednesday after school to before school thursday, with that time to be supervised by her mother.   the children to spend half-school holidays with each of the parties, (b) the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions, including their birthdays, (c) changeovers to occur via school, (d) communication via ourfamilywizard, (e) communication for the children electronically with the parties between 6.00pm and 7.00pm each friday and sunday, and at other times in accordance with the children’s wishes, (f) orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   the children to spend time with each of the parties on special occasions, including their birthdays, (c) changeovers to occur via school, (d) communication via ourfamilywizard, (e) communication for the children electronically with the parties between 6.00pm and 7.00pm each friday and sunday, and at other times in accordance with the children’s wishes, (f) orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   changeovers to occur via school, (d) communication via ourfamilywizard, (e) communication for the children electronically with the parties between 6.00pm and 7.00pm each friday and sunday, and at other times in accordance with the children’s wishes, (f) orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   communication via ourfamilywizard, (e) communication for the children electronically with the parties between 6.00pm and 7.00pm each friday and sunday, and at other times in accordance with the children’s wishes, (f) orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   communication for the children electronically with the parties between 6.00pm and 7.00pm each friday and sunday, and at other times in accordance with the children’s wishes, (f) orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   orders ancillary to ensure the parties were kept informed about medical and educational issues to do with the children, (g) various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   various restraints against each of them engaging in specified behaviours which have the broad aim of quarantining the children from parental conflict, (h) the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.   the father submitting to an hst or hair strand test, and (i) costs.
the evidence
the defendant – (who is the mother) – and mr dennis, (the father), have shared custody of the children and own two properties together in suburb l. during the afternoon of sunday, 24 january 2021, the pinop – (so this is the paternal grandmother)...was present at her son mr dennis’ home at m street, suburb l. at this time, the pinop was looking after x whilst mr dennis was away with friends. x was due to return into the care of the defendant the following day. at about 5.15pm on the same date, the pinop and x were sitting on a couch in the lounge room at m street, suburb l, watching television, when the defendant – (who is the mother) – attended the location and knocked on the front door. the pinop opened the front door, with the defendant standing in front of her. the defendant pushed the door open and entered the residence. the pinop was standing in front of the defendant as she entered the residence, and with two hands the defendant pushed the pinop to the chest, forcing her backwards and into the wall. the defendant turned to face x and demanded she come with her, however, the child refused and stated she wished to remain with her grandmother. the defendant persisted and continued to tell x to come with her. the pinop told the defendant to get out of her house, to which the defendant replied, “it’s my house.” the defendant raised her right arm, clenched her fist and drove it backwards, hitting the pinop, who was standing behind her, in the top lip. in defence, the pinop slapped the defendant to the face. after some time, the defendant left the location with x, who at this time was crying. following the incident, the pinop contacted her son mr dennis and advised him of the incident. mr dennis subsequently contacted police, who attended l street, suburb m and spoke to the pinop. police obtained a dvec video statement from the pinop, at which time she outlined the above incident. the pinop disclosed to police that she was scared and fearful of the defendant after the incident. and then: at about 9pm on the same date, police attended n street, suburb l. police knocked on the front of the location, which was answered by the defendant. the defendant was cautioned and questioned in relation to the above incident, at which time she made admissions to attending m street, suburb l to collect her daughter. the defendant was placed under arrest and further questioned in relation to the incident. the defendant was well intoxicated and argumentative with police, and as a result she was escorted from the location and placed in the caged section of the police vehicle. the defendant was conveyed to suburb g police station, where she was introduced to the custody manager, who read and explained and provided her with a copy of her rights, as per part 9 of the law enforcement (powers and responsibilities) act 2002. the defendant was not offered the opportunity to participate in a formal interview during her time in custody, due to her level of intoxication.
at 2.40 pm on thursday, 11 february 2021, the victim was at her residence with her child – (this is not spelt correctly, but it is z, so the victim is the mother. i will skip a few lines): the person of interest – (which is the father) – left the location when asked to by the victim.
so this is the mother telling the police her side of the story:
at 3.30pm that afternoon, police attended the victim’s address to speak with her regarding the incident, as she had called police upon the person of interest – (who is the father) – leaving the location prior. the victim stated to police that nil offences had been committed by the person of interest, that she was not fearful, and that she was just upset that he had attended her house unannounced and wishing to see his children.
and i will skip the next part. it is not relevant:
whilst at the location, police sighted z with him, presenting to police as having nil issues regarding the incident.
which is a miracle. that is me saying that, not the police:
the other children were not there. a short time later, police attended the father’s address and spoke with him regarding the incident. the father was remorseful with police, stating he had only attended the victim’s address due to her not adhering to their verbal agreement regarding their children. the police warned the father that by him attending the address, this will upset and cause fear/alarm to the victim, with him stating that he will immediately cease contact with the victim and communicate through his legal rep regarding their children. police have made a record only regarding the incident, due to nil offences having been committed and nil grounds for an advo application.
so that is the independent business record.
legal principles
apart from relying upon uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue[1].   consuming alcohol for 24 hours before and during the time the children are in their care, and (b) abusing, assaulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party or a member of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting the children to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent or person with whom the other parent is a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, and (c) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the children or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence.   abusing, assaulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party or a member of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the children, or permitting the children to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent or person with whom the other parent is a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, and (c) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the children or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence.
associate: dated: 14 june 2022
dated: 14 june 2022
[1] ss & ah [2010] famcafc 13