last updated: 27 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bergman & bergman [2022] fedcfamc2f 1313
orders
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
7.08 appointing another expert witness   if a single expert witness has been appointed to prepare a report or give evidence in relation to an issue, a party must not tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue without the court’s permission. (2) the court may allow a party to tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue if it is satisfied that: (a) there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   the court may allow a party to tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue if it is satisfied that: (a) there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.
mr linklater-steele: i say it’s methodology with one working from, firstly, the use of the comparable sales which the court would be familiar with as a technique. secondly, the factual consideration of the lineage. i mean obviously one could value these things as hamburger but that would obviously ignore the very essence of the nature of what is being valued. and to value it, as it seems to be on the face of the all assets appraisal, as is where is, which is usually something one hears about in terms of cars and the like, in my submission, fails to meet the requisite need that the court has to understand truly the value of these horses given the background of the investor. ... mr linklater-steele: and... at this stage it would seem, on the face of it, there are comparative sales that [mr d] has relied upon. i can’t say specifically because the matter couldn’t be taken any further with [mr f] as to whether he was alert to but certainly his report and methodology doesn’t reference or rely upon comparative sales at all. so, in my submission, it’s established factually that that information is known at this stage only to [mr d]. ... mr linklater-steele: i would say the special reason [is] that it has been considered from time to time is that it’s not a matter that can be cured by cross-examination [of] [mr f]. it will leave your honour with a hole in the evidence, particularly, given some of the evidence that your honour already has as to the amount of money spent in the advancement of the breeding and sale activities. it’s not a matter where if cross-examination is undertaken of [mr f] the court is going to be provided with a level of evidence to make the requisite findings. so there is a need for there to be actual evidence before the court to which the court can call upon to make a definitive determination as to value. ... and, obviously, as to whether the court accepts that at the end of the day is a matter for, ultimately, submissions, but from a purely evidentiary basis there will be a ravine in the evidence that [mr f] seems to not be able to fill in terms of his report and obviously all efforts to try and alleviate and provide him with instructions haven’t been successful so that he could perhaps provide further evidence.   the application does not fall within one of the pre-conditions set out in rule 7.08(2). the mere expression of an opinion as to value by another expert no matter how substantially contrary to that of the single expert does not in itself constitute a substantial body of opinion within the meaning of the rule, (salmon & ors & salmon [2020] famcafc 134 at [35], (b) if, contrary to that submission, the court finds the discretion has been enlivened then the application should be dismissed in any event because: (i) all assets appraisal valuations have been in the parties’ possession, in the respect of the first valuation since 2020 and second valuation since november 2021, (ii) despite that the [mr d] report was only provided to the wife less than two weeks prior to the final hearing (at 3.53 pm on a friday afternoon), (iii) no explanation has been provided for the delay in circumstances where the letter of instruction to provide the adversarial report was dated 21 december 2021 and where the husband already had a comparison report on 8 december 2021, which was not disclosed to the wife, (iv) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.   if, contrary to that submission, the court finds the discretion has been enlivened then the application should be dismissed in any event because: (i) all assets appraisal valuations have been in the parties’ possession, in the respect of the first valuation since 2020 and second valuation since november 2021, (ii) despite that the [mr d] report was only provided to the wife less than two weeks prior to the final hearing (at 3.53 pm on a friday afternoon), (iii) no explanation has been provided for the delay in circumstances where the letter of instruction to provide the adversarial report was dated 21 december 2021 and where the husband already had a comparison report on 8 december 2021, which was not disclosed to the wife, (iv) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.   all assets appraisal valuations have been in the parties’ possession, in the respect of the first valuation since 2020 and second valuation since november 2021, (ii) despite that the [mr d] report was only provided to the wife less than two weeks prior to the final hearing (at 3.53 pm on a friday afternoon), (iii) no explanation has been provided for the delay in circumstances where the letter of instruction to provide the adversarial report was dated 21 december 2021 and where the husband already had a comparison report on 8 december 2021, which was not disclosed to the wife, (iv) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  ) despite that the [mr d] report was only provided to the wife less than two weeks prior to the final hearing (at 3.53 pm on a friday afternoon), (iii) no explanation has been provided for the delay in circumstances where the letter of instruction to provide the adversarial report was dated 21 december 2021 and where the husband already had a comparison report on 8 december 2021, which was not disclosed to the wife, (iv) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  i) no explanation has been provided for the delay in circumstances where the letter of instruction to provide the adversarial report was dated 21 december 2021 and where the husband already had a comparison report on 8 december 2021, which was not disclosed to the wife, (iv) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  ) the letter from wilsons engaging [mr d] commences with “we refer to the above and previous correspondence, most recently last week.” (affidavit of the husband filed 18 may 2022 at [“-04”]) (v) the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.   the previous correspondence has not been disclosed, (vi) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  ) the period between december 2021 and the delivery of the report on 11 may 2022, is totally unexplained. there is evidence that further information has been obtained by [mr d] during that period however, that information has not been disclosed, (vii) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  i) the late provision of the report means that division 7.17 cannot be complied with. rule 7.30 prescribes that where two or more parties tender an expert report to adduce evidence from different expert witnesses about the same or similar questions, the parties must arrange for the expert witness to confer at least 28 days before the earlier of: the first day of the trial in which the expert’s report will be relied on in evidence, the first day when the expert reports or otherwise be relied on in evidence. (viii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.  ii) the late provision of the report has further caused prejudice to the wife by denying her the opportunity to herself obtain a “shadow expert” to provide an expert report. that is the very vice kent j in tsoutsouvas & tsoutsouvas & ors at [26] cautioned against.
7.02 purpose of part 7.1
the purpose of this part is as follows: ... (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.
associate: dated: 28 september 2022
dated: 28 september 2022