last updated: 28 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
christensen & wicks [2022] fedcfamc2f 673
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge jarrett
3. the applicant seeks leave for the following amendments to the contravention application counts:   count 1, 2 and 4 should reference the applicant ms christensen being the person bound by order 3) not mr b, but that the respondent intentionally prevented compliance of the order by the applicant or alternatively the respondent aided and abetted mr b in preventing compliance with the relevant order by the applicant, (b) count 2 the reference in the statement of the alleged contravention to order 3 should say order 4 as set out in the reference to the paragraph of the order alleged to have been contravened.   count 2 the reference in the statement of the alleged contravention to order 3 should say order 4 as set out in the reference to the paragraph of the order alleged to have been contravened.
the orders
the court orders: that within 14 days of the date of this order, the applicant vacate the properties situated at lot ... rp ..., or at c street, town d in the state of queensland. the respondent be solely entitled to the said property to the exclusion of the applicant. that within 30 days of the date of this order, the respondent pay to the applicant the sum of $15,000. that within 5 months of the date of this order, the applicant cause to be removed from lot ... rp ..., or at c street, town d in the state of queensland the dwelling constructed by the applicant’s father, including water tanks attached to the dwelling and anything fitted to the dwelling. that within 5 months of the date of this order, the applicant cause to be removed from lot 240 rp 231102 or at c street, town d in the state of queensland the two shipping containers stored on the property. in complying with order 1 herein, the applicant leave the property situated at lot ... rp ..., or at c street, town d in the state of queensland the items of property listed in schedule 1 herein. that the parties retain all other property in their possession including bank accounts, superannuation, motor vehicles. that each party indemnify the other in respect of any loans, liabilities or encumbrances in their sole name. that each party bear their own costs in respect to these proceedings. that for compliance with order 3 herein, the applicant gives 7 days’ notice to the solicitors for the respondent.   contravened order 3 in that on or about 17 december, 2017:
without reasonable excuse, following the giving of notice to the solicitor of the respondent mr b on 10/12/2017, the respondent ms wicks with knowledge of the order, intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person bound by it (being the applicant ms christensen) and/or aided or abetted, a contravention of order 3 by a person bound by the order being mr b and in doing so the applicant has been deprived of the property to which she was entitled under the order being: “the dwelling constructed by the applicant’s father, including water tanks attached to the dwelling and anything fitted to the dwelling”   contravened order 4 in that on or about 17 december, 2017:
without reasonable excuse, following the giving of notice to the solicitor of the respondent mr b on 10/12/2017, the respondent ms wicks with knowledge of the order, intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person bound by it (being the applicant ms christensen) and/or aided or abetted, a contravention of order 4 by a person bound by the order being mr b, and in doing so the applicant has been deprived of the property to which she was entitled under the order being: “two shipping containers stored on the property” and their contents excluding those items included in schedule 1 of the order.   contravened order number 2 in that on or about 10 december, 2017:
without reasonable excuse, the respondent ms wicks with knowledge of the order, aided or abetted a contravention of order 2 by a person bound by the order being mr b by assisting the respondent mr b to establish bank accounts and/or to transfer monies in order to:   avoid the payment of monies as required under order 2 to the applicant: or (b) to defeat attempts by the applicant to recover said monies from the applicant:
and in doing so the applicant has been deprived of the property to which she was entitled under the order being: “$15,000.00” and interest thereon   contravened order 6 in that on or about 17 december, 2017:
without reasonable excuse, following the giving of notice to the solicitor of the respondent mr b on 10/12/2017, the respondent ms wicks with knowledge of the order, intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person bound by it (being the applicant ms christensen) or aided or abetted a contravention of order 6 by a person bound by the order being mr b, and in doing so the applicant has been deprived of the property to which she was entitled under the order being: “motor vehicles in the possession of the applicant” at the date of the order or their value
the law  intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (b) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.
68. .... a person intentionally prevents another person from complying with an order by intentionally doing an act which prevents compliance with the order by the person bound by it.... 69. the requisite elements for s 112ab(1)(b)(ii) appear to be that there has to be an aiding and abetting of the contravention of an order by a person bound by the order. what is aided and abetted is a contravention of the order by a person bound by it. there is nothing in the section which makes it necessary to demonstrate that those who aid and abet the contravention of the order must be shown to have done so in a manner which was contumelious or contumacious or in any way defiant of the authority of the court.  e aider or abettor] need not actually know that an offence has been committed, because he may not know that the facts constitute an offence and ignorance of the law is not a defence.
my view of the law may be summed up very shortly. no one may be convicted of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of an offence unless, knowing all the essential facts which made what was done a crime, he intentionally aided, abetted, counselled or procured the acts of the principal offender. wilful blindness, in the sense that i have described, is treated as equivalent to knowledge but neither negligence nor recklessness is sufficient.
the evidence
so without any knowledge of what was in the actual orders you were happy to pass on those sorts of messages, were you? you’re nodding your head, yes. so what do you mean? --- yes, i did. but i was present in that mediation. so my – i assumed that the information and the discussion was in the order. so i didn’t actually read the order once it was filed through the courts. but i went on the assumption of what conversations i was privy to. so i absolutely – when i sent those messages – believed that the information i thought was in the orders – i was – i was acting – i was saying the right things. i didn’t realise that i wasn’t – i didn’t have the accurate information. right. well, see, earlier you told me that you were doing all this off the word of your uncle? yes. well, you’re now saying that you’re doing it off your own bat? no, i’m saying that my uncle asked me to contact ms christensen. i’m saying that my uncle instructed me to have – to take over for him and i did say in that text message that as per the orders. but i didn’t know the exact contents of the orders. so you’ve taken on yourself ? yes. the responsibility of dealing with this and imposing controls on ms christensen’s access to the property. you knew the dwelling was hers – the – her – the dwelling that her father built? correct. you knew the shipping containers were hers. yes. so you’ve got to speak because the ? sorry.
good morning mr b
could you please tell me when it would be convenient for us to access the house and containers at the rear of your property as i would like to have these things removed as quickly as possible.
firstly i would like to remove the containers and vintage cars however this can not be done in one day.
could i please request access for 3 consecutive days during the week as i would rather not impact your weekends. if you could reply as soon as conveniently possible i would be grateful. kind regards, ms christensen
ms christensen. any correspondence will come directly through me or your lawyers but you are not to contact mr b again. as per the court agreement you and any of your family are not permitted to enter the property at c street, town d again. in consultation with qps you will receive a trespassing notice and face prosecution. any workman wishing to enter the property are required to contact me directly and must have insurances to complete removal to ensure mr b property is protected. as you have not complied with the court order the cost of lawns and all maintenance will be at your expense. the property will be secured therefore no one will have access without this process occurring. this is not to prove difficult but to ensure my uncles property and welfare are safe and secure. please feel free to have them contact me directly and i am happy to assist them accordingly. you are welcome to send me confirmation and details of what will need to occur and i will ensure your belongings are moved appropriately. i am sure you are as anxious to have this matter finalised as is mr b however this will be done correctly. just to advise there is also someone at the premises 24 hours a day and they will contact police accordingly so please be aware of this should you wish to not honour the order or our directives.
regards ms wicks
i am emailing you to as per instructions in final court orders (p)brc4736/2017, i would like to give 7 days notice to enter the property at c street, town d for 3 consecutive days the hours being 8am to 5pm. to remove the shipping containers and vintage cars. also in this time frame we are hoping to secure an electrician to disconnect the power to the dwelling owned by my father as mentioned in 3. on final court orders. the days that i would require are 18th, 19th and 20th of this month december. could you please email as soon as possible with a reply so i can coordinate container cranes, tow companies and tradesmen.
kind regards,
ms christensen
ms christensen. there is no point in liaising with mr b lawyer. we are not engaging their services as there is no need. and you are not paying his legal fees. as previously stated if you require access advise and we will organise this. mr b will let me know asap his working hours to ensure he is at the property when said service people are attending. as also previously advised you or any of your family are not permitted on the property under any circumstances. you are leaving the gas bottles leaking proved enough your capabilities and disregard for his safety and well-being. therefore please provide me details of the company and have them call me.
ms christensen – mr b will not be responding to you. i am your point of contact.and mr b representative. as stayed you or family are not permitted on property. mr b is not available due to work however myself and another family member are available for removalists on monday, tuesday and wednesday. person attending property will need to contact me to arrange access. mr b has requested they show public liability insurance is as per the agreement.
all contact through
[mobile phone number given]  ms wicks held an enduring power of attorney for mr b and acted in that capacity on behalf of mr b for the sale of the c street, town d property, (b) upon the sale of the property, the net sale proceeds of $375,650.24, were deposited into bank e account number ...20 – a joint account in the names of mr b and ms wicks, (c) the next day there were five withdrawals whereby a total sum of $370,760.22 was transferred to bank e account number ...84 – a joint account in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (d) on 9 november, 2018 ms wicks then made two transfers from account ...84 totalling $308,000 to another bank e account number ...15 –another joint account held in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (e) also on 9 november, 2018, $300,000 was withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 made out to ms wicks, (f) the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.   upon the sale of the property, the net sale proceeds of $375,650.24, were deposited into bank e account number ...20 – a joint account in the names of mr b and ms wicks, (c) the next day there were five withdrawals whereby a total sum of $370,760.22 was transferred to bank e account number ...84 – a joint account in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (d) on 9 november, 2018 ms wicks then made two transfers from account ...84 totalling $308,000 to another bank e account number ...15 –another joint account held in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (e) also on 9 november, 2018, $300,000 was withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 made out to ms wicks, (f) the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.   the next day there were five withdrawals whereby a total sum of $370,760.22 was transferred to bank e account number ...84 – a joint account in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (d) on 9 november, 2018 ms wicks then made two transfers from account ...84 totalling $308,000 to another bank e account number ...15 –another joint account held in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (e) also on 9 november, 2018, $300,000 was withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 made out to ms wicks, (f) the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.   on 9 november, 2018 ms wicks then made two transfers from account ...84 totalling $308,000 to another bank e account number ...15 –another joint account held in the names of ms wicks and her husband mr f, (e) also on 9 november, 2018, $300,000 was withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 made out to ms wicks, (f) the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.   also on 9 november, 2018, $300,000 was withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 made out to ms wicks, (f) the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.   the funds withdrawn from account ...15 by way of cheque number ...46 in favour of ms wicks were deposited in the trust account of jeff horsey solicitors on 4 december, 2018 – mr b’s solicitors.
conclusion
associate: dated: 30 may 2022
dated: 30 may 2022