last updated: 4 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
griggs & oduro (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 703
orders
it is ordered that:  allowing any other person to accompany her inside the said b street police station or to participate in the handover, and (b) recording or photographing the said handover or allowing any other person to do so.   recording or photographing the said handover or allowing any other person to do so.   entering upon or coming within 50 metres of c school or allowing anyone else to do so: (b) entering upon or coming within 50 metres of the father’s residence or allowing anyone else to do so, and (c) communicating with the child save and except with the father’s prior written consent.   entering upon or coming within 50 metres of the father’s residence or allowing anyone else to do so, and (c) communicating with the child save and except with the father’s prior written consent.   communicating with the child save and except with the father’s prior written consent.   to find and recover the child x born in 2016, and (b) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child may be found, and (c) to deliver the child to the father mr oduro at such a place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate.   to stop and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the child may be found, and (c) to deliver the child to the father mr oduro at such a place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate.   to deliver the child to the father mr oduro at such a place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate.   as and from friday 12 august 2022, from the conclusion of school friday (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) to 4:00pm on saturday and each alternate weekend thereafter. (b) as and from friday 30 september 2022, the time provided for in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to conclude at 4:00pm sunday each alternate weekend thereafter. (c) that as and from friday 25 november 2022, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) that as and from friday 20 january 2023, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school tuesday (or 9:00am if a non school day).   as and from friday 30 september 2022, the time provided for in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to conclude at 4:00pm sunday each alternate weekend thereafter. (c) that as and from friday 25 november 2022, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) that as and from friday 20 january 2023, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school tuesday (or 9:00am if a non school day).   that as and from friday 25 november 2022, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) that as and from friday 20 january 2023, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school tuesday (or 9:00am if a non school day).   that as and from friday 20 january 2023, the time referred to in paragraph 15(a) herein be extended to the commencement of school tuesday (or 9:00am if a non school day).   with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5:00pm on the middle saturday, and (b) with the father from 5:00pm on the middle saturday until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term noting that the child shall be in the mother’s care pursuant to paragraph 15(a) herein for the first weekend of the said school term. (c) the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   with the father from 5:00pm on the middle saturday until the commencement of school on the first day of the new school term noting that the child shall be in the mother’s care pursuant to paragraph 15(a) herein for the first weekend of the said school term. (c) the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if a non-school day) on the last friday of the school term until 5:00pm the following friday and each alternate week thereafter. (b) with the father from 5:00pm on friday of the first week of the school holidays until 5:00pm the following friday (or the commencement of school in term 1) and each alternate week thereafter. (c) that the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   with the father from 5:00pm on friday of the first week of the school holidays until 5:00pm the following friday (or the commencement of school in term 1) and each alternate week thereafter. (c) that the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   that the time referred to in paragraph 15 herein shall be suspended.   on mother’s day each year with the mother from 5:00pm on the saturday immediately preceding mother’s day until 5:00pm on mother’s day. (b) on father’s day each year with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday immediately preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (c) on the said child’s birthday commencing in 2023, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (d) on each of the parties’ birthdays, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (e) for christmas in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the mother from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am on christmas day. (f) in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   on father’s day each year with the father from 5:00pm on the saturday immediately preceding father’s day until 5:00pm on father’s day. (c) on the said child’s birthday commencing in 2023, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (d) on each of the parties’ birthdays, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (e) for christmas in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the mother from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am on christmas day. (f) in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   on the said child’s birthday commencing in 2023, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (d) on each of the parties’ birthdays, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (e) for christmas in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the mother from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am on christmas day. (f) in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   on each of the parties’ birthdays, telephone communication with the parent who does not have the care of the child at such time to be agreed between the parties in writing or failing agreement at 5:00pm. (e) for christmas in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the mother from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am on christmas day. (f) in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   for christmas in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, with the father from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the mother from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am on christmas day. (f) in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   in christmas 2023 and each alternate thereafter, with the mother from 10:00am christmas day until 10:00am boxing day and with the father from 10:00am 24 december until 10:00am christmas day. (g) for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   for easter in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (h) for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   for easter in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter with the father from the conclusion of school maundy thursday (or 3:00pm if a non-school day) until 5:00pm easter monday. (i) on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   on any other special occasion not otherwise provided for herein as agreed between the parties in writing.   a detailed itinerary in respect of such travel including addresses and telephone numbers for all venues which it is proposed the child will stay during the course of the travel and the period and dates the child is to stay at those venues. (b) all travel dates and copies of tickets showing departure and return, (c) flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for make up time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   all travel dates and copies of tickets showing departure and return, (c) flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for make up time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for make up time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for make up time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   a proposal for make up time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   a detailed itinerary in respect of such travel including addresses and telephone numbers for all venues which it is proposed the child will stay during the course of the travel and the period and dates the child is to stay at those venues: (b) all travel dates and copies of tickets showing departure and return, (c) flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for makeup time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   all travel dates and copies of tickets showing departure and return, (c) flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for makeup time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   flight numbers and/or details as to the mode of transport, (d) a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for makeup time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   a mobile telephone contact number which is to remain operational and is to be answered personally by the travelling party for the duration of the travel period, and (e) a proposal for makeup time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   a proposal for makeup time, if the non-travelling party’s times with the child is to be suspended or interrupted by the travel.   physically disciplining the child or allowing any other person to do so, (b) abusing, criticising or denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence of or hearing of the child, or allowing any other person to do so, (c) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the child or permitting any other person to do so, (d) travelling with the child to a location subject to an adverse travel warning issued by the australian government that is higher than “exercise normal safety precautions” at the time of travel, (e) videoing or recording any handover between the parties, and (f) permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   abusing, criticising or denigrating the other parent or the other parent’s family in the presence of or hearing of the child, or allowing any other person to do so, (c) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the child or permitting any other person to do so, (d) travelling with the child to a location subject to an adverse travel warning issued by the australian government that is higher than “exercise normal safety precautions” at the time of travel, (e) videoing or recording any handover between the parties, and (f) permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the child or permitting any other person to do so, (d) travelling with the child to a location subject to an adverse travel warning issued by the australian government that is higher than “exercise normal safety precautions” at the time of travel, (e) videoing or recording any handover between the parties, and (f) permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   travelling with the child to a location subject to an adverse travel warning issued by the australian government that is higher than “exercise normal safety precautions” at the time of travel, (e) videoing or recording any handover between the parties, and (f) permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   videoing or recording any handover between the parties, and (f) permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   permitting any other person from attending at the handovers referred to in paragraph 19 herein without the written consent of the other parent having first been obtained.   any medical problems or illness suffered by the child whilst in their respective care, (b) any medication that is prescribed for the child, (c) any social, school or religious function that the child is to attend, (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any medication that is prescribed for the child, (c) any social, school or religious function that the child is to attend, (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any social, school or religious function that the child is to attend, (d) any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.   any other matter relevant to the child’s welfare.
reasons for judgment
judge dickson:
introduction
documents relied upon at trial
court documents  amended initiating application filed 4 march 2022, (2) trial affidavits filed on 25 january 2022 and 4 march 2022, (3) trial affidavit filed 10 february 2022, (4) trial affidavit of ms j, maternal grandmother, filed 25 january 2022, (5) trial affidavit of mr h filed 25 january 2022, (6) trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   trial affidavits filed on 25 january 2022 and 4 march 2022, (3) trial affidavit filed 10 february 2022, (4) trial affidavit of ms j, maternal grandmother, filed 25 january 2022, (5) trial affidavit of mr h filed 25 january 2022, (6) trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   trial affidavit filed 10 february 2022, (4) trial affidavit of ms j, maternal grandmother, filed 25 january 2022, (5) trial affidavit of mr h filed 25 january 2022, (6) trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   trial affidavit of ms j, maternal grandmother, filed 25 january 2022, (5) trial affidavit of mr h filed 25 january 2022, (6) trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   trial affidavit of mr h filed 25 january 2022, (6) trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   trial affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022, and (7) an outline of case document.   an outline of case document.   amended response to initiating application filed 23 february 2021, (2) trial affidavits filed 3 february 2022 and 25 february 2022, (3) the report of ms k, psychologist (tendered by consent without the need for ms k to be cross examined), and (4) an outline of case document.   trial affidavits filed 3 february 2022 and 25 february 2022, (3) the report of ms k, psychologist (tendered by consent without the need for ms k to be cross examined), and (4) an outline of case document.   the report of ms k, psychologist (tendered by consent without the need for ms k to be cross examined), and (4) an outline of case document.   an outline of case document.
exhibits
mother  usb stick of video and audio taken of handovers on 23 december 2021 and 6 january 2022 (exhibit m2), (b) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 23 june 2021 (exhibit m3), (c) selection of sms messages between the parties in october 2018 in relation to the child (exhibit m4), (d) cps carer interview with the father dated 28 january 2021 (exhibit m5), and (e) photograph of mr oduro (the father) wearing silver ring on middle finger dated 2014 (exhibit m6).   photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 23 june 2021 (exhibit m3), (c) selection of sms messages between the parties in october 2018 in relation to the child (exhibit m4), (d) cps carer interview with the father dated 28 january 2021 (exhibit m5), and (e) photograph of mr oduro (the father) wearing silver ring on middle finger dated 2014 (exhibit m6).   selection of sms messages between the parties in october 2018 in relation to the child (exhibit m4), (d) cps carer interview with the father dated 28 january 2021 (exhibit m5), and (e) photograph of mr oduro (the father) wearing silver ring on middle finger dated 2014 (exhibit m6).   cps carer interview with the father dated 28 january 2021 (exhibit m5), and (e) photograph of mr oduro (the father) wearing silver ring on middle finger dated 2014 (exhibit m6).   photograph of mr oduro (the father) wearing silver ring on middle finger dated 2014 (exhibit m6).
father  text messages between parties dated 23 december 2021 (exhibit f1), (b) medical report dated 8 february 2021 by dr l forensic paediatrician child protection services in relation to the child x (exhibit f2), (c) child protection service continuation sheet dated 20 january 2022 (exhibit f3), (d) child protection service intake form dated 9 april 2021 (exhibit f4), (e) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 8 april 2021 (exhibit f5), (f) child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   medical report dated 8 february 2021 by dr l forensic paediatrician child protection services in relation to the child x (exhibit f2), (c) child protection service continuation sheet dated 20 january 2022 (exhibit f3), (d) child protection service intake form dated 9 april 2021 (exhibit f4), (e) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 8 april 2021 (exhibit f5), (f) child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   child protection service continuation sheet dated 20 january 2022 (exhibit f3), (d) child protection service intake form dated 9 april 2021 (exhibit f4), (e) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 8 april 2021 (exhibit f5), (f) child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   child protection service intake form dated 9 april 2021 (exhibit f4), (e) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 8 april 2021 (exhibit f5), (f) child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 8 april 2021 (exhibit f5), (f) child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   child protection service continuation sheet dated 22 february 2022 (exhibit f6), (g) photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   photocopy of mother’s diary entry dated 18 november 2021 (exhibit f7), (h) child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   child protection service continuation sheet dated 7 january 2020 (but should read 7 january 2021) (exhibit f8), (i) child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   child protection service continuation sheet dated 12 january 2020 (but should read 2021) (exhibit f9), (j) photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   photocopies of diary entries made by ms j (the maternal grandmother) (exhibit f10), (k) co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   co-parenting counselling report dated 3 march 2022 prepared by ms k (exhibit f11), and (l) photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).   photographs of father’s plants in his apartment dated march 2022 (exhibit f12).
independent children’s lawyer  cps case note dated 21 january 2021 (exhibit i1), (b) forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 26 march 2021 (exhibit i2), (c) department of child protection familial intake report in relation to the child x (exhibit i3), (d) transcripts of interviews between child x and ms m cps dated 8 february 2022 and 14 february 2022 respectively (exhibit i4), (e) child protection services forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022 (exhibit i5), and (f) video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 26 march 2021 (exhibit i2), (c) department of child protection familial intake report in relation to the child x (exhibit i3), (d) transcripts of interviews between child x and ms m cps dated 8 february 2022 and 14 february 2022 respectively (exhibit i4), (e) child protection services forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022 (exhibit i5), and (f) video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   department of child protection familial intake report in relation to the child x (exhibit i3), (d) transcripts of interviews between child x and ms m cps dated 8 february 2022 and 14 february 2022 respectively (exhibit i4), (e) child protection services forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022 (exhibit i5), and (f) video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   transcripts of interviews between child x and ms m cps dated 8 february 2022 and 14 february 2022 respectively (exhibit i4), (e) child protection services forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022 (exhibit i5), and (f) video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   child protection services forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022 (exhibit i5), and (f) video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   video interviews of the child x and ms m of cps on 8 february 2022 (exhibit i6). (g) addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 from ms m of the child protection service (exhibit i7).   ms n, court child expert (‘the court child expert’). the court child expert’s oral evidence supplemented her family reports dated 29 may 2019 and 30 september 2021, and (2) ms m from the child protection service (‘cps’) at the o hospital. ms m oral evidence supplemented her forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022. the addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 was admitted into evidence by consent on 25 may 2022 without the need for ms m to be called for further cross examination.   ms m from the child protection service (‘cps’) at the o hospital. ms m oral evidence supplemented her forensic psychosocial assessment report dated 24 february 2022. the addendum forensic psychosocial report dated 16 may 2022 was admitted into evidence by consent on 25 may 2022 without the need for ms m to be called for further cross examination.
issues in dispute  whether or not the mother or the father should have the sole parental responsibility for the child, (2) whether or not the child should live either with his mother or his father, (3) if the mother is successful with her application, then whether or not the child’s relationship with his father should be permanently terminated, or in the alternative, whether or not the child should spend time with the father supervised by a professional supervisor for 2 hours each week, (4) if the father’s application for primary care is successful, whether or not the mother should spend time with the child each alternate weekend from friday to monday (or such other longer period), school holidays and special occasions, and (5) is the child at risk in the care of either or both of the parties?   whether or not the child should live either with his mother or his father, (3) if the mother is successful with her application, then whether or not the child’s relationship with his father should be permanently terminated, or in the alternative, whether or not the child should spend time with the father supervised by a professional supervisor for 2 hours each week, (4) if the father’s application for primary care is successful, whether or not the mother should spend time with the child each alternate weekend from friday to monday (or such other longer period), school holidays and special occasions, and (5) is the child at risk in the care of either or both of the parties?   if the mother is successful with her application, then whether or not the child’s relationship with his father should be permanently terminated, or in the alternative, whether or not the child should spend time with the father supervised by a professional supervisor for 2 hours each week, (4) if the father’s application for primary care is successful, whether or not the mother should spend time with the child each alternate weekend from friday to monday (or such other longer period), school holidays and special occasions, and (5) is the child at risk in the care of either or both of the parties?   if the father’s application for primary care is successful, whether or not the mother should spend time with the child each alternate weekend from friday to monday (or such other longer period), school holidays and special occasions, and (5) is the child at risk in the care of either or both of the parties?   is the child at risk in the care of either or both of the parties?
background  that the father’s residence was in filthy condition, there was mouldy food on the counters and a cat litter tray next to the food preparation area, (2) that the father had left children’s medication unrefrigerated and on a counter, and (3) that the mother, on accessing the father’s ipad under the pretence of checking to see whether or not the father was accessing her personal bank accounts, discovered that the father had been viewing female pornography. the mother was unsure as to whether or not the women were underage.   that the father had left children’s medication unrefrigerated and on a counter, and (3) that the mother, on accessing the father’s ipad under the pretence of checking to see whether or not the father was accessing her personal bank accounts, discovered that the father had been viewing female pornography. the mother was unsure as to whether or not the women were underage.   that the mother, on accessing the father’s ipad under the pretence of checking to see whether or not the father was accessing her personal bank accounts, discovered that the father had been viewing female pornography. the mother was unsure as to whether or not the women were underage.
he said looking down in a shy, embarrassed and scared manner, “not sure”. as a result of his demeanour, i did not feel comfortable pressing him further. it was not until 16 december 2020 that he told me that he was being hit by a baseball bat and a golf stick. i rang the child abuse hotline immediately.
dcp, the father has been fine in his interactions with dcp – seems understanding of the process but concerned about the impact on x of no contact and he has expressed concerns that for the past 3 christmases, the mother has stopped contact. he said he sees it as a pattern by the mother to prevent him from having contact at the special times of the year. the father has presented as being child focussed and has been asking how x is going and querying the impact of no contact. the mother has made several comments which have put doubts into the minds of dcp worker about whether she is being driven by other factors – she called again this morning and left voicemail message in heightened tone, saying it was an urgent matter and needed the worker to call her back in relation to the new allegations. dcp more concerned about the mother’s presentation as compared with the father.[2]   strangulation by his father, (2) that the father had placed sticky tape on his mouth, (3) that the father had chained the child to the bed if he was naughty, (4) that the child had nightmares at night informing his mother that his father had been “coming out of the wall” and trying to tie him up and strangle him, (5) that the father had hit the child with a “baseball bat” and a “golf thing”, (6) on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the father had placed sticky tape on his mouth, (3) that the father had chained the child to the bed if he was naughty, (4) that the child had nightmares at night informing his mother that his father had been “coming out of the wall” and trying to tie him up and strangle him, (5) that the father had hit the child with a “baseball bat” and a “golf thing”, (6) on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the father had chained the child to the bed if he was naughty, (4) that the child had nightmares at night informing his mother that his father had been “coming out of the wall” and trying to tie him up and strangle him, (5) that the father had hit the child with a “baseball bat” and a “golf thing”, (6) on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the child had nightmares at night informing his mother that his father had been “coming out of the wall” and trying to tie him up and strangle him, (5) that the father had hit the child with a “baseball bat” and a “golf thing”, (6) on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the father had hit the child with a “baseball bat” and a “golf thing”, (6) on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   on 28 december 2020 an allegation that the father had touched his “bum” and “penis”. (7) that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the father only fed him noodles, that he did not have his own bedroom and slept with his father, and (8) that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.   that the father had touched the child’s “bum and willy”.
she said that both she and the mother were very disappointed about the current situation, following the third forensic interview and said that they have seen the way that x reacts to mr oduro (the father) and said he is scared of mr oduro and has been having recurring nightmares about mr oduro coming out of the wall. dl explained that x had not been able to provide enough contextual and clear information about abuse for police to take any further criminal action. ms j said she questions giving x back to mr oduro and said that x does not make things up and has said that dad hits him with a golf bat and mr oduro put a chain around his neck if he does not behave. she also expressed concerns about possible sexual abuse and said that there is a history of sexual abuse in the father’s family. she said that “ putting everything together” the family has concerns about x being with his father.
she said that her family knows that something has happened to x and said “we won’t give up and we will go for custody and maybe supervised visits” for the father.
the child attended in the company of his mother and maternal grandmother. the focus of the interview was on sexual abuse. the child presented as tired and not as engaged as in the previous 2 interviews and early in the session started to indicate that he wanted to leave and was tired. the child “spoke about being touched on his willy and his bum by his father and that he was not allowed to talk about it”. however, he again was lacking in contextual information. he said it happened in dad’s bed and then said it happened in the shower and also provided information that appeared fantastical – such as daddy touching his penis with a needle.[3]
due to cps and sapol finalizing (sic) their investigation processes, dcp are now not in a position to stipulate that x should not have contact with his fa, as dcp have not been able to make any conclusive findings either. mo became quite heightened on the phone and raised her voice at ssw ... mo stated that she would not be letting x have contact with fa and will be speaking with her lawyer requesting an urgent hearing. ssw discussed that if mo would like to withhold contact from fa, then that is now her choice and she should seek legal advise (sic) around making this decision.[4]
requesting therapy (for the child). the mother said that x’s behaviours are escalating, for example he is having night terrors and thinks that his father is coming through the wall to get him. reportedly, child care and the grandmother needed to call mum to help calm him. in addition x has started throwing things at her and is yelling at her, and is having eating issues, whereby he will not during the day and then gorge himself in the evening. ms r is asking if we would consider offering him therapy given that x is beginning to ‘open up and disclose more’, and that we may be able to offer longer term therapy.[5]
assessment: conclusive findings were not able to be determined from the forensic medical and interviews complete with x. there are some suspicions indicators of emotional distress but in the absence of dcp being able to assess the child in the father’s care (mother has chosen to withhold contact) dcp are unable to substantiate the allegations made against the father.[6]
the ground “child has significant symptoms of emotional distress” has not been substantiated ... the ground “violent behaviour directed toward the child” has not been substantiated. ... the ground “unexplained injury” has not been substantiated. ... the ground “sexual act or exploitation” has not been substantiated.[7] (original emphasis)
he looked down (as if he was embarrassed or scared) and said “it happened at child care”. i asked what happened at child care and he said “i don’t know”. i did not press him further because he already appeared upset. i did not want to get him even more upset close to bed time and he clearly did not want to talk about it. i simply accepted his answer, although i suspected that it was untrue.
the mother’s position
the father’s position
independent’s children’s lawyer’s position  whether the father presents a risk to the child because of his alleged physical abuse of the child, (b) whether the mother presents a risk to the child as a consequence of: (i) deliberately making unfounded allegations with respect to the father’s alleged abuse of the child, and (ii) any likelihood that allegations of a similar nature would continue to be made.   the court should make an order for sole parental responsibility in favour of one of the parties depending on the court’s findings. (2) the independent children’s lawyer did not support a position where there would be “no time” with the parent who is not the primary caregiver. (3) the independent children’s lawyer did not support a return to any shared care arrangement.   the independent children’s lawyer did not support a position where there would be “no time” with the parent who is not the primary caregiver. (3) the independent children’s lawyer did not support a return to any shared care arrangement.   the independent children’s lawyer did not support a return to any shared care arrangement.
significant issues in the proceedings
the evidence
the mother
i felt pressured to enter into the final orders to finalise the matter because i was concerned about the heavy criticism made of me in the family assessment report dated 30 august 2019 and this made me second-guess my parenting.[8]
and, of course, that has been your concern for quite some time now. the father notes that on 21 january 2021, you told a meeting with cps and sapol that x will never be seeing his father again. that was in january last year. do you remember saying that? --- yes, i do. and that’s a view that you have maintained for quite some time now, isn’t it? --- yes.[9]
i say that prior to our separation, there was family violence in the relationship. the violence was not physical, in that the father never assaulted me.
but again, there is no reference to that or any other physical violence in your trial affidavit? --- okay. i understand what you’re saying, and i feel that it is a major mistake. it’s not a matter of whether it’s a mistake or not. it’s whether or not you think that information would be of assistance to her honour in her final orders for the parenting arrangements for your son? --- absolutely, it’s relevant. but you still didn’t think to include this in your trial affidavit? --- as i said, it was misworded and a mistake.[10]
and – you were concerned about him. what were you going to do with the photographs? --- i wanted to communicate with the father. that’s my whole idea this whole time.[11]
her honour: does he ever ask you, “why are you taking a photo, mummy”? ---like, often, he wants to show me, like, a rash or something. so, you know, if i wanted to show the doctor, for example, like, how he came into my care, then yes. but he – he doesn’t really ask, no. right. does he understand that if he shows you something like that, that it would be the ordinary practice to take a photo of it? --- perhaps. but i don’t take hundreds of photos. it’s only if he presents unwell. if something – if there’s a rash or, you know, something that’s suspicious. right. how many photos – i mean, we’ve seen a lot in this book. how many photos do you think you have of x with – presenting with injuries or illnesses or rashes or something of that descriptive? --- i would say no more than 40. so can i understand, then, that the photos that are in this book – that’s not all of the photos. this is a selection of the photos? --- i would say that’s majority of them, your honour.[12]
and when he says that it’s your view that there can be no other explanation except for mr oduro using violence? --- there was no incident reports at the childcare so, again. no, that wasn’t my question. when mr – when x tells you that he was hit by the father your only explanation is that must have been an act of violence? --- correct. it could not have been – it could not have been an accident? --- no. and it could not have been perhaps in play? --- no. did you ever consider either of those explanations? --- no. did you consider that x was making that up? --- no. and beyond the bruising there was no broken bones or the like. it was just bruising in terms of the injury? --- correct.[13]
well, i’m asking you, ms griggs. have you considered the possibility that these behaviours are as a result of sexual abuse by somebody else? --- there – that could be a possibility. but you think it is ms oduro who has done it? --- yes. and why do you think it’s mr oduro who does it? --- because x has made disclosures. and you saw as part of the cps forensic interview, the first one, that there were elements of fantasy involved in that which led to some concern that that – that, indeed, that had not happened. you remember reading that? --- they said they were unsure if it had occurred or not. so that’s – in your mind it must be mr oduro who has been sexually abusing x? --- yes. and if the court orders that x have time with mr oduro unsupervised will you remain concerned that he is sexually abusing x? --- i will be concerned, yes. and you will continue to monitor x’s behaviour about that? --- yes. her honour: does mr h share your belief that mr oduro is sexually abusing x? --- yes, your honour. and does your mother also share that same belief that mr oduro is sexual abusing x? --- or had sexually abused at that point, your honour, yes. i appreciate there’s no time at the moment? --- yes. but is it a common position that yourself, mr h and your mother believe that x is still at risk of sexual abuse --- ? yes. if he has unsupervised time with his father? --- yes, because x had made disclosures to all three of us at different points, your honour. yes.[14]
her honour: was it because of your family’s dissatisfaction with how dcp had handled the investigation in 2021 that a decision was made to attend at the police in january of this year rather than reporting to dcp? --- mr h, my partner, he attended and the first thing he thought of was y street police station because of the location that we were in, the cbd. right. okay? --- rather than a phone call to report through dcp. right? --- but, yes, your honour, we took that into account as well. okay? --- yes.[15]
did you – and you didn’t ask mr h not to make the report, did you? i said not to make – --- i didn’t say not to make the report. i said, “perhaps we shouldn’t make the report.” and in reality, ms griggs, you were quite happy for him to make the report and you encouraged him to, didn’t you? --- well, now i’m glad he made the report, yes. and why are you glad he made the report? --- because it has happened and it needed to be told and exposed. so x has undergone a further two forensic interviews as a result of that process? --- correct. and do you think that’s good for x to undergo forensic interview processes? --- yes, because now he has a voice. and so you don’t see that there is anything wrong with x undergoing a forensic interview process? --- not at all. you don’t think that might be upsetting for x? --- it may be upsetting for him to relive what has actually occurred to him but that verses being at physical harm, i think, that would be a much better option. now, it’s your case that there is absolutely no possible explanation that x must be at risk of physical harm and i want you to suspend that belief for a moment and assume that x is not at risk of physical harm. would you accept if there was no risk of physical harm to x it would be harmful for him to undergo these forensic interviews? --- yes.[16]
but you were content for x to have weekend time, nonetheless? --- i was purely seeking what i thought the court would be happy with. so it wasn’t a genuine proposal you were making? --- no. you were just saying what you thought the report writer wanted to hear? --- yes, at that point. what orders were you really seeking at that time? if you just put aside for the moment the assumptions that others were making about you and your reporting, what orders would you have sought if it was solely up to you at that time? --- primary care and supervised time with the father. so the same orders that you’re seeking this week? that’s right.[17] ... and again, your evidence to the court is that the proposal that you put to the report writer wasn’t a genuine one, you were just telling the writer what she wanted to hear at that point in time?‑‑‑i believe so.[18]
sorry, i might need to clarify my question. that might be of some assistance. i’m not suggesting – in my question to you, i don’t suggest that the bruises are in any way made up or are not a consequence of an injury. what i am inviting you to do is to hold in your mind the possibility that there may be an innocent justification for the bruises. and if, ultimately, whether it is sapol – or some other authority finds that there is an innocent reason for the bruises, i’m asking you to consider what impact these investigations will have had on x? --- i guess what i can say is that i’m x’s voice, so he has come to me and disclosed these things to me. and if i didn’t say anything, then that would be on my conscience. so you consider yourself to be x’s voice? --- if he discloses things to me, yes. and again, i’m – i will just ask the question again. if – have you considered the possibility that what x is disclosing to you may not be 100 per cent accurate? --- i believe it is as accurate as he has disclosed to me. yes. so you haven’t considered the possibility that what x is saying to you may not be as he says it? --- do you mean that it’s made up? that it’s made up. there might be an innocent justification for it. there could be a whole range of reasons. no, you say to this court that there is only one reason, and that is because x is telling the truth? --- correct. noting what you say – that your view is that there can only ever be one reason, and that is the reasons as outlined by x in his disclosures to you – i’m still going to invite you to consider what impact it would have had on x to have his bruises photographed at a hospital if in fact it wasn’t caused by physical abuse? --- yes, but i believe that it was physical abuse.[19]
do you think you play a part in these proceedings confusing to carry on and on and on? --- when he’s not agreeing and he doesn’t want to call a conference with me and come to some sort of agreement, then no. i --- so you think --- ? i feel like my hands are tied. that’s how i feel. her honour: but, sorry, ms griggs, your application – the way you’re giving your evidence at the moment suggests that you’re receptive to trying to resolve this case? --- i have tried, your honour. but your case is that the father spend no time with x, and that you have an order for sole parental responsibility? --- correct. right. are you suggesting, seriously, that the father should just accept what you are offering him, and that would bring an end to these proceedings? --- perhaps. i see. thank you. ms bailey.[20]
mr h  the occasion when the child was reported to have asked another female child to pull down her pants at day care in november 2021, and (2) the behaviour of the child with his half-brother p in the bath.   the behaviour of the child with his half-brother p in the bath.
ms j (‘the maternal grandmother’)
my husband and i do not foster negative feelings towards mr oduro. however, i am concerned about mr oduro spending unsupervised time with x in circumstances where x returns from mr oduro’s care with severe unexplained bruising and where x is almost always reluctant to transition into mr oduro’s care.
and that didn’t calm x down?‑‑‑no. but i feel like walking away was not the right thing to do. i think x just needed to be told, “i know you’re upset”. he needed to be validated in his – in his trauma. and what do you mean by validated in his trauma?‑‑‑i mean to say something like, “i know you’re upset. i know this is hard for you”. obviously, x was in a very distressed state and he – by walking away, i don’t think that helped the situation. well, what – why do you – now, you say that it was hard for x. what was it in particular ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑well ‑ ‑ ‑ [21]
her honour: just while you’re doing that, what did you mean by you won’t give up? give up what?‑‑‑your honour, i was referring to the fact that x had disclosed this information to us. and we were aware that x – from mr ad’s mouth, mr ad’s said to me that x was not able to give enough information. he was able to tell of what happened, but he wasn’t able to tell what led up to that and what happened afterwards. and he said that was very consistent with a child of x’s age and he said if he was older, he would be able to disclose those things. and that’s why i said we won’t give up. if – if this continues, we won’t give up. all right. but won’t give up what? what are you hoping ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑won’t give up, i suppose, fighting ‑ ‑ ‑ what are you hoping to achieve, i guess, by continuing on?‑‑‑well, i suppose, being an advocate for x. like, we’re his voice. so you know, if it did continue and if he continued to disclose things, well, we would be his voice again.[23]
did you consider at that time x being a four and a half-year-old when he says mr oduro touched his penis and bottom, that there may have been an innocent explanation for that ?‑‑‑no, i didn’t, because in my training as a mandatory reporter we are told that you are to believe a child when they tell you something about an abuse because it is a very rare thing that children will make it up and it is where i report to dcp. but x didn’t actually tell you that his father had abused him, did he?‑‑‑he did. he said – he said “daddy.” he told me that daddy touched my penis and my bottom. but he said he touched my penis and bottom. that’s all he said?‑‑‑whatever i’ve said in here is what he said because i would have done it straightaway. and with a child under four-and-a-half years old – four-and-a-half years old ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ there would have been occasions with bating or toileting or dressing where mr oduro may have innocently or as a requirement of his care for x have touched his penis or bottom. do you accept that?‑‑‑he may have, but i – the way that x told me was he was traumatised by it. he didn’t like it.[24] ‑ ‑ ‑ that this just came out of the blue?‑‑‑yes. i was shocked. i was totally shocked, your honour. right. thank you. and where you told x or reassured him and you said we can pray and we will go away, is that what happened? did you then join together ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes, we did. ‑ ‑ ‑ in pray?‑‑‑i prayed for him and it was not that – that doesn’t sound really good. the vision that that kind of, you know, vision of dad coming out of there, you won’t have that anymore if i pray with you. okay?‑‑‑and then he went to bed fine. so i’m picturing you holding hands or something like that ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes, yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ and praying together?‑‑‑yes. praying to god, that’s ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes, absolutely. praying to god, what, that dad wouldn’t come out of the air-conditioner or want to be safe or ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑just that that would – he would go away, this vision would go away. it wasn’t that, like, mr oduro was actually there coming out of the air-conditioner, but that that scariness that he was feeling would go away. okay. thank you?‑‑‑thank you, your honour.[25]
and judging from the conversation you had with mr ae, you think that might need to be supervised to manage the risk for x?‑‑‑at the moment. and if x was spending unsupervised time with mr oduro, you would continue to be quite concerned about ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑at the moment, yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ about the abuse ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ x might have?‑‑‑yes. and you would continue to monitor x for signs of abuse at the hands of mr oduro?‑‑‑yes. and i think from your evidence you take your duty as a mandatory notifier quite seriously?‑‑‑yes, i do. you wouldn’t hesitate to tell – to make a child abuse report if you saw signs of abuse?‑‑‑it’s my duty by law to do it. i have no further questions for this witness, your honour.[26]
and you maintain that x is always truthful?‑‑‑pretty much. and that children don’t lie about allegations of abuse?‑‑‑yes. and so that when x says he was “hit by a bat”, it is literally he was hit by a bat?‑‑‑yes. and you think that there was – that the father put a chain around his neck?‑‑‑yes, if that’s what he said. yes. so every disclosure that x makes is an accurate one ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑pretty much. ‑ ‑ ‑ that is free of any embellishment?‑‑‑we all embellish, so ‑ ‑ ‑ it is not fantastical?‑‑‑it is not fantastical. yes, no, i don’t think he – he – he wouldn’t even know about those things to make them up. so in your mind, there isn’t even a possibility that the injuries could have an innocent explanation?‑‑‑no. what then follows is that because x said to you on one occasion his father touched his willy and his bum, that the father definitely sexually abused x?‑‑‑well, that he touched – exactly what x said. we don’t know the embellishment – like, the extra information around that. that’s all the information that he gave, so that’s all we know. is it your understanding – or is it your belief that because x was – on your case ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ touched by mr oduro, that he was sexually abused?‑‑‑yes. mrs griggs, you say in your affidavit that you foster no negative feelings towards mr oduro. is that still the case?‑‑‑it is.[27] how can that be, mrs griggs, in the circumstances where you were making allegations that the father physically and sexually abused your grandson?‑‑‑well, it is – i am being truthful here – it is the love of god, because god doesn’t hate the person, he only hates the action, and that’s what i extend to mr oduro.[28]
ms d psychologist
depending on the outcome of the court proceedings ms griggs may require ongoing treatment to continue to address her anxieties. specifically, should the court deem ms griggs allegations to be unreliable, then this would likely cause increased distress for ms griggs and she may require assistance to help alleviate her symptoms. conversely, should ms griggs’ allegations be considered valid, then it is likely her anxieties will lessen. should this occur, ms griggs will not require intensive therapeutic intervention but she may benefit from “maintenance” sessions to help ensure she sustains and continues to make gains in her emotional understanding and to support her ongoing care of her children.[30]
the father  he had never hit the child with a tree branch or any other object, (2) the only plants in the father’s apartments are plants and nothing with a branch capable of inflicting an injury, (3) that the only occasion that the child had “hidden” from his father was during the play activity commonly known as “hide and seek” which the father commented was enjoyed by the child, (4) that the father had been interviewed by officers from sapol two weeks prior to the trial commencing in relation to the injury to the child’s head in november 2021. the father’s evidence is that he was offered an opportunity to have a solicitor present which he declined, and that he informed the officers that he was content to proceed with the interview. at the date of the trial, the father confirmed that he had not been charged with any offence in relation to the child or otherwise. (5) the father also confirmed in chief that as at the date of trial he had not been asked to participate in an interview with ms m of the cps.   the only plants in the father’s apartments are plants and nothing with a branch capable of inflicting an injury, (3) that the only occasion that the child had “hidden” from his father was during the play activity commonly known as “hide and seek” which the father commented was enjoyed by the child, (4) that the father had been interviewed by officers from sapol two weeks prior to the trial commencing in relation to the injury to the child’s head in november 2021. the father’s evidence is that he was offered an opportunity to have a solicitor present which he declined, and that he informed the officers that he was content to proceed with the interview. at the date of the trial, the father confirmed that he had not been charged with any offence in relation to the child or otherwise. (5) the father also confirmed in chief that as at the date of trial he had not been asked to participate in an interview with ms m of the cps.   that the only occasion that the child had “hidden” from his father was during the play activity commonly known as “hide and seek” which the father commented was enjoyed by the child, (4) that the father had been interviewed by officers from sapol two weeks prior to the trial commencing in relation to the injury to the child’s head in november 2021. the father’s evidence is that he was offered an opportunity to have a solicitor present which he declined, and that he informed the officers that he was content to proceed with the interview. at the date of the trial, the father confirmed that he had not been charged with any offence in relation to the child or otherwise. (5) the father also confirmed in chief that as at the date of trial he had not been asked to participate in an interview with ms m of the cps.   that the father had been interviewed by officers from sapol two weeks prior to the trial commencing in relation to the injury to the child’s head in november 2021. the father’s evidence is that he was offered an opportunity to have a solicitor present which he declined, and that he informed the officers that he was content to proceed with the interview. at the date of the trial, the father confirmed that he had not been charged with any offence in relation to the child or otherwise. (5) the father also confirmed in chief that as at the date of trial he had not been asked to participate in an interview with ms m of the cps.   the father also confirmed in chief that as at the date of trial he had not been asked to participate in an interview with ms m of the cps.   that he denied ever attempting to strangle the child around the neck or grabbing the child by the neck. (2) that the child would not hide from him other than in the activity known as “hide and seek”. (3) that occasionally the child would be defiant at handover. (4) the father completely denied the allegation that by late 2020 the child was withdrawn and anxious. (5) the father denied that the child would ever lie on the floor and not talk to anyone. (6) that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   that the child would not hide from him other than in the activity known as “hide and seek”. (3) that occasionally the child would be defiant at handover. (4) the father completely denied the allegation that by late 2020 the child was withdrawn and anxious. (5) the father denied that the child would ever lie on the floor and not talk to anyone. (6) that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   that occasionally the child would be defiant at handover. (4) the father completely denied the allegation that by late 2020 the child was withdrawn and anxious. (5) the father denied that the child would ever lie on the floor and not talk to anyone. (6) that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   the father completely denied the allegation that by late 2020 the child was withdrawn and anxious. (5) the father denied that the child would ever lie on the floor and not talk to anyone. (6) that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   the father denied that the child would ever lie on the floor and not talk to anyone. (6) that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   that if the mother had agreed to handovers occurring at the childcare centre then problems with the child separating and leaving the maternal grandparents home would not have arisen. (7) that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   that by january 2021 both parties were concerned about the child’s behaviour at handover. (8) the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   the father denied ever hitting the child or locking him in his room. he further denied restraining the child if he was having a tantrum. (9) the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   the father denied showering with the child and gave evidence that the child showered independently. (10) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father denied ever hitting the child with a baseball bat or golf stick. the father stated that he did not own a baseball bat and his golf clubs are stored in a locked basement storeroom. nor, did the father own any bamboo sticks which were alleged to have been used by him to strike the child. (11) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father was unable to explain how the child sustained a bruise which was observed by the mother on 3 december 2020. (12) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father also denied that either of his parents had struck the child or put sticky tape over his mouth. the father stated that he had stopped showering with the child after allegations had been made by mother. the father conceded that on occasion he would assist the child with his toileting but denied touching his genitals. (13) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) as at august 2021 the father denied the child having aggressive behaviour other than “very rarely” and “sometimes at handovers”. the father described as ‘very rarely” the child not listening to him and denied every using inappropriate language with the child or the child to him. the father described the child as being “always happy” in his care. (14) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) in relation to the injuries sustained by the child on 17 november 2021 to his head, the father was cross examined about the need to send a message to the mother. the father gave evidence that he did so in order to “safeguard myself” because he was concerned that the mother would make further allegations. the father agreed that he observed the mark to the child’s head when collected from childcare. when asked why he had not raised the injury with the childcare centre, the father agreed that he could have done so but that he had considered the mark to be nothing more than “a play around...kids mucking around”. (15) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father agreed that an incident had also occurred at the child care centre where the child had asked another child to “pull her pants down”. the father was unable to explain why he had not read or seen the report from the child care centre on the day in question. the court was left without any independent or clear understanding as to what had transpired that day given that neither party called any childcare worker to give evidence at trial. (16) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father denied having an argument with the child on the evening of 17 november 2021. (17) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father denied paragraph 87 of the mother’s trial affidavit. the father’s evidence is that he was telephoned by mr h who had been abusive. the father denied ever assaulting the child with his hand or wearing a ring or another other object. the father’s evidence is that he has not worn a ring since 2015. (18) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) when cross examined by the mother’s counsel as to why he had not gone back to the childcare centre to query the injury, the father explained that he did not consider that the “bump” was such an issue and so he thought it best to advise the mother so she could simply apply cream. (19) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father conceded that neither party had paid child support to the other. (20) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father conceded that the handover on 23 december 2021 had been “a bit distressing” for the child but denied that the handover was “traumatic” as put to him by the mother’s counsel. the father’s evidence was that upon the child coming into his care, he then settled and the crying ceased. (21) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father gave evidence that if he was successful in securing an order for primary care of the child then he would have no difficulty in sending a sms to the mother to keep her informed in relation to any urgent issues. (22) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father was asked as to whether or not he accepted that mr h had attended at the sapol on 6 january 2022 out of “love” for the child. the father responded by stating that he had “no idea” why mr h had gone to the police station and that he did not “know why he did”. (23) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father agreed that he was unhappy when mr h had cut the child’s hair stating that he was concerned that the child would be the subject of “ridicule” by having shapes cut into the side of his hair. these shapes included a zig zag shape (similar to a ‘lightning bolt’), a love heart and a star which the father had attempted to rectify by cutting the child’s hair even shorter. (24) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.  ) the father categorically denied punching the child in the stomach accidentally or otherwise.   the child is a very active young boy and prone to injuries. (2) when the child sustained a bruise to his back on or about 3 december 2020 he had assumed that it occurred due to rough play at childcare and that it had been accidental. the father also contended that the alleged injuries in april, june and november 2021 were accidental and caused by boisterous play at the childcare centre. (3) when the child came to him he would observe as to whether or not the child had any scratches or bruising and would then send an sms message to the mother to inform her. if the father observed the child to have some form of marking whilst changing clothes then the father described “making a note in my head” to put it in the sms to the mother. (4) that both parents love the child very much.   when the child sustained a bruise to his back on or about 3 december 2020 he had assumed that it occurred due to rough play at childcare and that it had been accidental. the father also contended that the alleged injuries in april, june and november 2021 were accidental and caused by boisterous play at the childcare centre. (3) when the child came to him he would observe as to whether or not the child had any scratches or bruising and would then send an sms message to the mother to inform her. if the father observed the child to have some form of marking whilst changing clothes then the father described “making a note in my head” to put it in the sms to the mother. (4) that both parents love the child very much.   when the child came to him he would observe as to whether or not the child had any scratches or bruising and would then send an sms message to the mother to inform her. if the father observed the child to have some form of marking whilst changing clothes then the father described “making a note in my head” to put it in the sms to the mother. (4) that both parents love the child very much.   that both parents love the child very much.
ms k, child and family consultant
whilst the parents were able to participate in a joint session and make several agreements in terms of the parenting of the child, and both assert that they want to step away from the court process, the mother continued to express a lack of confidence in the father’s parenting and the child being safe in his care. therefore, progress in the co-parenting counselling has remained in its infancy due to the mother’s staunch belief that the child has been abused by the father and continues to be at risk of abuse in the father’s care. it appears that even when the allegations of child abuse are unsubstantiated, the mother is not accepting of the assessment. whilst the mother maintains the perspective that the child is at risk in the care of the father, it is not possible for there to be a co-parenting relationship or an equal shared care arrangement. (my emphasis)
court child expert ms n the first family report   the child’s time spending with each parent, (2) the viability of equal shared care continuing in view of the limited cooperative parenting, (3) the child’s young age.[31]   the viability of equal shared care continuing in view of the limited cooperative parenting, (3) the child’s young age.[31]   the child’s young age.[31]
both parties’ accounts of their relationship appear to suggest that they held different experiences and perceptions of their relationship. there have been mutual allegations made with regard to each parent’s capacity to prioritise (the child’s) needs. each parent appeared to attribute the responsibility to the other parent and appeared to focus on externalising the responsibility, rather than remain child focussed. there is limited communication between the parties which continues to present as opportunities for ongoing acrimony, particularly around the discord of (the child’s) medical needs. both parties state that they were willing to negotiate and move forward, although there was little evidence to suggest that this had occurred since the child dispute conference. in view of the apparent low risk factors in this matter, such continued acrimony or high conflict might suggest that there is a vested interest of one of the parties to undermine the co-parent relationship. should evidence provided to the court give weight to this, the viability of shared care remaining in (the child’s) interests would be doubtful. the child’s observations with the mother and mr h, the father and the paternal grandparents were unremarkable. none of the interactions and engagements raised ay concern about the child’s relationships with the significant adults in his life. furthermore, the child’s interactions were said to suggest that he “experienced safety in his relationship with his father”.[33]
this assessment did not raise concern with either parent’s capacity to respond sensitively and with emotional attuned responses to x. x’s interactions with both parents further indicated that he is open to a relationship with both parents and continues to seek significant and substantial relationship with both parents, approaching both relationships from an apparent sense of safety ... the assessment did not identify concerns that x was at risk in either parent’s care and the observations of the parental interactions did not support x approaching either parent with a sense of fear. ... there does not appear to be supplementary evidence to support the mother’s allegations of drug use and alcohol consumption by the father. ... the issue of family violence remained disputed by the parties...the risk of ongoing violence is considered low in such situations. it is likely that poor communication continues to contribute to ongoing conflict and thus until this improves disagreements remain highly likely. ... the observations of interactions between (the child) and both parents suggest that both offered “good enough” parenting responses. it is the comparison of the observation that suggest mr oduro presented with greater emotional connection and responsiveness to (the child’s) behavioural views, which were evidenced by mutual joy and delight in shared experiences. the writer considered that mr oduro’s interactions could have been affected by the late stage of her pregnancy, but her responses were suggestive of more limited emotional availability... due to the child’s young age, being just three years old, and his additional dietary needs, x is likely to benefit from remaining with a primary carer, who will assume the lead responsibility for managing his additional needs. ms oduro’s (sic) allegations suggest that shared care is affecting x’s needs being addressed in a consistent manner. however, her actions such as presenting x with multiple medical appointments for the same illness, in itself exposes x to unnecessary harm.[34]
should the court give weight to the shared care not being able to support x’s developmental, social and emotional needs, the writer would support the increase in the parental arrangement in favour of the father’s care. mr oduro demonstrated the greater emotional availability, willingness and capacity to support x to maintain a positive connection with the non-resident parent and extended maternal and paternal family.[35]   updated family report
there have been mutual allegations made with regard to each parent’s capacity to prioritise x’s needs and support his relationship with the other parent. this appears to have significantly escalated since the last assessment, which had led to allegations of child abuse. there is limited communication between the parties, which continues to present as opportunities for ongoing acrimony. the parties’ ability and/or willingness to co-parent has made no significant improvement since the last family assessment. ms griggs’ seemingly negative and critical views about the father are also concerning in terms of her ability to support x to maintain a meaningful relationship with his father. this appeared consistent with the views expressed by the maternal grandmother such that the father’s role in x’s life appeared to be ‘sidelined’ in preference of his relationship with mr h. the implication of this, if continued, would be significant for x’s relationship with his father. the high degree of mistrust and scepticism, in the co-parenting relationship seems to result in someone benign parenting being viewed through highly critical lense particularly by the mother.[37] (my emphasis)
whilst the mother appeared to understand what might be appropriate interactions their engagement in the activities seemed disjointed and not a natural experience for x or the mother as perhaps demonstrated by the mother’s flat affect and incongruence with statements made.[38]
it was notable at times that both mr h and the mother made little eye contact with the children during their interactions...[39]
the adults’ incongruence seemed consistent with x’s lack of focus and frequent switching between activities. it is likely that x would benefit from parental interactions that ‘scaffolds’ his focus and attention. whilst overall the interactions did not raise significant concern, the mother’s apparent incongruence in terms of her verbal and non-verbal encouragement seemed to support x’s apparent ambivalence, seeking reassurance through his regular need to cue his mother verbally for her attention (i want you to play with me mummy). [40]
overall, the father’s interactions appeared consistent with sensitive and attuned parental responses, such that the father appeared able to remain with x as he expressed his emotional pain (rejection), such responses often require significant emotional insight to be able to separate the child’s experiences from your own feelings.[41]
...the father demonstrated sensitive and respectful interactions with x during the observed interaction. such behaviours are not generally consistent with behaviours associated with parents that act in harmful ways towards children. further, sensitive parents have the capacity to build secure relationships. in turn, a secure parent-child relationship is a protective factor because a parent who has developed a positive, attuned emotional relationship with their child is not likely to act in harmful ways towards them ... this said x’s interactions with his father during this assessment were notably different to that observed at the previous assessment.[42]
...seemed able to support or allow x to express his feelings, rather, the parent seemed focussed on seeing these behaviours and emotions as negative expressions of the other parent. it is equally possible that x’s behaviours are simply a reflection of a child who is not coping, and who does not have the cognitive and emotional intelligence to be able to share this.[43] (my emphasis)
when children experience repeated separations this can cause instability and uncertainty in that relationship, particularly when the other parent is not supportive or positive about the resumption of the relationship, and is unable or unwilling to provide the necessary support and emotional reassurance for the child to make sense of the separation...further extended periods of separation in a child’s early years (0-5) has been associated with increased likelihood of emotional and mental health issues in adolescence. if the allegations regarding the father continue to be unfounded and without basis, then ms griggs’ actions present significant concern to x’s ongoing emotional development, his wellbeing and the relationship he shares with his father.[44] (my emphasis)
seem consistent with the polarised positions of each parent, and their determination or perhaps fixation on their said positions/proposals, and ms griggs’ perception of mr oduro as an inadequate and abusive parent. such parallel positons frequently cause children significant emotional distress, as they have to navigate their parents’ different narratives against their own lived experiences. in this regard the ongoing risk to x’s emotional wellbeing remain significant, and is consistent with the parties’ current concerns about his presenting behaviours. x’s is already playing out some confusing and aggressive behaviour and emotional states, which might be reflective of having to battle the competing narratives.[45] (my emphasis)
it is critically important that mr oduro still have an opportunity to spend significant and substantial time, including special occasions and celebrations with x, in view of the concerns about ms griggs’capacity to support mr oduro’s relationship. if the court considers that the mother is not able to manage or proactively support this, then serious consideration would need to be given to this arrangement being reversed.[48] (my emphasis)  ) the court child expert’s oral evidence at trial
report of mr ad’s of child protection service dated 26 march 2021
the clinician had some concerns about the possible impact of the acrimony between his parents on x during his interviews, and more generally. children are often aware of tension and conflict between their parents, and may pick up on anxious or negative feelings towards a particular person. in such a scenario, it is possible for a child to attempt to please a parent by providing negative information about the other parent. also, when an adult has a preconceived belief or concern, it is possible for them to inadvertently question a child in a manner which shapes the child’s responses. x made several comments in his interviews which caused the clinician to consider the possibility that x was directly or indirectly questioned by his mother and/or step-father. while this does not necessarily mean that the physical abuse allegations were baseless, it added to the difficulty in attempting to establish what x’s experiences had been. it was also not possible to draw any strong conclusions in relation to the allegations that x may have been sexually abuse by his father. when the clinician attempted to father contextual information about x’s reported experiences, x was unable or unwilling to provide any information to clarify his experiences. notably, when asked specifically whether his father touching his ‘willy’ and ‘bum’ was something that happened or didn’t happen. x said “didn’t happen”. it was noted that during the assessment, x made a couple of concerning comments in relation to things his father had said to him. for example, when asked a question about what happened when he got in trouble with his father, x said his father “say, ’he fucked me up” and said that his father used “naughty words”. it appeared possible that mr oduro has sworn at x and possibly threatened him in the context of rebuking him, which would likely have scared x and had a negative impact on his psychological and emotional wellbeing. it was further noted that according to ms griggs and ms j, x was reluctant to return to his father’s care and had “meltdowns” at handover, also suggesting that there may have been aspects of the care provided by mr oduro, which troubled x. during the assessment, it was reported that x had been having nightmares and had expressed fears about the possibility that his father might find him by coming through the air vent, which was also suggestive that he experienced some anxiety in relation to his father. while his anxiety could be related to experiences of abuse, it is also possible that x’s emotional presentation can be explained by the acrimony between his parents, which he would most likely be aware of. the clinician was concerned about the possibility that x had sensed acrimony between his parents and as such experienced a sense of not knowing what he could or could not talk about in his interviews. young children do not have the cognitive maturity to copy with conflict or tension between significant caregivers and this is likely to be confusing and distressing for them, as well as impacting negatively on their wellbeing. further, children of x’s age tend to engage in egocentric thinking and therefore may blame themselves for the conflict, which could be damaging to their self-esteem. in addition, the conflict between his parents may make it difficult for x to maintain a positive and trusting relationship with each of his parents.[51]
reports of ms m of child protection service (‘cps’) dated 24 february 2022 and 16 may 2022  the first report
on 19 january 2022, whilst dcp advised cps that they had not opened the case and would not be investigating the concerns, sapol requested that cps consider accepting a referral for x to participate in a forensic psychosocial assessment. given that dcp were not involved with the family, sapol were advised that cps could only accept the referral if ms griggs was prepared to withhold x from contact with mr oduro during the course of the assessment (page 4 exhibit i5)   the addendum report
submissions
unacceptable risk
in proceedings under pt vii of the act in relation to a child, the court is enjoined to “regard the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration” (s 60d). the paramountcy of this consideration in proceedings for custody or access is preserved by s 64(1). the consequence is that the ultimate and paramount issue to be decided in proceedings for custody of, or access to, a child is whether the making of the order sought is in the interests of the welfare of the child. the fact that the proceedings involve an allegation that the child has been sexually abused by the parent who seeks custody or access does not alter the paramount and ultimate issue which is the court has to determine, though the court’s findings on the disputed allegation of sexual abuse will naturally have an important, perhaps a decisive, impact on the resolution of that issue. but it is a mistake to think that the family court is under the same duty to resolve in a definitive way the disputed allegation of sexual abuse as a court exercising criminal jurisdiction would be if it were trying the party for a criminal offence. proceedings for custody or access are not disputes inter partes in the ordinary sense of that expression, reynolds v reynolds (1973) 47 aljr 499, 1 alr 318, mckee v mckee (1951) ac 352 at pp 364-365. in proceedings of that kind the court is not enforcing a parental right of custody or right to access. the court is concerned to make such an order for custody or access which will in the opinion of the court best promote and protect the interests of the child. in deciding what order it should make the court will give very great weight to the importance of maintaining parental ties, not so much because parents have a right to custody or access, but because it is prima facie in a child’s interests to maintain the filial relationship with both parents: cf j v lieschke [1987] hca 4, (1987) 162 clr 447 at pp 450, 458, 462, 463-464. viewed in this setting, the resolution of an allegation of sexual abuse against a parent is subservient and ancillary to the court’s determination of what is in the best interests of the child. the family court’s consideration of the paramount issue which it is enjoined to decide cannot be diverted by the supposed need to arrive at a definitive conclusion on the allegation of sexual abuse. the family court’s wide-ranging discretion to decide what is in the child’s best interests cannot be qualified by requiring the court to try the case as if it were no more than a contest between the parents to be decided solely by reference to the acceptance or rejection of the allegation of sexual abuse on the balance of probabilities. in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at p 362. there dixon j said: “the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. in such matters “reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.” ... in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access. even in such a case, however, there may be a risk of disturbance to a child who is compulsorily brought into contact with a parent who has sexually abused her or whom the child believes to have sexually abused her. but that is not the issue in this case.[56]
it is not in doubt that an expert’s opinion, which is based on an appropriate foundation and given by a suitably qualified person, will carry substantial weight. departure from an expert report in such circumstance requires careful consideration by a trial judge. however, the ultimate decision still must be that of the trial judge. the weight to be given to a family report was explained by the full court in hall & hall [1979] famca 73, (1979) flc 90-713 at 78,819. [59]   the mother is unwilling or unable to support the child’s relationship with the father, (2) the mother made no concession in the witness box that her assessment of the facts could be in error or showed any insight into the possibility of there being other explanations for the child’s conduct, (3) the mother has exposed the child to repeated assessments, observations and interviews with medical professionals and others, (4) the mother and her family have repeatedly photographed the child to catalogue alleged injuries said to be caused by the father, and (5) the mother secretly recorded two handovers without the father’s knowledge.   the mother made no concession in the witness box that her assessment of the facts could be in error or showed any insight into the possibility of there being other explanations for the child’s conduct, (3) the mother has exposed the child to repeated assessments, observations and interviews with medical professionals and others, (4) the mother and her family have repeatedly photographed the child to catalogue alleged injuries said to be caused by the father, and (5) the mother secretly recorded two handovers without the father’s knowledge.   the mother has exposed the child to repeated assessments, observations and interviews with medical professionals and others, (4) the mother and her family have repeatedly photographed the child to catalogue alleged injuries said to be caused by the father, and (5) the mother secretly recorded two handovers without the father’s knowledge.   the mother and her family have repeatedly photographed the child to catalogue alleged injuries said to be caused by the father, and (5) the mother secretly recorded two handovers without the father’s knowledge.   the mother secretly recorded two handovers without the father’s knowledge.   the child may be subjected to what has been described as “systems abuse” with further interviews, interventions or appointments: (b) the child may ultimately cause to view himself as a victim of sexual and/or physical abuse by his father, and (c) the mother and her immediate family may expose the child to their views that the child has been abused or is at risk of abuse.   the child may ultimately cause to view himself as a victim of sexual and/or physical abuse by his father, and (c) the mother and her immediate family may expose the child to their views that the child has been abused or is at risk of abuse.   the mother and her immediate family may expose the child to their views that the child has been abused or is at risk of abuse.
objects and principles of the act   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.[61]   protecting children from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.[61]   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.[61]   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.[61]   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have the right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).[62]   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have the right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).[62]   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have the right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).[62]   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have the right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).[62]   children have the right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).[62]   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse and neglect or family violence.[63]   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected to or exposed to abuse and neglect or family violence.[63]
section 60cc(2)(a) – meaningful relationship
section 60cc(2)(b) – need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
section 60cc(3) – additional considerations any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long‑term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family -any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility  when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. note: the presumption provided for in this subsection is a presumption that relates solely to the allocation of parental responsibility for a child as defined in section 61b. it does not provide for a presumption about the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents (this issue is dealt with in section 65daa). (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent's family (or that other person's family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child's parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.[68]
conclusion
associate: dated: 1 june 2022
dated: 1 june 2022
[1] see father’s trial affidavit filed 25 february 2022 at pg 78. [2] ibid at pg 83.[3] ibid at pg 91.[4] ibid at pg 93. [5] ibid pg 94. [6] ibid pg 97.[7] ibid pg 75. [8] see mother’s trial affidavit filed 25 january 2022 at [46].[9] see transcript of proceedings from 7 march 2022 at pg 17, lines 6-11.[10] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 71, lines 38-47.[11] see transcript of proceedings from 7 march 2022 at pg 38, lines 28-30.[12] see transcript of proceedings from 7 march 2022 at pg 41, lines 1-17.[13] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 15, lines 29-44.[14] see transcript of proceedings from 7 march 2022 at pg 27, lines 18-46 and pg 28, lines 1-5.[15] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 35, lines 42-46 and pg 36, lines 1-5.[16] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 44, lines 17-45.[17] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 98, lines 21-34.[18] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 102, lines 1-4.[19] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 97, lines 20-47.[20] see transcript of proceedings from 8 march 2022 at pg 13, lines 24-40.[21] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 26, lines 9-18.[22] see trial affidavit of ms j filed on 25 january 2022 at [20]. [23] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 43, lines 21-35.[24] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 60, lines 16-36.[25] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 63, lines 5-29.[26] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 83, lines 15-34.[27] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 99, lines 14-46.[28] see transcript of proceedings from 10 march 2022 at pg 100, lines 1-4.[29] see affidavit of ms d filed 2 march 2022 at pg 10.[30] ibid.[31] see family report of court child expert ms n dated 30 august 2019 at [36].[32] ibid [37].[33] ibid at [67]-[69] and [85]. [34] ibid [95]-[100]. [35] ibid [101]. [36] ibid [97]-[102].[37] see updated family report of court child expert ms n dated 30 september 2021 at [76]-[79]. [38] ibid [94]. [39] ibid [97]. [40] ibid [98].[41] ibid [107]. [42] ibid [110]. [43] ibid [112]. [44] ibid [113].[45] ibid [116]. [46] ibid [119]. [47] ibid [120].[48] ibid [123].[49] ibid [124].[50] ibid [126]-[132].[51] see exhibit i2 at pg 29. [52] see exhibit i5 at pg 24. [53] ibid pg 4. [54] vassser & taylor-black [2007] famca 547; (2007) flc 93-329.[55] m v m (1988) 166 clr 69. [56] ibid at 81, 673-75.[57] see forensic psychosocial report dated 24 february 2022 at pg 11. [58] andrew v delaine [2009] famcafc 182.[59] ibid [72]. [60] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[61] ibid s 60b(1).[62] ibid s 60b(2). [63] ibid 60cc(2). [64] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520.[65] ibid [26].[66] jurchenko & foster [2014] famcafc 127.[67] ibid [123]. [68] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.