last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hood & weaver (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 728
orders
the court orders that:
until further order the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  x (‘x’) who is 11 years of age, (b) y (‘y’) who is seven (7) years of age, and (c) z (‘z’) who is three (3) years of age, collectively referred to as the children.   y (‘y’) who is seven (7) years of age, and (c) z (‘z’) who is three (3) years of age, collectively referred to as the children.   z (‘z’) who is three (3) years of age, collectively referred to as the children.
collectively referred to as the children.   on a preliminary basis, whether the mother’s application to commence parenting proceedings (insofar as they relate to y and z) should be dismissed in reliance of the principle espoused in the decision of rice and asplund[3], and (b) subject to a determination of the preliminary issue, what parenting orders should be made in relation to the children in circumstances where the parties agreed that the mother’s application (insofar as x was concerned) must proceed because there had been a significant change in circumstances.   subject to a determination of the preliminary issue, what parenting orders should be made in relation to the children in circumstances where the parties agreed that the mother’s application (insofar as x was concerned) must proceed because there had been a significant change in circumstances.   the father’s inability to regulate his emotions when angry causing him to strike/punch/kick and throw x, (b) the father takes prescribed medication for anger which he has given to x as a way to stabilise the child’s tantrums by causing the child to go to sleep, (c) the number of persons within the father’s household, (d) the father’s care of z has caused z to be returned to her mother with a red genital area, (e) the mother’s observation of the children’s inappropriate sexual behaviours after being cared for by the father, (f) the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.   the father takes prescribed medication for anger which he has given to x as a way to stabilise the child’s tantrums by causing the child to go to sleep, (c) the number of persons within the father’s household, (d) the father’s care of z has caused z to be returned to her mother with a red genital area, (e) the mother’s observation of the children’s inappropriate sexual behaviours after being cared for by the father, (f) the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.   the number of persons within the father’s household, (d) the father’s care of z has caused z to be returned to her mother with a red genital area, (e) the mother’s observation of the children’s inappropriate sexual behaviours after being cared for by the father, (f) the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.   the father’s care of z has caused z to be returned to her mother with a red genital area, (e) the mother’s observation of the children’s inappropriate sexual behaviours after being cared for by the father, (f) the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.   the mother’s observation of the children’s inappropriate sexual behaviours after being cared for by the father, (f) the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.   the mother’s observation of regression in y and z’s behaviours after being cared for by the father.
the evidence  initiating application filed 21 february 2022, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 21 february 2022, (c) affidavit of mr weaver filed 21 february 2022[4], (d) the father’s outline of case document filed 20 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’ (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f10’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 21 february 2022, (c) affidavit of mr weaver filed 21 february 2022[4], (d) the father’s outline of case document filed 20 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’ (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f10’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   affidavit of mr weaver filed 21 february 2022[4], (d) the father’s outline of case document filed 20 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’ (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f10’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   the father’s outline of case document filed 20 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’ (e) various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f10’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   various exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f10’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   response to initiation application filed 11 april 2022, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence and risk filed 11 april 2022, (c) affidavit of ms hood filed 11 april 2022[5], (d) affidavit of ms ss filed 7 april 2022, (e) the mother’s outline of case document filed 19 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’ (f) various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   notice of child abuse, family violence and risk filed 11 april 2022, (c) affidavit of ms hood filed 11 april 2022[5], (d) affidavit of ms ss filed 7 april 2022, (e) the mother’s outline of case document filed 19 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’ (f) various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   affidavit of ms hood filed 11 april 2022[5], (d) affidavit of ms ss filed 7 april 2022, (e) the mother’s outline of case document filed 19 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’ (f) various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   affidavit of ms ss filed 7 april 2022, (e) the mother’s outline of case document filed 19 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’ (f) various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   the mother’s outline of case document filed 19 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’ (f) various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   various exhibits marked from ‘m2’ to ‘m8’ and which (as may be relevant) will be referred to in more detail within this judgment.   the independent children’s lawyer’s outline of case document filed 20 april 2022 – marked exhibit ‘icl1’, (b) family report of ms dd dated 29 may 2021 – marked exhibit ‘a’.   family report of ms dd dated 29 may 2021 – marked exhibit ‘a’.
chronology  the father to have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children to live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows – (i) each wednesday for up to four hours after school, (ii) each alternate weekend from after-school friday to 6.00pm sunday, (c) the children to spend one-half of each school holiday with each party, (d) the children to spend time with each party on special occasions, (e) the parties to be restrained by way of injunction from doing certain things including (as is relevant to these proceedings) them not using physical discipline upon the children and not –   the children to live with the father and spend time with the mother as follows – (i) each wednesday for up to four hours after school, (ii) each alternate weekend from after-school friday to 6.00pm sunday, (c) the children to spend one-half of each school holiday with each party, (d) the children to spend time with each party on special occasions, (e) the parties to be restrained by way of injunction from doing certain things including (as is relevant to these proceedings) them not using physical discipline upon the children and not –   each wednesday for up to four hours after school, (ii) each alternate weekend from after-school friday to 6.00pm sunday,  ) each alternate weekend from after-school friday to 6.00pm sunday,   the children to spend one-half of each school holiday with each party, (d) the children to spend time with each party on special occasions, (e) the parties to be restrained by way of injunction from doing certain things including (as is relevant to these proceedings) them not using physical discipline upon the children and not –   the children to spend time with each party on special occasions, (e) the parties to be restrained by way of injunction from doing certain things including (as is relevant to these proceedings) them not using physical discipline upon the children and not –   the parties to be restrained by way of injunction from doing certain things including (as is relevant to these proceedings) them not using physical discipline upon the children and not –
...recording, photographing and/or presenting the children to police, doctors and hospitals unless the children are unwell and this restraint extends to permitting any other person doing so...   the provision of information to both parties about long-term (and day-to-day) issues about the welfare of the children despite the father having sole parental responsibility, (g) the practical implementation of the orders about matters such as how the parties are to communicate, facilitate changeovers and otherwise improve their parenting relationships with each other and their children.   the practical implementation of the orders about matters such as how the parties are to communicate, facilitate changeovers and otherwise improve their parenting relationships with each other and their children.   the mother did not seek a restraint or any orders about protecting the children form family violence but the father and the icl did, and given my findings, an order would be made restraining the parties from exposing the children to family violence (see paragraphs 103 to 106), (b) there was an allegation that the father had punched y, which was denied by the father (see paragraph 108), (c) x made disclosures of having been smacked by both his parents and that the father also smacked y and z. the mother accepted this had occurred whereas the father did not. i found that both parties had engaged in physical discipline but that the children had not been abused or were at risk of being abused in a manner that would not otherwise fall within the category of physical discipline. consequently, an injunction was ordered to protect the children from physical discipline (see paragraphs 109 to 119), (d) during the trial, the make-up of the persons in the father’s household, the father’s working hours and the relationships the children have with some members of the household were explored and found expression within the final judgment (see for example, paragraphs 132, 145 – 147, 149 – 150, 169 – 170 & 211), (e) the evidence of family violence and the disputation between the parties and those issues were explored with findings made (see for example, paragraphs 96 – 105 and 173 (b)), (f) in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   there was an allegation that the father had punched y, which was denied by the father (see paragraph 108), (c) x made disclosures of having been smacked by both his parents and that the father also smacked y and z. the mother accepted this had occurred whereas the father did not. i found that both parties had engaged in physical discipline but that the children had not been abused or were at risk of being abused in a manner that would not otherwise fall within the category of physical discipline. consequently, an injunction was ordered to protect the children from physical discipline (see paragraphs 109 to 119), (d) during the trial, the make-up of the persons in the father’s household, the father’s working hours and the relationships the children have with some members of the household were explored and found expression within the final judgment (see for example, paragraphs 132, 145 – 147, 149 – 150, 169 – 170 & 211), (e) the evidence of family violence and the disputation between the parties and those issues were explored with findings made (see for example, paragraphs 96 – 105 and 173 (b)), (f) in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   x made disclosures of having been smacked by both his parents and that the father also smacked y and z. the mother accepted this had occurred whereas the father did not. i found that both parties had engaged in physical discipline but that the children had not been abused or were at risk of being abused in a manner that would not otherwise fall within the category of physical discipline. consequently, an injunction was ordered to protect the children from physical discipline (see paragraphs 109 to 119), (d) during the trial, the make-up of the persons in the father’s household, the father’s working hours and the relationships the children have with some members of the household were explored and found expression within the final judgment (see for example, paragraphs 132, 145 – 147, 149 – 150, 169 – 170 & 211), (e) the evidence of family violence and the disputation between the parties and those issues were explored with findings made (see for example, paragraphs 96 – 105 and 173 (b)), (f) in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   during the trial, the make-up of the persons in the father’s household, the father’s working hours and the relationships the children have with some members of the household were explored and found expression within the final judgment (see for example, paragraphs 132, 145 – 147, 149 – 150, 169 – 170 & 211), (e) the evidence of family violence and the disputation between the parties and those issues were explored with findings made (see for example, paragraphs 96 – 105 and 173 (b)), (f) in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   the evidence of family violence and the disputation between the parties and those issues were explored with findings made (see for example, paragraphs 96 – 105 and 173 (b)), (f) in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   in the context of a challenge to the child expert making findings or opining on mental health conditions or diagnoses, i found inadmissible any evidence opining on the mother’s observed behaviours or reported actions (see paragraphs 12 – 13). consequently, the mother’s mental health was not a feature of the trial and other than as set out above, no findings were made in that regard, (g) the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   the mother made various allegations about the father’s care of y and z including concerns about their behaviours regressing, z being at risk of inappropriate sexual behaviour and y’s sore and red penis. the allegations were explored and findings made (see for example paragraphs 119 – 124), (h) the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).   the veracity of mr ee’s evidence was explored at trial and discounted, particularly because he did not appear as a witness for either party (see paragraph 99 (j)).
...”dad has been hurting me a lot the last three weekends i went there he’s even hitting me”...”mr weaver pulled my hair and slapped me across the face.”[9]   x expressing that the father consistently physically abuses the children, (b) the police holding serious concerns for the children’s safety, (c) the matter was ‘screened in’ for various reasons with a decision to liaise with the police about the children’s whereabouts and safety, (d) y being subjected to historical allegations of excessive discipline and dangerous behaviour before he commenced school in 2021 (which were reported to the police at the time), (e) x making disclosures about himself being a victim.   the police holding serious concerns for the children’s safety, (c) the matter was ‘screened in’ for various reasons with a decision to liaise with the police about the children’s whereabouts and safety, (d) y being subjected to historical allegations of excessive discipline and dangerous behaviour before he commenced school in 2021 (which were reported to the police at the time), (e) x making disclosures about himself being a victim.   the matter was ‘screened in’ for various reasons with a decision to liaise with the police about the children’s whereabouts and safety, (d) y being subjected to historical allegations of excessive discipline and dangerous behaviour before he commenced school in 2021 (which were reported to the police at the time), (e) x making disclosures about himself being a victim.   y being subjected to historical allegations of excessive discipline and dangerous behaviour before he commenced school in 2021 (which were reported to the police at the time), (e) x making disclosures about himself being a victim.   x making disclosures about himself being a victim.
the parties’ proposals  the father’s rice and asplund application be dismissed, (b) orders 2 to 11 of the final orders be suspended, (c) the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility for the children, (d) the children should live with the mother, (e) x spend no time and have no communication with the father, (f) y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   orders 2 to 11 of the final orders be suspended, (c) the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility for the children, (d) the children should live with the mother, (e) x spend no time and have no communication with the father, (f) y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   the mother should exercise sole parental responsibility for the children, (d) the children should live with the mother, (e) x spend no time and have no communication with the father, (f) y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   the children should live with the mother, (e) x spend no time and have no communication with the father, (f) y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   x spend no time and have no communication with the father, (f) y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   y and z should spend professionally supervised time with the father (at his cost) for one (1) hour each alternate saturday, and (g) the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   the father should enrol in and complete an anger management program conducted by tt centre.   the mother’s parenting application (as it related to y and z) should be dismissed, and (b) pursuant to s 68q, to the extent that any orders were inconsistent with the interim advo, then the parenting orders would prevail.   pursuant to s 68q, to the extent that any orders were inconsistent with the interim advo, then the parenting orders would prevail.
the applicable law
principle 1 (3) the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. principle 4 (6) the fourth principle is that the proceedings are, as far as possible, to be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child-focused parenting by the parties.
the principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation... change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that... there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material.   the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.
discussion  the existing status quo has been a constant in the children’s lives since april 2020.[28] (b) the mother’s concerns about the father being physically abusive towards the children, using excessive discipline upon the children, the father’s supervision of the children, the make-up of the father’s household, the children’s exposure to family violence, the parental conflict between the parties (including taking various children to the police to make statements against the other party) and the cause of the adverse behaviours/physical signs the mother saw in the children (arising from neglect, poor hygiene, sexual abuse, inappropriate sexual behaviour and/or exposure to any of these factors) were all considered at trial.[29] (c) at trial, no finding was made about the mother’s mental health[30] and so the current state of the mother’s mental health was and is irrelevant to the final judgment which found that y and z should primarily live with the father. in any event, her exhibited material suggests her symptoms have been of a longstanding nature and so could have been pressed at the trial. along the same lines (in terms of irrelevance), the same can be said about the mother’s evidence that dcj have lately visited each party’s household to assess safety and (one could infer) the lack of any tendered material would discount any safety concerns the mother has about the father’s household including y and z’s access to a swimming pool. (d) at trial, the court expressly discounted the evidence of mr ee for many reasons including that no affidavit from mr ee was relied upon by either party[31]. the evidence now provided by the mother was available at the trial. nothing has changed in terms of the weight the court should give to this evidence. (e) the parental conflict (and their attitude towards it) has continued unabated with allegations that each party has made (to use the mother’s language) vexatious complaints to the authorities either with or without the children being interviewed by third parties. (f) in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   the mother’s concerns about the father being physically abusive towards the children, using excessive discipline upon the children, the father’s supervision of the children, the make-up of the father’s household, the children’s exposure to family violence, the parental conflict between the parties (including taking various children to the police to make statements against the other party) and the cause of the adverse behaviours/physical signs the mother saw in the children (arising from neglect, poor hygiene, sexual abuse, inappropriate sexual behaviour and/or exposure to any of these factors) were all considered at trial.[29] (c) at trial, no finding was made about the mother’s mental health[30] and so the current state of the mother’s mental health was and is irrelevant to the final judgment which found that y and z should primarily live with the father. in any event, her exhibited material suggests her symptoms have been of a longstanding nature and so could have been pressed at the trial. along the same lines (in terms of irrelevance), the same can be said about the mother’s evidence that dcj have lately visited each party’s household to assess safety and (one could infer) the lack of any tendered material would discount any safety concerns the mother has about the father’s household including y and z’s access to a swimming pool. (d) at trial, the court expressly discounted the evidence of mr ee for many reasons including that no affidavit from mr ee was relied upon by either party[31]. the evidence now provided by the mother was available at the trial. nothing has changed in terms of the weight the court should give to this evidence. (e) the parental conflict (and their attitude towards it) has continued unabated with allegations that each party has made (to use the mother’s language) vexatious complaints to the authorities either with or without the children being interviewed by third parties. (f) in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   at trial, no finding was made about the mother’s mental health[30] and so the current state of the mother’s mental health was and is irrelevant to the final judgment which found that y and z should primarily live with the father. in any event, her exhibited material suggests her symptoms have been of a longstanding nature and so could have been pressed at the trial. along the same lines (in terms of irrelevance), the same can be said about the mother’s evidence that dcj have lately visited each party’s household to assess safety and (one could infer) the lack of any tendered material would discount any safety concerns the mother has about the father’s household including y and z’s access to a swimming pool. (d) at trial, the court expressly discounted the evidence of mr ee for many reasons including that no affidavit from mr ee was relied upon by either party[31]. the evidence now provided by the mother was available at the trial. nothing has changed in terms of the weight the court should give to this evidence. (e) the parental conflict (and their attitude towards it) has continued unabated with allegations that each party has made (to use the mother’s language) vexatious complaints to the authorities either with or without the children being interviewed by third parties. (f) in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   at trial, the court expressly discounted the evidence of mr ee for many reasons including that no affidavit from mr ee was relied upon by either party[31]. the evidence now provided by the mother was available at the trial. nothing has changed in terms of the weight the court should give to this evidence. (e) the parental conflict (and their attitude towards it) has continued unabated with allegations that each party has made (to use the mother’s language) vexatious complaints to the authorities either with or without the children being interviewed by third parties. (f) in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   the parental conflict (and their attitude towards it) has continued unabated with allegations that each party has made (to use the mother’s language) vexatious complaints to the authorities either with or without the children being interviewed by third parties. (f) in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   in relation to neglect or capacity considerations generally, the mother’s evidence had a similar flavour to that described within the family report and discussed within the final judgment. the mother clearly maintains her view that the father’s capacity to manage or supervise the children is deficient including because she says he is not ‘present’ at times when the children’s needs demand him being there. taking her evidence at its highest i am not satisfied that her concerns (including about a swimming pool or the children having nits) permits a finding that a significant change has occurred. (g) dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   dcj specifically identified and ruled out the behaviours that led to a report being made about z displaying behaviour indicative of sexual abuse[32] and otherwise, the mother’s evidence is consistent with what the court considered at the trial. (h) the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   the events of 9 april 2022 are not corroborated by ms ss. given the mother’s contentions of what allegedly occurred, it is incongruent that ms ss did not do so. as identified earlier, complaints of sexualised behaviour were heard and considered at the trial. the state of the mother’s evidence does not enable me to make a finding that a significant change of circumstances has occurred.   the mother seeks that (relevantly) y and z live with her and she exercise sole parental responsibility for them. y and z have lived with the father for over two years and despite extensive testing of the mother’s numerous and detailed allegations, the court determined that the children should remain living with the father. y is six (6) and z is almost four (4) and the family report opined that the children will more likely experience consistency and structure in the father’s home which is most important for z over the next three to five years (see paragraph 174). the father has been making decisions about y and z for a considerable period of time and in light of the poor co-parenting relationship, the court determined that whomever the children live with should be allocated this responsibility. (b) y and z have already been interviewed by the family report writer once and met with the icl. in the final judgment i expressed significant concern about both parties’ propensity to take the children inappropriately to the police to make adverse statements against the other parent. (c) despite the final orders and the final judgment, the parties (or other family members) have continued to observe and report either the children’s verbal expressions or physical presentation to support their adverse allegations against the other. unless this chapter of the litigation is closed, y and z will remain at risk of a continuation of this type of behaviour, with the risk of them becoming aware of or being exposed to further parental conflict.[33] (d) i don’t wish to expose the children to being re-interviewed by an expert witness or the icl. i don’t wish to unnecessarily invite a perpetuation of the parties’ past behaviours in unnecessarily taking y and/or z to the authorities to gather adverse evidence about the other party. in my view, closing the door on future litigation will either completely or be less likely to lead to these events occurring in the future.   y and z have already been interviewed by the family report writer once and met with the icl. in the final judgment i expressed significant concern about both parties’ propensity to take the children inappropriately to the police to make adverse statements against the other parent. (c) despite the final orders and the final judgment, the parties (or other family members) have continued to observe and report either the children’s verbal expressions or physical presentation to support their adverse allegations against the other. unless this chapter of the litigation is closed, y and z will remain at risk of a continuation of this type of behaviour, with the risk of them becoming aware of or being exposed to further parental conflict.[33] (d) i don’t wish to expose the children to being re-interviewed by an expert witness or the icl. i don’t wish to unnecessarily invite a perpetuation of the parties’ past behaviours in unnecessarily taking y and/or z to the authorities to gather adverse evidence about the other party. in my view, closing the door on future litigation will either completely or be less likely to lead to these events occurring in the future.   despite the final orders and the final judgment, the parties (or other family members) have continued to observe and report either the children’s verbal expressions or physical presentation to support their adverse allegations against the other. unless this chapter of the litigation is closed, y and z will remain at risk of a continuation of this type of behaviour, with the risk of them becoming aware of or being exposed to further parental conflict.[33] (d) i don’t wish to expose the children to being re-interviewed by an expert witness or the icl. i don’t wish to unnecessarily invite a perpetuation of the parties’ past behaviours in unnecessarily taking y and/or z to the authorities to gather adverse evidence about the other party. in my view, closing the door on future litigation will either completely or be less likely to lead to these events occurring in the future.   i don’t wish to expose the children to being re-interviewed by an expert witness or the icl. i don’t wish to unnecessarily invite a perpetuation of the parties’ past behaviours in unnecessarily taking y and/or z to the authorities to gather adverse evidence about the other party. in my view, closing the door on future litigation will either completely or be less likely to lead to these events occurring in the future.   i have dismissed the mother’s parenting application regarding y and z, and (b) the final orders permit the parties to agree in writing to time being spent between the mother and the children outside of orders 5 (a) and (b), (c) the informal agreement between the parties will be recorded in writing by me as part of this decision.   the final orders permit the parties to agree in writing to time being spent between the mother and the children outside of orders 5 (a) and (b), (c) the informal agreement between the parties will be recorded in writing by me as part of this decision.   the informal agreement between the parties will be recorded in writing by me as part of this decision.
conclusion  there have not been significant changes to the family’s circumstances since the final orders were made due to – the evidence consisting of a re-hash of past allegations previously considered at trial or available to be relied upon at trial (including physical abuse, neglect, sexual concerns), the children’s current living and care circumstances were in place at the time of the trial and are unchanged, the most recent allegation is not corroborated by ms ss, the alleged eyewitness, the balance of the allegations are not significant, such as about the swimming pool or the alleged nit infestation. (b) the potential detriment to y and z caused by the litigation outweigh the likelihood that the final orders will be varied as sought by the mother because it will expose the children to more parental conflict (disputation) because – they will be re-interviewed by an expert witness, they will have to meet with the icl, and there is a real risk of their expressions or physical behaviours/presentation being used to support them being unnecessarily taken to authorities for the purpose of gathering evidence against the other party in the proceedings.   the potential detriment to y and z caused by the litigation outweigh the likelihood that the final orders will be varied as sought by the mother because it will expose the children to more parental conflict (disputation) because – they will be re-interviewed by an expert witness, they will have to meet with the icl, and there is a real risk of their expressions or physical behaviours/presentation being used to support them being unnecessarily taken to authorities for the purpose of gathering evidence against the other party in the proceedings.
associate: dated: 8 june 2022
dated: 8 june 2022
[1] unless otherwise specified any reference to legislation shall be a reference to the family law act 1975 (cth)[2] out of respect for each person’s personal preference about how they may wish to be identified in terms of their preferred honorific, persons (other than the parties or children of either party) shall be referred to by their surname only.[3] [1978] famca 84[4] for convenience sake, references to the contents of the affidavit of mr weaver shall be prefaced by “w” with a paragraph number enclosed in square brackets and an annexure identified alphabetically.[5] for convenience sake, references to the contents of the affidavit of ms hood shall be prefaced by “h” with a paragraph number enclosed in square brackets and an annexure identified alphabetically.[6] for convenience sake, references to the final judgment shall be prefaced by “reasons” with a paragraph number enclosed in square brackets.[7] h [79][8] h [81][9] h [17][10] h [19][11] exhibit ‘m8’[12] w [9] & exhibit ‘f6’[13] h [27][14] w [18][15] h [25] & [26] & annex “a” and w [21] & annex “d”[16] w [21] & annex “d”, exhibit ‘f4’[17] exhibit ‘f8’[18] w [22][19] h [27], w [9] & [23][20] w [24][21] w [25][22] exhibit ‘m8’[23] w [26][24] exhibit ‘m2’[25] exhibit ‘m6’[26] w [27][27] w [29] & [30][28] reasons at [51][29] see for example reasons at 96 – 106, 108 – 124, 132, 145 – 147, 19 – 140, 169 – 170, 173 (b) & 211[30] see for example reasons at 12 - 13[31] reasons at 99 (i)[32] exhibit ‘f8’[33] see for example the disclosures to dcj about past allegations involving y and z and recent allegations of x exposing y to inappropriate material whilst in the care of the mother