last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia  ision 2)
prietto & abella [2022] fedcfamc2f 807
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
‘2. final orders sought 1- unpaid spousal maintenance to be paid. 2- return of property 3- property share 4- share of superannuation and pensions. 5- judical review nullity/suspension of order for divorce. interlocutory or procedural orders sought nullity/suspension of order for divorce and considering financial settlement’
principles relating to an application for summary dismissal
10.09 application for summary orders   a party may apply for summary orders after a response has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response, that:   the court has no jurisdiction, or (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   an application under this rule must be made by filing an application in accordance with the approved form.
‘1. it is a serious matter to deprive a person of access to the courts of law for it is there that the rule of law is upheld, including against government and other powerful interests. this is why relief... is rarely and sparingly provided. to secure such relief, the party seeking it must show that it is clear, on the face of the opponent's documents, that the opponent lacks a reasonable cause of action or is advancing a claim that is clearly frivolous or vexatious. an opinion of the court that a case appears weak and such that it is unlikely to succeed is not, alone, sufficient to warrant summary termination. even a weak case is entitled to the time of a court. experience teaches that the concentration of attention, elaborated evidence and argument and extended time for reflection will sometimes turn an apparently unpromising cause into a successful judgment. ... if there is a serious legal question to be determined, it should ordinarily be determined at a trial for the proof of facts may sometimes assist the judicial mind to understand and apply the law that is invoked and to do so in circumstances more conducive to deciding a real case involving actual litigants rather than one determined on imagined or assumed facts. if, notwithstanding the defects of pleadings, it appears that a party may have a reasonable cause of action which it has failed to put in proper form, a court will ordinarily allow that party to reframe its pleading... the guiding principle is... doing what is just. if it is clear that proceedings within the concept of the pleading under scrutiny are doomed to fail, the court should dismiss the action to protect the defendant from being further troubled, to save the plaintiff from further costs and disappointment and to relieve the court of the burden of further wasted time which could be devoted to the determination of claims which have legal merit.’ (footnotes omitted)
‘that may be a judgment of law or of fact, or of mixed law and fact. where there are factual issues capable of being disputed and in dispute, summary dismissal should not be awarded to the respondent simply because the court has formed the view that the applicant is unlikely to succeed on the factual issue...’
background facts
consideration
judicial review of divorce order
the wife’s application for financial orders  identification of the parties’ net assets and liabilities at the date of trial, (b) assessment of the financial and non-financial contributions made by the parties pursuant to s 79(4)(a) - (c) of the act, (c) consideration of s 75(2) factors, and (d) undertaking a holistic overview in considering whether the proposed orders are just and equitable. in addition, s 79(2) of the act provides that the court must not make any order under s 79 of the act unless satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to do so.[2] in stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) 247 clr 108 (‘stanford’) the high court of australia made clear that ss 79(2) and 79(4) of the act impose two distinct statutory requirements which must not be conflated: firstly to determine whether it is just and equitable to make an order for alteration of property interests at all, and secondly to determine what order would be just and equitable in percentage or monetary terms. nevertheless, the factors under s 79(4) of the act may, along with any other relevant matters, inform the court’s determination under s 79(2), so long as there is separate consideration under the two subsections as required by the act.’[3]   assessment of the financial and non-financial contributions made by the parties pursuant to s 79(4)(a) - (c) of the act,   undertaking a holistic overview in considering whether the proposed orders are just and equitable.   the parties moved into rental accommodation paid for by their parents after getting married, (b) in 1989, the parties purchased a three bedroom home in city c for around $us38,000, (c) in around 1994, the house in city c was sold for $us92,000, and the money was used by the parties to support themselves, the education of their daughters and to ‘complement’ the husband’s training, (d) in the (us) summer of 2002, the husband was dismissed from his position and the wife lost an employment opportunity. the parties returned to country d, (e) on return to country d, the parties and their four daughters ‘rented a large one-bedroom flat with five beds, the best we could afford because all our savings from our home were gone’, (f) the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   in 1989, the parties purchased a three bedroom home in city c for around $us38,000, (c) in around 1994, the house in city c was sold for $us92,000, and the money was used by the parties to support themselves, the education of their daughters and to ‘complement’ the husband’s training, (d) in the (us) summer of 2002, the husband was dismissed from his position and the wife lost an employment opportunity. the parties returned to country d, (e) on return to country d, the parties and their four daughters ‘rented a large one-bedroom flat with five beds, the best we could afford because all our savings from our home were gone’, (f) the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   in around 1994, the house in city c was sold for $us92,000, and the money was used by the parties to support themselves, the education of their daughters and to ‘complement’ the husband’s training, (d) in the (us) summer of 2002, the husband was dismissed from his position and the wife lost an employment opportunity. the parties returned to country d, (e) on return to country d, the parties and their four daughters ‘rented a large one-bedroom flat with five beds, the best we could afford because all our savings from our home were gone’, (f) the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   in the (us) summer of 2002, the husband was dismissed from his position and the wife lost an employment opportunity. the parties returned to country d, (e) on return to country d, the parties and their four daughters ‘rented a large one-bedroom flat with five beds, the best we could afford because all our savings from our home were gone’, (f) the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   on return to country d, the parties and their four daughters ‘rented a large one-bedroom flat with five beds, the best we could afford because all our savings from our home were gone’, (f) the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   the husband worked in country d ‘for just one month with no contract’ and the parties received ‘financial support mostly from my family, as well as government support that i was entitled to. my oldest daughter worked as an educator and was saving money to move back to the us to marry her boyfriend, and also provided some support for the family expenses’, (g) the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   the husband obtained a job offer in australia and moved to australia, (h) the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   the husband sent money back to the wife and the children, however he stopped sending ‘alimony’ when the children went to live in country b.   when the husband left for australia, the children initially remained living with her in country d, (b) the husband sent money from australia to the wife and the children in country d, (c) the children ceased living with the wife in around may 2004. the husband ceased sending money to the wife once the children ceased to be in her care, (d) the wife sent gifts and parcels to the children and for the children when they were in the care of the husband, but these were rejected.   the husband sent money from australia to the wife and the children in country d, (c) the children ceased living with the wife in around may 2004. the husband ceased sending money to the wife once the children ceased to be in her care, (d) the wife sent gifts and parcels to the children and for the children when they were in the care of the husband, but these were rejected.   the children ceased living with the wife in around may 2004. the husband ceased sending money to the wife once the children ceased to be in her care, (d) the wife sent gifts and parcels to the children and for the children when they were in the care of the husband, but these were rejected.   the wife sent gifts and parcels to the children and for the children when they were in the care of the husband, but these were rejected.   the wife made a contribution in caring for the children (particularly the younger children) from the time of separation until may 2004. she did not make any contributions toward the care or welfare of the children after this time, and those contributions she did seek to make by way of gift or parcels were rejected, (b) the husband made contributions in caring for the children (particularly the younger children) after they ceased living with the wife.   the husband made contributions in caring for the children (particularly the younger children) after they ceased living with the wife.
the application for security for costs
12.02 application for security for costs   a respondent may apply for an order that the applicant in the proceeding give security for the respondent’s costs. (2) in deciding whether to make an order, the court may consider any of the following matters:   in deciding whether to make an order, the court may consider any of the following matters:   the applicant’s financial means, (b) the prospects of success or merits of the application, (c) the genuineness of the application, (d) whether the applicant’s lack of financial means was caused by the respondent’s conduct, (e) whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding, (f) whether the proceeding involves a matter of public importance, (g) whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid, (h) whether the applicant ordinarily resides outside australia, (i) the likely costs of the proceeding, (j) whether the applicant is a corporation, (k) whether a party is receiving legal aid, (l) any other relevant matter.   whether the applicant’s lack of financial means was caused by the respondent’s conduct, (e) whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding,   whether an order for security for costs would be oppressive or would stifle the proceeding,   whether a party has an order, in the same or another proceeding (including a proceeding in another court), against the other party for costs that remain unpaid,   in subrule (1): respondent includes an applicant who has filed a reply because orders in a new cause of action were sought in the response.
associate: dated: 21 june 2022
dated: 21 june 2022
[1] ajo & gro [2005] famca 195 at [46] citing ferraro & ferraro [1992] famca 64; (1993) flc 92-335 at 79,560.[2] mallet v mallet (1984) 156 clr 605, 647. [3] chapman & chapman [2014] famcafc 91 at [9] per bryant cj.