last updated: 11 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cicero & matti [2022] fedcfamc2f 810
orders
the court orders that:  further entering the land upon which the father’s residence is located (even if invited to do so by the children), or (b) approaching or communicating with the father in any way (even if invited to do so by the children).   approaching or communicating with the father in any way (even if invited to do so by the children).   making critical or derogatory remarks about the other party in the presence or hearing of the children, and shall remove the children from the presence of any third person doing so, and (b) allowing the children access to any court documents from these or any other court proceedings involving the parties, (c) discussing with the children these proceedings or any other court proceedings involving the parties.   allowing the children access to any court documents from these or any other court proceedings involving the parties, (c) discussing with the children these proceedings or any other court proceedings involving the parties.   discussing with the children these proceedings or any other court proceedings involving the parties.   attending upon the children’s school/s, before/after school care facility, extra‑curricular activity, (b) further entering upon the land where the father and/or the children live, other than in accordance with order 4, (c) removing the children from the care of the father, any school that the children may attend, any before/after school care facility, any extra-curricular activity or from any person in whose care the father has placed the children, and (d) drinking alcohol within 24 hours before spending time with the children and/or during the time spent with the children.   further entering upon the land where the father and/or the children live, other than in accordance with order 4, (c) removing the children from the care of the father, any school that the children may attend, any before/after school care facility, any extra-curricular activity or from any person in whose care the father has placed the children, and (d) drinking alcohol within 24 hours before spending time with the children and/or during the time spent with the children.   removing the children from the care of the father, any school that the children may attend, any before/after school care facility, any extra-curricular activity or from any person in whose care the father has placed the children, and (d) drinking alcohol within 24 hours before spending time with the children and/or during the time spent with the children.   drinking alcohol within 24 hours before spending time with the children and/or during the time spent with the children.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction  x (‘x’) is 15 years of age, (b) y (‘y’) is 14 years of age, and (c) z (‘z’) is 10 years of age, collectively referred to as the children.   y (‘y’) is 14 years of age, and (c) z (‘z’) is 10 years of age, collectively referred to as the children.   z (‘z’) is 10 years of age, collectively referred to as the children.
collectively referred to as the children.   whether the mother posed an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, and depending on such finding, (b) what time and what communication the children should have with her.   what time and what communication the children should have with her.   the children shall spend unsupervised time with the mother for four hours on the second sunday of every month (which would automatically see them spending time with their mother on mother’s day without the need for the parties to have communicate about that day), (b) the mother being at liberty to call the children each sunday, and (c) various orders to address the risk issues identified within the proceedings and otherwise support the tenor of the orders.   the mother being at liberty to call the children each sunday, and (c) various orders to address the risk issues identified within the proceedings and otherwise support the tenor of the orders.   various orders to address the risk issues identified within the proceedings and otherwise support the tenor of the orders.
the evidence  affidavit of mr cicero filed 9 may 2022,[2] (b) the father’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (c) various other exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f17’ - with those that are relevant being referred to throughout my judgment.   the father’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘f1’, (c) various other exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f17’ - with those that are relevant being referred to throughout my judgment.   various other exhibits marked from ‘f2’ to ‘f17’ - with those that are relevant being referred to throughout my judgment.   amended response to initiating application filed 22 december 2021, (b) notice of risk filed 2 november 2018, (c) affidavit of ms matti filed 20 may 2022,[3] (d) the mother’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) the indictment and crown case statement dated 4 september 2019 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   notice of risk filed 2 november 2018, (c) affidavit of ms matti filed 20 may 2022,[3] (d) the mother’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) the indictment and crown case statement dated 4 september 2019 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   affidavit of ms matti filed 20 may 2022,[3] (d) the mother’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) the indictment and crown case statement dated 4 september 2019 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   the mother’s outline of case document filed 27 may 2022 – marked exhibit ‘m1’, (e) the indictment and crown case statement dated 4 september 2019 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   the indictment and crown case statement dated 4 september 2019 – marked exhibit ‘m2’.   the icl’s outline of case document filed 26 may 2022 – marked ‘exhibit ‘icl1’, (b) various other exhibits marked from ‘icl2’ to ‘icl15’ - with those that are relevant being referred to throughout my judgment.   various other exhibits marked from ‘icl2’ to ‘icl15’ - with those that are relevant being referred to throughout my judgment.   an email from the icl to a former solicitor for the mother, mr e (‘mr e’) dated 23 june 2020,[6] and (b) an affidavit affirmed by the mother on 24 july 2020 which was filed on 31 july 2020 (see paragraphs 24 to 36 under the heading ‘hair follicle test’).[7]   an affidavit affirmed by the mother on 24 july 2020 which was filed on 31 july 2020 (see paragraphs 24 to 36 under the heading ‘hair follicle test’).[7]   on 23 june 2020, the icl had informed mr e that she had obtained funding for a hair test, recommending that it would be beneficial for the mother to have the test results available when the matter returned to court on 28 july 2020, and (b) as part of a response, on the same day, mr e wrote –   as part of a response, on the same day, mr e wrote –
...as for my client doing a hair follicle alcohol test, she has instructed that she is not interested in doing one.   on 24 july 2020, the mother deposed to – being aware that on 9 april 2020 (sic) judge costigan (sic) had advised her to get a hair test for alcohol should she get legal funding, her being unable to secure funding, realising it was $750 and she couldn’t afford it, being very upset and frustrated that this failure was used against her in the july hearing and was one of the reasons why the children were left with the father, having gone out with friends and had several alcoholic drinks whilst feeling upset and frustrated and having also consumed a bottle of moscato (containing five (5) standard drinks) over her birthday weekend, having been told by her solicitor (sometime following the july hearing), that the icl had now secured funding for a hair follicle test, and declining to submit to the test because –
....i felt it was futile to waste legal aid money on a test that may show the use of alcohol.   requesting relapse prevention education after a recent lapse involving alcohol, (b) saying she had four (4) standard drinks on the weekend of 14 march 2021, (c) saying she had had nil alcohol since 14 march 2021, (d) saying she had recently been consuming four standard drinks on weekends when the children were not with her, (e) regularly attending alcoholics anonymous (‘aa’) meetings with a goal of abstinence.   saying she had four (4) standard drinks on the weekend of 14 march 2021, (c) saying she had had nil alcohol since 14 march 2021, (d) saying she had recently been consuming four standard drinks on weekends when the children were not with her, (e) regularly attending alcoholics anonymous (‘aa’) meetings with a goal of abstinence.   saying she had had nil alcohol since 14 march 2021, (d) saying she had recently been consuming four standard drinks on weekends when the children were not with her, (e) regularly attending alcoholics anonymous (‘aa’) meetings with a goal of abstinence.   saying she had recently been consuming four standard drinks on weekends when the children were not with her, (e) regularly attending alcoholics anonymous (‘aa’) meetings with a goal of abstinence.   regularly attending alcoholics anonymous (‘aa’) meetings with a goal of abstinence.
background  acute behavioural disturbance due to alcohol intoxication, and (b) alcohol use disorder[11]   alcohol use disorder[11]
a family went for a drive. the driver (the mother) aimed the car straight off a big cliff. they drove straight off it, they all survived but where (sic) very hurt. the driver got out of the car and jumped straight into another car and wanted to drive again but looked back to find the family looking at them not wanting to get in. the driver was upset and hurt and asking them, why aren’t they getting in, the family were hurt and scared and thinking they can’t (sic) getting in, the family were hurt and scared and thinking they can’t trust the driver, and each one of them came up with there (sic) own way of dealing with the situation. one just yelled and screamed ([y]), another stood there (sic) ground and said there (sic) old enough to drive ([x]), a (sic) another just got in the car because they were used of (sic) accidents ([z]). another walked away a bit sat down and had to think (father).   on 13 august 2018, the father did break and enter the family home (where the mother was living) and committed a serious indictable offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, in circumstances of aggravation, namely knowing that there was a person present therein, and (b) on 13 august 2018, the father whilst at the family home, assaulted the mother and at the time of the assault he committed an act of indecency on the mother.[20]   on 13 august 2018, the father whilst at the family home, assaulted the mother and at the time of the assault he committed an act of indecency on the mother.[20]   a final advo was issued for two (2) years for the protection of the father and the children from mother including conditions that the mother not be in the company of the father or the children at least 12 hours after drinking alcohol (‘the final advo’),[23] (b) an interim advo was issued to protect the mother from the father (‘the interim advo’) which included a condition that the father could not approach the mother or contact her in any way, unless through a lawyer, to attend counselling/mediation/conciliation, as ordered to enable the contact with the children or as agreed in writing with the mother about contact with the children.[24]   an interim advo was issued to protect the mother from the father (‘the interim advo’) which included a condition that the father could not approach the mother or contact her in any way, unless through a lawyer, to attend counselling/mediation/conciliation, as ordered to enable the contact with the children or as agreed in writing with the mother about contact with the children.[24]   the children’s relationships with the mother had suffered due to their experience of physical harm and neglect in her care,[39] (b) the children have been exposed to inappropriate and dysregulated behaviour by the father (especially around the time of separation) but currently felt safe in his care.[40] (c) the mother said that the father had perpetrated physical and emotional family violence upon her.[41] the father had yelled at the mother about her drinking on occasions and had taken steps to protect the children from risk of harm arising from the mother’s drinking (such as to come home during his work days and removing car keys from the mother). the father was adamant he had not perpetrated any form of family violence, which was supported by the comments made by the children. he agreed he had sent the mother messages accusing her of infidelity.[42] (d) the father alleged that the mother had perpetrated physical and emotional violence upon him and the children. the mother made concessions about using violence in the relationship. the children’s account was consistent with the father’s account over two interviews with the child expert and in circumstances where during the first interview they were primarily living with the mother.[43] (e) x said that the mother is a different person when she drinks, noting that whereas the father can have one drink, the mother cannot stop saying “for mum, one is ten” and that this pattern of drinking made his mother “crazy”. his account of the ‘horse float incident’ is searing and accords with the child expert’s observation that the children had contacted the police with concerns for their safety,[44] (f) the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   the children have been exposed to inappropriate and dysregulated behaviour by the father (especially around the time of separation) but currently felt safe in his care.[40] (c) the mother said that the father had perpetrated physical and emotional family violence upon her.[41] the father had yelled at the mother about her drinking on occasions and had taken steps to protect the children from risk of harm arising from the mother’s drinking (such as to come home during his work days and removing car keys from the mother). the father was adamant he had not perpetrated any form of family violence, which was supported by the comments made by the children. he agreed he had sent the mother messages accusing her of infidelity.[42] (d) the father alleged that the mother had perpetrated physical and emotional violence upon him and the children. the mother made concessions about using violence in the relationship. the children’s account was consistent with the father’s account over two interviews with the child expert and in circumstances where during the first interview they were primarily living with the mother.[43] (e) x said that the mother is a different person when she drinks, noting that whereas the father can have one drink, the mother cannot stop saying “for mum, one is ten” and that this pattern of drinking made his mother “crazy”. his account of the ‘horse float incident’ is searing and accords with the child expert’s observation that the children had contacted the police with concerns for their safety,[44] (f) the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   the mother said that the father had perpetrated physical and emotional family violence upon her.[41] the father had yelled at the mother about her drinking on occasions and had taken steps to protect the children from risk of harm arising from the mother’s drinking (such as to come home during his work days and removing car keys from the mother). the father was adamant he had not perpetrated any form of family violence, which was supported by the comments made by the children. he agreed he had sent the mother messages accusing her of infidelity.[42] (d) the father alleged that the mother had perpetrated physical and emotional violence upon him and the children. the mother made concessions about using violence in the relationship. the children’s account was consistent with the father’s account over two interviews with the child expert and in circumstances where during the first interview they were primarily living with the mother.[43] (e) x said that the mother is a different person when she drinks, noting that whereas the father can have one drink, the mother cannot stop saying “for mum, one is ten” and that this pattern of drinking made his mother “crazy”. his account of the ‘horse float incident’ is searing and accords with the child expert’s observation that the children had contacted the police with concerns for their safety,[44] (f) the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   the father alleged that the mother had perpetrated physical and emotional violence upon him and the children. the mother made concessions about using violence in the relationship. the children’s account was consistent with the father’s account over two interviews with the child expert and in circumstances where during the first interview they were primarily living with the mother.[43] (e) x said that the mother is a different person when she drinks, noting that whereas the father can have one drink, the mother cannot stop saying “for mum, one is ten” and that this pattern of drinking made his mother “crazy”. his account of the ‘horse float incident’ is searing and accords with the child expert’s observation that the children had contacted the police with concerns for their safety,[44] (f) the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   x said that the mother is a different person when she drinks, noting that whereas the father can have one drink, the mother cannot stop saying “for mum, one is ten” and that this pattern of drinking made his mother “crazy”. his account of the ‘horse float incident’ is searing and accords with the child expert’s observation that the children had contacted the police with concerns for their safety,[44] (f) the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   the children’s views should be given some weight, notwithstanding the need to recognise that children are not entirely capable of appraising the complexity of risks which they may come across within their family,[45] (g) x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   x said that he would like to spend time with the mother every alternate saturday night but that if the mother had even one drink he would call his father and get out of there. he said he would prefer that the calls he had with his mother were at his discretion rather than at set times which caused him stress because he sometimes forgot to charge his phone,[46] (h) y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   y said he liked the telephone calls with the mother, but not when she told the children that she wanted them to go home to her. y said that he and x had talked about what outcome they wanted and both agreed that they should stay with the father and see the mother every second saturday overnight,[47] (i) z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]   z said she would like to see the current supervised arrangements change “a little bit” so that she could see the mother at the mother’s home and maybe have a sleepover. she was clear to say she wanted to remain living with the father.[48]
the children have experienced physical harm and neglect in the mother’s care. they have experienced psychological harm and fear. consequently, the children’s relationship with the mother have suffered. even if there were ways of mitigating the physical risks of harm to the children with the mother, there is an ongoing risk of emotional and psychological harm to the children while ever the mother denies their experiences. it is noted that even in his assessment, when presented with detailed collateral information about the experiences of the children and the events that occurred in may 2020, the mother remained fixed on her alternate version of events. the mother will not be able to meet the children’s emotional needs if she cannot recognise and accept the harm she has caused. the children will not feel secure with the mother until she can adequately take responsibility for the impact of her alcohol abuse has had on them. the mother is presently not able to empathise with the children’s experiences, and consequently, the children do not trust her. it is difficult to forsee how the children can have a meaningful relationship with the mother into the future, if the mother continues to deny their reality and/or continues to suggest that their reality has been manufactured and ‘groomed’ by others. there would appear to be no doubt in this matter that the children have been exposed to inappropriate and dysregulated behaviour by the father and paternal grandparents, especially around the time of the parental separation. denigrating the mother to children, and questioning and recording the children in the context of parental conflict, is emotionally harmful. these behaviours damage the trust children experience in all of the adults in their life, compounding the impacts on the children of the trauma they are already enduring.   medical interventions (from a trusted general physician offering anti-depressants, antabuse and ongoing monitoring of symptoms and signs), (d) behavioural support (from a trusted clinician with dual qualifications in the areas of drug & alcohol and mental health), and (e) social support (with aa being able to fill this space and avoid the mother feeling isolated and without access to immediate community support).   behavioural support (from a trusted clinician with dual qualifications in the areas of drug & alcohol and mental health), and (e) social support (with aa being able to fill this space and avoid the mother feeling isolated and without access to immediate community support).   social support (with aa being able to fill this space and avoid the mother feeling isolated and without access to immediate community support).
...[ms matti] said that she stopped drinking alcohol in 2018, prior to which she was binge drinking up to 14 standard drinks at the weekends. she has had a brief admission to [region h] hospital in 2005. she said she has had intermittent anxiety and depression in relation to conjugal tension. she was told by a social worker she may have trauma symptoms. she was on sertraline for a year and this was after a brief trial of escitalopram. she was told by a social worker she may have trauma symptoms...   ms matti has a past history of mixed anxiety and depressive disorder. (2) she is currently stable and on no medications. (3) she has intermittent trauma symptoms, for which she is eager to engage with a psychologist. (4) she has a past history of drinking alcohol to excess, but has been currently abstinent for over two years. i must also finish off by saying that the entire history is based on ms matti’s narrative and i did not have a collateral account. (5) i think engaging with a psychologist is a positive step. (6) i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   she is currently stable and on no medications. (3) she has intermittent trauma symptoms, for which she is eager to engage with a psychologist. (4) she has a past history of drinking alcohol to excess, but has been currently abstinent for over two years. i must also finish off by saying that the entire history is based on ms matti’s narrative and i did not have a collateral account. (5) i think engaging with a psychologist is a positive step. (6) i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   she has intermittent trauma symptoms, for which she is eager to engage with a psychologist. (4) she has a past history of drinking alcohol to excess, but has been currently abstinent for over two years. i must also finish off by saying that the entire history is based on ms matti’s narrative and i did not have a collateral account. (5) i think engaging with a psychologist is a positive step. (6) i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   she has a past history of drinking alcohol to excess, but has been currently abstinent for over two years. i must also finish off by saying that the entire history is based on ms matti’s narrative and i did not have a collateral account. (5) i think engaging with a psychologist is a positive step. (6) i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   i think engaging with a psychologist is a positive step. (6) i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   i would not consider medications currently as there is no indication. (7) i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.   i have not given ms matti a review appointment, but shall be pleased to see her if needed.
the proposals of the parties  he have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with him, (c) he shall keep the mother informed of the schools the children attend and notify her in the event that the children are involved in an accident or medical emergency, (d) the mother being able to obtain the children’s school reports and photographs, (e) the children to spend no time or have any communication with the mother unless the children request communication with the mother (which the father will be obliged to facilitate), (f) the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   the children live with him, (c) he shall keep the mother informed of the schools the children attend and notify her in the event that the children are involved in an accident or medical emergency, (d) the mother being able to obtain the children’s school reports and photographs, (e) the children to spend no time or have any communication with the mother unless the children request communication with the mother (which the father will be obliged to facilitate), (f) the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   he shall keep the mother informed of the schools the children attend and notify her in the event that the children are involved in an accident or medical emergency, (d) the mother being able to obtain the children’s school reports and photographs, (e) the children to spend no time or have any communication with the mother unless the children request communication with the mother (which the father will be obliged to facilitate), (f) the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   the mother being able to obtain the children’s school reports and photographs, (e) the children to spend no time or have any communication with the mother unless the children request communication with the mother (which the father will be obliged to facilitate), (f) the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   the children to spend no time or have any communication with the mother unless the children request communication with the mother (which the father will be obliged to facilitate), (f) the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   the mother and father to keep each other informed of their contact details.   the father have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with the father, (c) the children spend time with the mother for four (4) hours on the second sunday of every month, (d) changeovers occur at the end of the father’s driveway, (e) the children communicate with the mother every sunday at 7.00pm and otherwise be at liberty to speak with the mother at their discretion, (f) the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   the children live with the father, (c) the children spend time with the mother for four (4) hours on the second sunday of every month, (d) changeovers occur at the end of the father’s driveway, (e) the children communicate with the mother every sunday at 7.00pm and otherwise be at liberty to speak with the mother at their discretion, (f) the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   the children spend time with the mother for four (4) hours on the second sunday of every month, (d) changeovers occur at the end of the father’s driveway, (e) the children communicate with the mother every sunday at 7.00pm and otherwise be at liberty to speak with the mother at their discretion, (f) the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   changeovers occur at the end of the father’s driveway, (e) the children communicate with the mother every sunday at 7.00pm and otherwise be at liberty to speak with the mother at their discretion, (f) the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   the children communicate with the mother every sunday at 7.00pm and otherwise be at liberty to speak with the mother at their discretion, (f) the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   the mother and the father be restrained from denigrating each other in the presence of the children and showing the children any court documents in these or any other proceedings, (g) the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.   the mother be restrained from attending various locations where the children may be present, removing the children from such locations and drinking alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children and/or during the time the children spend with her.
the applicable law – parenting proceedings
the term “neglect”, will have a similar meaning to its use in state and territory child protection legislation. it is intended to be limited to situations where a lack of reasonable care is likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury to the health of the child.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary. relevantly for the issues raised in this appeal, he noted that rather than referring to “the briginshaw test” it was now more appropriate to refer to s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (“the evidence act”). section 140 provides as follows: section 140   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: (a) the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: (a) the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.   the gravity of the matters alleged.   the decision in orwell & watson [2008] famcafc 62 where the court rejected the proposition that the child was at unacceptable risk of sexual abuse in the care of the father but was at unacceptable risk of psychological abuse by the father due to his manipulative and over-bearing behaviour and disrespect for boundaries, and (b) the decisions in a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 3.15 and 3.25 and amador v amador [2009] famcafc 196, (2009) 43 fam lr 268 at [89] where the test was applied to the risk of children being exposed to family violence.   the decisions in a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 at 3.15 and 3.25 and amador v amador [2009] famcafc 196, (2009) 43 fam lr 268 at [89] where the test was applied to the risk of children being exposed to family violence.
the standard used by the family court to “achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access”. in other words, where the court makes a finding of unacceptable risk it is a finding that the risk of harm to the children in having access with a parent outweighs the possible benefits to them from that access.
section 60cc - the primary considerations
section 60cc(2)(a)  sometime before separation on 17 june 2018, the father had written what he described as “an analogy” to the mother of his observations and perceptions of the impact of her behaviours on the family unit. as a result, the mother said that she experienced heightened anxiety and fear and the father said the letter reflected the ongoing chaos caused by the mother’s consistent pattern of binge drinking. i accept that no matter whose evidence is accepted, the family relationships were under significant strain due to the behaviours/intentions of the parents before and after separation in june 2018, (b) the children have been present at times when the mother has been intoxicated and the police have been called, for example when the mother drove into a dam just before separation, then when the mother was escorted away from the family by the police in august 2018, again when the mother physically removed z from her brothers and mr r in august 2018, and finally in may 2020 when the ‘horse float incident’ occurred, (c) the children spent no time or communication with the father for periods when he was remanded in custody (as a result of the mother giving a statement to police which resulted in the institution of criminal proceedings), and (d) as a result of the proceedings, since mid-2020, the children have lived with the father and have only spent fortnightly professionally supervised time with the mother for two hours since (with regular telephone communication each week).   the children have been present at times when the mother has been intoxicated and the police have been called, for example when the mother drove into a dam just before separation, then when the mother was escorted away from the family by the police in august 2018, again when the mother physically removed z from her brothers and mr r in august 2018, and finally in may 2020 when the ‘horse float incident’ occurred, (c) the children spent no time or communication with the father for periods when he was remanded in custody (as a result of the mother giving a statement to police which resulted in the institution of criminal proceedings), and (d) as a result of the proceedings, since mid-2020, the children have lived with the father and have only spent fortnightly professionally supervised time with the mother for two hours since (with regular telephone communication each week).   the children spent no time or communication with the father for periods when he was remanded in custody (as a result of the mother giving a statement to police which resulted in the institution of criminal proceedings), and (d) as a result of the proceedings, since mid-2020, the children have lived with the father and have only spent fortnightly professionally supervised time with the mother for two hours since (with regular telephone communication each week).   as a result of the proceedings, since mid-2020, the children have lived with the father and have only spent fortnightly professionally supervised time with the mother for two hours since (with regular telephone communication each week).
section 60cc(2)(b)  she minimised the consequences of her actions (the children were not fearful), (b) she denied she had consumed alcohol (which made her sober decision to bite her son’s hand even more bizarre), and (c) if i accept her evidence (which i don’t) she asks me to also accept that in her sobriety, her behaviour afterwards was acceptable by a parent whose children had left home at night without any explanation (which is implausible and confirms her being neglectful of her children).   she denied she had consumed alcohol (which made her sober decision to bite her son’s hand even more bizarre), and (c) if i accept her evidence (which i don’t) she asks me to also accept that in her sobriety, her behaviour afterwards was acceptable by a parent whose children had left home at night without any explanation (which is implausible and confirms her being neglectful of her children).   if i accept her evidence (which i don’t) she asks me to also accept that in her sobriety, her behaviour afterwards was acceptable by a parent whose children had left home at night without any explanation (which is implausible and confirms her being neglectful of her children).
child’s best interests - the additional considerations
section 60cc(3)(a)
section 60cc(3)(b)
section 60cc(3)(d)
section 60cc(3)(e)
section 60cc(3)(f)  the nsw police (in making observations about her being intoxicated at the scene of the june 2018 traffic incident), (b) the jury (in finding the father not guilty of criminal charges which arose from her complaint), (c) dr c (about her intoxicated state in july 2018), (d) various clinicians (about her reported history of alcohol abuse pre-separation and her relapse in 2021), (e) her lawyer (for not giving her good advice about the april 2020 hair test order), (f) the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   the jury (in finding the father not guilty of criminal charges which arose from her complaint), (c) dr c (about her intoxicated state in july 2018), (d) various clinicians (about her reported history of alcohol abuse pre-separation and her relapse in 2021), (e) her lawyer (for not giving her good advice about the april 2020 hair test order), (f) the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   dr c (about her intoxicated state in july 2018), (d) various clinicians (about her reported history of alcohol abuse pre-separation and her relapse in 2021), (e) her lawyer (for not giving her good advice about the april 2020 hair test order), (f) the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   various clinicians (about her reported history of alcohol abuse pre-separation and her relapse in 2021), (e) her lawyer (for not giving her good advice about the april 2020 hair test order), (f) the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   her lawyer (for not giving her good advice about the april 2020 hair test order), (f) the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   the operators of the interlock device (for why the readings tested positive for the presence of alcohol in her breath), and (g) her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).   her children (for example, suggesting that she was intoxicated during the ‘horse float’ incident or that they breathed into the interlock device).
section 60cc(3)(i)
section 60cc(3)(j), (k)
section 60cc(3)(l)  her less than satisfactory answers about why she failed to submit to a hair test in accordance with the april 2020 orders and the circumstances around her breach advo conviction, and (b) the largely consistent time and communication spent between her and the children in compliance with the june 2020 orders (albeit with some hiccups such as occurred on 19 march 2022), and (c) the lack of any evidence of her breaching the existing series of restraints imposed by the final advo and past interlocutory parenting orders.   the largely consistent time and communication spent between her and the children in compliance with the june 2020 orders (albeit with some hiccups such as occurred on 19 march 2022), and (c) the lack of any evidence of her breaching the existing series of restraints imposed by the final advo and past interlocutory parenting orders.   the lack of any evidence of her breaching the existing series of restraints imposed by the final advo and past interlocutory parenting orders.
conclusion  the shift in the mother’s attitude towards one of taking responsibility for her drinking when she contacted aa after drinking beer earlier this year and then presenting to f hospital at which time she expressed guilt for her actions, (b) two years of no adverse incidents involving authorities related to her displaying abusive, illegal or anti-social behaviours caused by intoxication, (c) years of no traffic incidents involving the police and the mother, (d) the mother’s engagement with dr b which should continue provided both patient and treater adopt a completely open, frank and transparent manner of discourse, reporting and recording which is not impinged by any apprehension that clinical records will be the subject of oversight from a judicial officer, (e) the unsupervised time being limited to four (4) hours every second sunday of the month, from 10.00am to 2.00pm which would constrain any potential for the children to be exposed to adverse behaviours, (f) the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   two years of no adverse incidents involving authorities related to her displaying abusive, illegal or anti-social behaviours caused by intoxication, (c) years of no traffic incidents involving the police and the mother, (d) the mother’s engagement with dr b which should continue provided both patient and treater adopt a completely open, frank and transparent manner of discourse, reporting and recording which is not impinged by any apprehension that clinical records will be the subject of oversight from a judicial officer, (e) the unsupervised time being limited to four (4) hours every second sunday of the month, from 10.00am to 2.00pm which would constrain any potential for the children to be exposed to adverse behaviours, (f) the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   years of no traffic incidents involving the police and the mother, (d) the mother’s engagement with dr b which should continue provided both patient and treater adopt a completely open, frank and transparent manner of discourse, reporting and recording which is not impinged by any apprehension that clinical records will be the subject of oversight from a judicial officer, (e) the unsupervised time being limited to four (4) hours every second sunday of the month, from 10.00am to 2.00pm which would constrain any potential for the children to be exposed to adverse behaviours, (f) the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   the mother’s engagement with dr b which should continue provided both patient and treater adopt a completely open, frank and transparent manner of discourse, reporting and recording which is not impinged by any apprehension that clinical records will be the subject of oversight from a judicial officer, (e) the unsupervised time being limited to four (4) hours every second sunday of the month, from 10.00am to 2.00pm which would constrain any potential for the children to be exposed to adverse behaviours, (f) the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   the unsupervised time being limited to four (4) hours every second sunday of the month, from 10.00am to 2.00pm which would constrain any potential for the children to be exposed to adverse behaviours, (f) the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   the imposition of a restraint upon the mother not to consume alcohol within 24 hours and during any time she spends with the children in circumstances where, if the mother is not already cognisant of it, these orders will be her last chance to maintain any form of meaningful engagement with the children until they are no longer subject to the court’s jurisdiction, (g) the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   the changeovers occurring in a location where the father has control of the environment (with appropriate restraints imposed such as the mother not being able to approach his residence).   the mother is not consume alcohol within 24 hours of spending time with the children or during such periods of time, (b) the mother is not to attend the children’s schools, before/after school care facilities, extra-curricular activities or their home (the definition of which shall exclude the changeover location as ordered), (c) the mother is prohibited from removing the children from the care of various persons/places, (d) the parties are not to expose the children to parental conflict including by way of denigration or the discussion of these or any other court proceedings.   the mother is not to attend the children’s schools, before/after school care facilities, extra-curricular activities or their home (the definition of which shall exclude the changeover location as ordered), (c) the mother is prohibited from removing the children from the care of various persons/places, (d) the parties are not to expose the children to parental conflict including by way of denigration or the discussion of these or any other court proceedings.   the mother is prohibited from removing the children from the care of various persons/places, (d) the parties are not to expose the children to parental conflict including by way of denigration or the discussion of these or any other court proceedings.   the parties are not to expose the children to parental conflict including by way of denigration or the discussion of these or any other court proceedings.
associate: dated: 21 june 2022
dated: 21 june 2022
[1] out of respect for each person’s personal preference about how they may wish to be identified in terms of their preferred honorific, persons (other than the parties or children of either party) shall be referred to by their surname only.[2] referred to as ‘’ with numbered paragraphs and annexures identified alphabetically identified in square brackets[3] referred to as ‘’ with numbered paragraphs and annexures identified alphabetically identified in square brackets[4] referred to as ‘fr’ with numbered paragraphs identified in square brackets[5] referred as the ‘child expert’[6] exhibit ‘icl11’[7] exhibit ‘icl14’[8] exhibit ‘f5’[9] exhibit ‘icl10’[10] exhibit ‘f11’[11] exhibit ‘icl9’[12] exhibit ‘icl9’[13] [61] & annex. ‘a’[14] [62][15] [5][16] exhibit ‘f8’[17] exhibit ‘f13’[18] exhibits ‘f10’, ‘icl5’[19] this summary is drawn from exhibit ‘m2’ which formed the basis of the mother’s cross-examination of the father[20] exhibit ‘m2’[21] exhibit ‘icl5’[22] exhibit ‘f8’[23] fr [25] & [31][24] fr [31] & [125][25] [114][26] exhibit ‘icl12’[27] exhibit ‘icl13’[28] [115][29] [116] – [117][30] exhibit ‘icl7’[31] fr [31][32] exhibit ‘f15’[33] exhibit ‘f12’[34] exhibit ‘icl4’[35] exhibit ‘icl11’[36] exhibit ‘icl14’[37] fr[31][38] exhibit ‘icl3’[39] fr[235] [40] fr[237] & [240][41] see fr[125], [127-129] for examples of the information contained in this sub-paragraph[42] see fr[138-140] for examples of the information contained in this sub-paragraph[43] see fr[132-137], [140][44] fr[87] & [182-183][45] fr[230][46] fr[190] & [193][47] fr[206] & [210][48] fr[221][49] fr[245] & [246][50] fr[248][51] fr [249-255][52] exhibit ‘icl3’[53] exhibit ‘icl3’[54] exhibit ‘f3’[55] [4], [134][56] [124] & annex. ‘c’[57] exhibit ‘f9’[58] exhibit ‘icl6’[59] exhibit ‘icl3’[60] [132-135][61] [167-171][62] exhibit ‘icl15’[63] unless otherwise specified, a legislative reference is to the family law act 1975 (cth)[64] fr[235] [65] fr[237] & [240][66] fr-65, 109, 110, 111, 125, 132, 138, 139