last updated: 28 july 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
carran & carran [2022] fedcfamc2f 818
orders
the court orders that:  the wife’s application at paragraph 3 of the terms of order sought in her application for final orders filed 30 october 2020, and (b) the husband and b pty ltd’s application at paragraph 1 of the terms of order sought in their response filed 21 december 2020, and (c) the husband and b pty ltd’s application at paragraph 2 of the terms of order sought in their response filed 21 december 2020, but only insofar as that paragraph says ‘pursuant to that agreement’ on the first line, and   the husband and b pty ltd’s application at paragraph 1 of the terms of order sought in their response filed 21 december 2020, and (c) the husband and b pty ltd’s application at paragraph 2 of the terms of order sought in their response filed 21 december 2020, but only insofar as that paragraph says ‘pursuant to that agreement’ on the first line, and   the husband and b pty ltd’s application at paragraph 2 of the terms of order sought in their response filed 21 december 2020, but only insofar as that paragraph says ‘pursuant to that agreement’ on the first line, and
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview
documents relied upon
the parties, their marriage, and their children
issues for determination  whether the 2006 agreement is a contract, (2) whether the 2006 agreement, stated to be made under s 90b of the act, is ‘fatally defective’ because the parties executed the agreement after they were married, (3) whether the 2006 agreement is a ‘financial agreement’,[18] (4) whether, if issue 3 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement is a binding financial agreement,[19] and (5) whether, if issue 4 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement should nevertheless be set aside on the basis that: (i) it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]   whether the 2006 agreement, stated to be made under s 90b of the act, is ‘fatally defective’ because the parties executed the agreement after they were married, (3) whether the 2006 agreement is a ‘financial agreement’,[18] (4) whether, if issue 3 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement is a binding financial agreement,[19] and (5) whether, if issue 4 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement should nevertheless be set aside on the basis that: (i) it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]   whether the 2006 agreement is a ‘financial agreement’,[18] (4) whether, if issue 3 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement is a binding financial agreement,[19] and (5) whether, if issue 4 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement should nevertheless be set aside on the basis that: (i) it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]   whether, if issue 3 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement is a binding financial agreement,[19] and (5) whether, if issue 4 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement should nevertheless be set aside on the basis that: (i) it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]   whether, if issue 4 is answered in the affirmative, the 2006 agreement should nevertheless be set aside on the basis that: (i) it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]   it is void, voidable or unenforceable, (ii) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]  ) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (iii) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]  i) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable.[20]
the law
part viiia financial agreements: creatures of statute, common law, and equity
contract law: general principles
formation  there is an agreement and (b) the application of s 90b, s 90c and s 90d to that agreement.[24]
construction
not to the actual intentions, aspirations or expectations of the parties before or at the time of the contract, ... but to the objective framework of facts within which the contract came into existence, and to the parties' presumed intention in this setting. we do not take into account the actual intentions of the parties and for the very good reason that an investigation of those matters would not only be time consuming but it would also be unrewarding as it would tend to give too much weight to these factors at the expense of the actual language of the written contract.
not as if it were entirely divorced from its context, but as part of the whole instrument: ex antecedentibus et consequentibus fit optima interpretatio.[32]
in interpreting actual terms in a contract, the learned authors of cheshire and fifoot's law of contract (9th edition) explain ...:
the high court has repeatedly emphasised that the court approaches the task of ascertaining the meaning of the parties' expressions objectively. it is not interested in their subjective understanding, but applies the meaning that an objective outsider would attribute to the contract in the circumstances. ...
later ... the authors quote from ... toll (fgct) pty ltd v alphapharm pty ltd [2004] hca 52, (2004) 219 clr 165 ...:
references to the common intention of the parties to a contract are to be understood as referring to what a reasonable person would understand by the language in which the parties have expressed their agreement. the meaning of the terms of a contractual document is to be determined by what a reasonable person would have understood them to mean. that, normally, requires consideration not only of the text, but also of the surrounding circumstances known to the parties, and the purposes and object of the transaction.
we also have regard to the contra proferentem rule. this rule, which may be applied where there is ambiguity in the terms of a contract, is resolved against the party seeking protection where that is appropriate.[35]
the high court’s decision in upper hunter county district council v australian chilling & freezing co ltd is conventionally regarded as the starting point of australian jurisprudence on the subject of uncertainty of contract. yet two other decisions on point, both of the high court, preceded that decision, namely mcdermott v black and o’brien v dawson. in upper hunter, barwick cj delivered the lead judgment. preferring to examine the case as an issue of construction, the chief justice held as follows –
but a contract of which there can be more than one possible meaning or which when construed can produce in its application more than one result is not therefore void for uncertainty. as long as it is capable of a meaning, it will ultimately bear that meaning which the courts, or in an appropriate case, an arbitrator, decides is its proper construction: and the court or arbitrator will decide its application. the question becomes one of construction, of ascertaining the intention of the parties, and of applying it. lord tomlin’s words in this connexion in hillas & co. ltd. v. arcos ltd ought to be kept in mind. so long as the language employed by the parties, to use lord wright’s words in scammell (g.) & nephew ltd. v. ouston is not “so obscure and so incapable of any definite or precise meaning that the court is unable to attribute to the parties any particular contractual intention”, the contract cannot be held to be void or uncertain or meaningless. in the search for that intention, no narrow or pedantic approach is warranted, particularly in the case of commercial arrangements. thus will uncertainty of meaning, as distinct from absence of meaning or of intention, be resolved.
former high court justice the honourable dyson heydon ac qc states in his academic treatise heydon on contract that three types of “uncertainty” exist at common law. those are –
a) incomplete terms, b) non-final terms, and c) unclear terms.
the decision of the high court in crown melbourne ltd v cosmopolitan hotel (vic) pty ltd is the most recent authoritative statement of the test. relevantly expressed it is in the following terms –
the contractual intention required to provide contractual certainty ... is not the subjective intention of either or both of the parties but such a mutual contractual intention as the words and conduct attributed to the parties might convey to a reasonable person having the background knowledge reasonably available to both of them.
the honourable dyson heydon ac qc explained the problem of uncertainty being its production of two outcomes, despite the fact that the parties purported to reach agreement. the two outcomes were explained in the following manner –
the first outcome is that the language they have used lacks any meaning at all. for example, unclarity was found in a provision that a “usual agreement for sale and purchase” was to be entered, that it should contain “the usual terms of sale” and that the terms of the agreement were to be in a form “satisfactory” to certain named persons. there was no evidence as to what the usual agreement was or what the usual terms were. the named persons could not “be compelled to agree to any particular terms and it is therefore clear that all the terms of the proposed transaction had not been finally agreed”. the second outcome is that the language has too many meanings in the sense that it is ambiguous in lacking any clear and single meaning and it is impossible for the court to select the correct one.
hence, on that analysis, uncertainty is produced where – a) the language used lacks any meaning at all, or b) the language used has too many meanings, it is lacking in any clear and single meaning and it is thus impossible for the court to select the correct meaning. so far as the impossibility of meaning approach is concerned, the agreement will only be void if the court is unable to put any definite meaning on the contract. three key decisions of the high court represent that proposition, namely meehan v jones, upper hunter and mcdermott v black. ... the legal academic j. w. carter has written that in the modern law of contract, arguments based on uncertainty have minimal attraction citing the decision of ormiston j in vroon bv v foster's brewing group ltd. in nea agrex sa v baltic shipping co ltd, goff lj described an argument about uncertainty as a “counsel of despair”. ... from what i could tell, in this case the applicant did not cast her case on the basis that the agreement was incomplete. had her case been cast in those terms, she would have enlivened the observations of the plurality of the high court (gibbs cj, murphy and wilson jj) in booker industries pty ltd v wilson parking (qld) pty ltd where it was held as follows –
a) the language used lacks any meaning at all, or b) the language used has too many meanings, it is lacking in any clear and single meaning and it is thus impossible for the court to select the correct meaning.
b) the language used has too many meanings, it is lacking in any clear and single meaning and it is thus impossible for the court to select the correct meaning.
it is established by authority, both ancient and modern, that the courts will not lend their aid to the enforcement of an incomplete agreement, being no more than an agreement of the parties to agree at some time in the future.
an agreement will usually be regarded as uncertain for incompleteness where essential terms are missing from the agreement. j. w. carter has written that “as an abstract matter, only three matters are essential”, namely –
a) parties, b) price, and c) subject matter.
that said, j. w. cater postulates that even if those essential matters are covered in a particular agreement, the circumstances relevant to that particular agreement may be such that four other matters must be included before an effective and binding agreement arises. those four other matters are – a) an agreement cannot be said to be binding as a contract unless the parties have reached agreement on those terms which are necessary as a matter of law to constitute a contract, b) a rule of law or statute may make agreement on a particular term essential, c) as part of a market practice, a certain usage may make agreement on a particular term essential, and d) the parties themselves may have determined that agreement on a particular term is necessary because they have agreed that there is to be no agreement unless and until that particular term is agreed. if a conclusion is reached by the court that a particular provision of a contract is void for uncertainty (for example, for being unintelligible or incomplete) the agreement as a whole may nevertheless be upheld where the noxious provision can be severed. two key high court authorities stand for that proposition, namely life insurance co of australia ltd v phillips in the reasons for judgment of knox cj and whitlock v brew in the reasons for judgment of taylor, menzies and owen jj. the relevant statement of law is as follows –
a) an agreement cannot be said to be binding as a contract unless the parties have reached agreement on those terms which are necessary as a matter of law to constitute a contract, b) a rule of law or statute may make agreement on a particular term essential, c) as part of a market practice, a certain usage may make agreement on a particular term essential, and d) the parties themselves may have determined that agreement on a particular term is necessary because they have agreed that there is to be no agreement unless and until that particular term is agreed.
b) a rule of law or statute may make agreement on a particular term essential, c) as part of a market practice, a certain usage may make agreement on a particular term essential, and d) the parties themselves may have determined that agreement on a particular term is necessary because they have agreed that there is to be no agreement unless and until that particular term is agreed.
c) as part of a market practice, a certain usage may make agreement on a particular term essential, and d) the parties themselves may have determined that agreement on a particular term is necessary because they have agreed that there is to be no agreement unless and until that particular term is agreed.
d) the parties themselves may have determined that agreement on a particular term is necessary because they have agreed that there is to be no agreement unless and until that particular term is agreed.
when a contract contains a number of stipulations one of which is void for uncertainty, the question whether the whole contract is void depends on the intention of the parties to be gathered from the instrument as a whole. if the contract be divisible, the part which is void may be separated from the rest and does not affect its validity.
to enliven that legal principle, on the proper construction of the relevant agreement it must be evident that the parties intended that the offending portion was severable or that the whole agreement must fail if the clause in question failed. so much was held by the high court in fitzgerald v masters. some important concepts may be distilled from the survey of the law of uncertainty recorded above. in no special order they are as follows – a) as a starting point, the court must examine the impugned clause, clauses or the agreement as a whole to assess whether the relevant portion is, in fact and in law, uncertain for ambiguity or incompleteness, b) if two constructions of the agreement are equally open, the agreement will not be struck down for uncertainty but rather, the court will construe the agreement according to the presumed intendment of the parties, c) where the impugned portion of the agreement is said to be uncertain because it is impossible to give meaning to the clause, impossibility is not to be equated with difficulty of construction, d) despite the presence of the essential terms of parties, price and subject matter, certain types of agreements import their own special requirements necessitating the presence of those requirements before it can be said that the agreement is certain, and e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
a) as a starting point, the court must examine the impugned clause, clauses or the agreement as a whole to assess whether the relevant portion is, in fact and in law, uncertain for ambiguity or incompleteness, b) if two constructions of the agreement are equally open, the agreement will not be struck down for uncertainty but rather, the court will construe the agreement according to the presumed intendment of the parties, c) where the impugned portion of the agreement is said to be uncertain because it is impossible to give meaning to the clause, impossibility is not to be equated with difficulty of construction, d) despite the presence of the essential terms of parties, price and subject matter, certain types of agreements import their own special requirements necessitating the presence of those requirements before it can be said that the agreement is certain, and e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
b) if two constructions of the agreement are equally open, the agreement will not be struck down for uncertainty but rather, the court will construe the agreement according to the presumed intendment of the parties, c) where the impugned portion of the agreement is said to be uncertain because it is impossible to give meaning to the clause, impossibility is not to be equated with difficulty of construction, d) despite the presence of the essential terms of parties, price and subject matter, certain types of agreements import their own special requirements necessitating the presence of those requirements before it can be said that the agreement is certain, and e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
c) where the impugned portion of the agreement is said to be uncertain because it is impossible to give meaning to the clause, impossibility is not to be equated with difficulty of construction, d) despite the presence of the essential terms of parties, price and subject matter, certain types of agreements import their own special requirements necessitating the presence of those requirements before it can be said that the agreement is certain, and e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
d) despite the presence of the essential terms of parties, price and subject matter, certain types of agreements import their own special requirements necessitating the presence of those requirements before it can be said that the agreement is certain, and e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
e) even if a particular clause of an agreement is said to be uncertain, it may be possible to sever the impugned clause thereby preserving the agreement so long as it is possible to discern from the agreement that the parties intended the offending portion to be severed.[36]
rectification
rectification is an equitable remedy, the purpose of which is to make a written instrument “conform to the true agreement of the parties where the writing by common mistake fails to express that agreement accurately”. for relief by rectification, it must be demonstrated that, at the time of the execution of the written instrument sought to be rectified, there was an “agreement” between the parties in the sense that the parties had a “common intention”, and that the written instrument was to conform to that agreement. critically, it must also be demonstrated that the written instrument does not reflect the “agreement” because of a common mistake. unless those elements are established, the “hypothesis arising from execution of the written instrument, namely, that it is the true agreement of the parties” cannot be displaced. the issue may be approached by asking – what was the actual or true common intention of the parties? there is no requirement for communication of that common intention by express statement, but it must at least be the parties’ actual intentions, viewed objectively from their words or actions, and must be correspondingly held by each party.[37]
rectification is an equitable remedy which is concerned with a mistake as to an aspect of what an instrument records and with the conscience of the parties. the common law, on the other hand, deals with the interpretation of the words chosen by the parties to reflect their agreement and it does so pragmatically, by reference to considerations such as business efficacy.[41]
the applicable principles are conveniently found in noon v bondi beach astra retirement village pty ltd [2010] nswca 202 at [46], where giles ja said, with the agreement of macfarlan ja:
the process of construction may bring a marked divergence from the text. in wilson v wilson [1854] engr 513, (1854) 5 hl cas 40 “john” was read as “mary” in a will. in fitzgerald v masters [1956] hca 53, (1956) 95 clr 420 “inconsistent” was read as “consistent” in a contract for sale. as a recent illustration in mchugh holdings pty ltd v newtown colonial hotels pty ltd [2008] nswsc 542 , (2008) 73 nswlr 53 “lessor” was read as “lessee” in a lease. this is often because a mistake is obvious on the face of the instrument and in chartbrook ltd v persimmon homes ltd [2009] ukhl 38, [2009] 1 ac 1101 lord hoffmann, with whom lords hope, rodger and walker and baroness hale relevantly agreed, accepted that there must be a clear mistake on the face of the instrument and it must be clear what correction ought to be made in order to cure the mistake. but in fitzgerald v masters at 437 it was explained “the rejection of repugnant words, the transposition of words and the supplying of omitted words” is a consequence of “the rule that the intention of the parties is to be ascertained from the instrument as a whole and that this intention when ascertained will govern its construction”. ascertaining the intention of the parties, of course, is in accordance with the principles of contract construction abovementioned.
... this principle is distinct from rectification in equity. as lord st leonards said in wilson v wilson [1854] engr 513, (1854) 5 hl cas 40 at 66–67, [1854] engr 513, 10 er 811 at 822:
now it is a great mistake if it is supposed that even a court of law cannot correct a mistake, or error, on the face of an instrument: there is no magic in words. if you find a clear mistake, and it admits of no other construction, a court of law, as well as a court of equity, without impugning any doctrine about correcting those things which can only be shown by parol evidence to be mistakes — without, i say, going into those cases at all, both courts of law and of equity may correct an obvious mistake on the face of an instrument without the slightest difficulty.
true it is that that principle requires a very strong level of conviction that a mistake has been made. to use the language of dixon cj and fullagar j in fitzgerald v masters [1956] hca 53, (1956) 95 clr 420 at 426–427, it must be “clearly necessary in order to avoid absurdity or inconsistency”, and, as this court said in miwa pty ltd v siantan properties pty ltd [2011] nswca 297 at [18], the test of absurdity is not easily satisfied. but that demanding test is in my view satisfied in this case. the principle is not confined to linguistic errors such as “inconsistent” being read as “consistent” or “shorter” being read as “longer”. the principle extends to obvious conceptual errors, such as “lessor” being read as “lessee” as in mchugh holdings pty ltd v newtown colonial hotel pty ltd [2008] nswsc 542 , (2008) 73 nswlr 53, or words denoting a mortgage of company title flat being read as a mortgage of the shares in the company which entitle their owner to that flat. in all those cases, it is perfectly clear what legal meaning is to be given to the literally absurd words.
the implication of a term is to be compared, and at the same time contrasted, with rectification of the contract. in each case the problem is caused by a deficiency in the expression of the consensual agreement. a term which should have been included has been omitted. the difference is that with rectification the term which has been omitted and should have been included was actually agreed upon, with implication the term is one which it is presumed that the parties would have agreed upon had they turned their minds to it — it is not a term that they have actually agreed upon. thus, in the case of the implied term the deficiency in the expression of the consensual agreement is caused by the failure of the parties to direct their minds to a particular eventuality and to make explicit provision for it. rectification ensures that the contract gives effect to the parties’ actual intention, the implication of a term is designed to give effect to the parties’ presumed intention.[43]
severance
one is whether the operation of the contract apart from the unclear part was to be conditional on the efficacy of that part or whether it was to take effect despite the failure of that part. another is whether the unclear part is “in substance so connected with the others as to form an indivisible whole which cannot be taken to pieces without altering its nature”. another is whether elimination of the unclear part changes the extent of the contract only, but not its kind. another is whether the parties did not intend to contract unless effect was given to the unclear provision. another is whether the unclear part is so material and important that it is to be inferred that the parties did not intend to make a contract without it. another is whether the severance of the unclear part would mean disregarding the main purport and substance of the relevant provision, or would alter entirely the scope and intention of the contract entirely. another is whether the unclear part is of such substance and materiality in the whole bargain that it cannot be severed from the rest. another is whether there is a reciprocity of obligation between the unclear promise and the other promise suggesting that legal validity of each promise is a condition of the operation of the other. the full court of the supreme court of victoria summarised the considerations relevant to this process as follows:
the process of construction will have regard to such considerations as the independence in form of the impugned part, any interdependence of that part in form or operation with the rest, the effect that severance would have on the operation or meaning of what is left, the nature of the subject-matter dealt with in the part and its relative importance in the setting of the whole bargain, whether the impugned part is one of several promises supported by different considerations or by a common consideration, or whether it is part of a single consideration supporting a promise or promises or whether it is one of several considerations, and, if so, whether it is a material or important part of the total consideration or merely subordinate. the considerations to which resort is had for the purpose of construction are not necessarily of the same force and effect, eg dependence in form or interdependence of operation or meaning would operate as a bar to severance, but interdependence in those respects may not be decisive in favour of severability.[45]
‘financial agreement’ (ss 4, 90b, 90c, 90d)  if: (a) people who are contemplating entering into a marriage with each other make a written agreement with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2), and (aa) at the time of the making of the agreement, the people are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90c or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,   people who are contemplating entering into a marriage with each other make a written agreement with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2), and (aa) at the time of the making of the agreement, the people are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90c or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,  ) at the time of the making of the agreement, the people are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90c or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,   the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,
the agreement is a financial agreement. the people may make the financial agreement with one or more other people.
...[46]   if: (a) the parties to a marriage make a written agreement with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2), and (aa) at the time of the making of the agreement, the parties to the marriage are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90b or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,   the parties to a marriage make a written agreement with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2), and (aa) at the time of the making of the agreement, the parties to the marriage are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90b or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,  ) at the time of the making of the agreement, the parties to the marriage are not the spouse parties to any other binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90b or 90d) with respect to any of those matters, and (b) the agreement is expressed to be made under this section,
the agreement is a financial agreement. the parties to the marriage may make the financial agreement with one or more other people. ...[47]
binding financial agreements (s 90g)
90g when financial agreements are binding   subject to subsection (1a), a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement if, and only if:[54] (a) the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) the agreement contains, in relation to each party to the agreement, a statement to the effect that the party to whom the statement relates has been provided, before the agreement was signed by him or her, as certified in an annexure to the agreement, with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner as to the following matters: (i) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, (ii) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of the making of the agreement,   the agreement is signed by all parties, and (b) the agreement contains, in relation to each party to the agreement, a statement to the effect that the party to whom the statement relates has been provided, before the agreement was signed by him or her, as certified in an annexure to the agreement, with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner as to the following matters: (i) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, (ii) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of the making of the agreement,   the agreement contains, in relation to each party to the agreement, a statement to the effect that the party to whom the statement relates has been provided, before the agreement was signed by him or her, as certified in an annexure to the agreement, with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner as to the following matters: (i) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, (ii) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of the making of the agreement,   the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, (ii) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of the making of the agreement,  ) the advantages and disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to the party of the making of the agreement,
or before signing the agreement, the spouse party was provided with independent legal advice from a legal practitioner about: (iii) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, and (iv) whether or not, at the time when the advice was provided, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that party to make the agreement, and (v) whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.[55] (c) either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and[56]  i) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, and (iv) whether or not, at the time when the advice was provided, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that party to make the agreement, and (v) whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.[55]  ) whether or not, at the time when the advice was provided, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that party to make the agreement, and (v) whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.[55]   whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.[55]  ) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.[55]   either before or after signing the agreement, each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in paragraph (b) was provided to that party (whether or not the statement is annexed to the agreement), and[56]  ) ...[57] (d) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.  ) a financial agreement is binding on all parties to the agreement if: (a) the agreement is signed by all the parties, and (b) paragraph (1)(b) is not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and[58] (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (d) the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court. (1b) for the purposes of paragraph (1a)(d), a court may make an order declaring that a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, upon application (the enforcement application) by a spouse party seeking to enforce the agreement. (1c) to avoid doubt, section 90ka applies in relation to the enforcement application.   the agreement is signed by all the parties, and (b) paragraph (1)(b) is not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and[58] (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (d) the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   paragraph (1)(b) is not satisfied in relation to the agreement, and[58] (c) a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (d) the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   a court is satisfied that it would be unjust and inequitable if the agreement were not binding on the spouse parties to the agreement (disregarding any changes in circumstances from the time the agreement was made), and (d) the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   the court makes an order under subsection (1b) declaring that the agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement, and (e) the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.   a court may make such orders for the enforcement of a financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the agreement as it thinks necessary.
... importantly, s 90g(1)(b) contains a requirement for independent legal advice separately to the requirement of a signed statement of legal advice, which is found in s 90g(1)(c). accordingly, evidence of the latter cannot have been intended to constitute determinative evidence of the former. if that were the case, the inclusion of a separate provision for each would be redundant.
the act in effect draws a distinction between agreements which are financial agreements (s 4, s 90b, s 90c, s 90d) and those financial agreements which are binding (s 90g). financial agreements can, like any other agreement, govern the actions of the parties to them and bind the parties to obligations, but do not oust the jurisdiction of the court. parties to an agreement that satisfies the definition of "financial agreement" are bound by its terms (or not bound as the case may be), just as they would be bound (or not bound) by any other agreement (s 90ka) ... section 90g is irrelevant to the contractual rights and remedies of the parties to an agreement that satisfies the definition of "financial agreement". that section only becomes relevant when the issue is whether an agreement that satisfies the definition of "financial agreement" is effective for a specific statutory purpose, namely to operate as a bar to claims by either party pursuant to part viii of the act (s 71a). it will be so, if and only if, it is "binding" within the meaning of s 90g. if an agreement, including an agreement that satisfies the definition of "financial agreement" under the act, fails to effectively bar part viii claims (because of its failure to comply with the requirements of s 90g and, as a result, is not "binding" within the meaning of that section) the financial agreement can nevertheless have an affect. however, an agreement's failure to be "binding" in the s 90g sense renders its use in part viii proceedings to be very limited, specifically it does not operate as a bar to orders made under that pt ... i consider this distinction to be ... [i]n particular, ... important with respect to the application of any remedies in contract or equity which might apply to a financial agreement, including, specifically, rectification ...[62]
grounds for setting a binding financial agreement aside (s 90k)  a court may make an order setting aside a financial agreement ... if, and only if, the court is satisfied that:
... (b) the agreement is void, voidable or unenforceable, or ... (d) since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (e) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable, or   the agreement is void, voidable or unenforceable, or   since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the marriage) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (2)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside, or (e) in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable, or   in respect of the making of a financial agreement—a party to the agreement engaged in conduct that was, in all the circumstances, unconscionable, or
void, voidable or unenforceable (s 90k(1)(b))
... the purpose of part viiia is to permit parties to arrange their own affairs in the manner they choose, to give certainty, and to avoid delay and costly disputes on marriage breakdown. the legislature intended a financial agreement, if binding, would oust the jurisdiction of the court to adjust property, financial resources, and other matters the subject of the agreement. the practical effect of part viiia is, (subject to the sections which permit a court in exercise of its discretion to set aside an agreement (s 90k), or to decline to enforce or test the validity, or effectiveness of the agreement (s 90ka)), to remove the provisions made in the agreement from the scrutiny of a court to ensure those provisions are just and equitable. the principle that words “may generally be supplied, omitted or corrected, in an instrument, when it is clearly necessary to avoid absurdity or inconsistency” is a well recognised principle in the law of contract (see fitzgerald v masters [1956] hca 53, (1956) 95 clr 420 at 426, westpac banking corporation v tanzone pty limited & ors [2000] nswca 25) ... we are of the view that, while common law principles of construction undoubtedly apply and can be used to avoid absurdity, the terms of the agreement must accurately reflect the intention of the parties at the time of the making of the agreement, and be unambiguous. in other words, the meaning to be given to expressions used in the agreement must be clear and their meaning certain. we note in this regard the discussion of mason and brennan jj in calverley v green of the meaning to be attributed to the word “acquire”. any term which a reasonable person would imply should be uncontroversial. these requirements are particularly important when the financial agreement is one made, as in this case, in contemplation of marriage, and deals with unidentified property or financial resources which may be acquired or contributed to by parties in the future and subsequently divided between them, or retained by one party, in the event their marriage breaks down irretrievably. we accept that in determining whether the agreement is valid, enforceable or effective, the general law relating to contracts, as well as principles of equity, are to be applied. that must be done to give effect to the parties’ intentions at the time of the making of the agreement, and in the context of the statute. the legislature has been careful to include strict requirements if a financial agreement is to be binding, including the requirement of independent legal advice. in those circumstances it is clear the legislature envisaged, because of the nature of these agreements and the removal of the court’s supervisory role, that parties would receive legal advice about the necessity for their intentions to be accurately and clearly reflected in the actual terms of the agreement. while, for the purpose of construing the agreement a court should, as in the context of a commercial agreement, apply an objective test of a reasonable bystander to the construction of an agreement, it cannot give meaning to an agreement whose terms are so imprecise or ambiguous the parties’ intent cannot be discerned. this is particularly so when regard is had to provisions of part viiia in the overall context of the act.[67]
material change in circumstances and resulting hardship (s 90k(1)(d))
a) [a] ‘material change in circumstances’ has occurred, b) that material change relate[s] to the ‘care, welfare and development’ of a child of the marriage, c) and, as a result of the change, d) the child, e) or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child, a party to the agreement, f) will suffer ‘hardship’ if the agreement is not set aside.[68]
akin to such concepts as hardness, severity, privation, that which is hard to bear or a substantial detriment.[78]   if the 2006 agreement remains in place, and (b) if the 2006 agreement is set aside.[80]   if the 2006 agreement is set aside.[80]
unconscionable conduct (s 90k(1)(e))
... the court should also have regard to the fact that the husband, unconscionably,[83] did not ever suggest any revision of the agreement: - as the admitted change occurred, - as the years, the wife’s contributions and the difficult circumstances of the relationship passed, and - as the circumstances for the wife and the children following the separation came to his knowledge’.[84]
a relationship that places one party at a ‘special disadvantage’ vis-à-vis the other, knowledge of that special disadvantage by the stronger party, and unconscientious exploitation by the stronger party of the weaker party’s disadvantage.[86]
the 2006 agreement
financial agreement family law act 1975 section 90b the agreement is made on the 8th day of december 2006. between: mr carran of o street, town m in tasmania (hereinafter referred to as “mr carran”) of the one part. and ms carran of o street, town m in tasmania (hereinafter referred to as “ms carran”) of the other part. whereas mr carran and ms carran commenced living together in 2005 (referred to as the “date of cohabitation”). mr carran and ms carran married in 2006 at city e in uk. in the hope of leading to marital tranquillity in their life together, and to avoid or reduce disputes between them in the future about ownership, use and descent of property and to avoid unpleasantness and dispute should the marriage, in any circumstances not survive, they wish to set down in writing their agreement as to how their financial relationship with each other should be regulated. this agreement is intended to operate in substitution of all other rights of either party under the provisions of the family law act (1975) and until that further agreement is entered into by the parties they intend the terms of this agreement to continue to operate. there is no other agreement in force as between mr carran and ms carran. as at the date of commencement of cohabitation and at the date of this agreement, mr carran is the manager of a factory (farming and agricultural farming), such businesses registered in his name. mr carran is in partnership with mr p and ms q. such partnership is known and registered as b pty ltd. mr carran also has a one third interest in a company known as company al. mr carran is one of three directors of this company. mr carran derives a salary of approximately fifty five thousand dollars ($55,000.00) per annum from his directorship with company ah. profits from b pty ltd are paid into company ah from which mr carran receives his salary. mr carran also receives some rent from company al for the lease of land. at the date of commencement of cohabitation and at the date of this agreement, ms carran is in part time employment as a customer service officer with employer am and receives a current income of approximately sixteen thousand dollars ($16,000.00) per annum. ms carran and mr carran are expecting their first child of the relationship in 2006 it is the joint intention of the parties that ms carran shall cease employment to embrace the responsibilities of a full time mother and home duties. ms carran has two children of a previous relationship, namely f j and g. the said children reside with mr carran and ms carran. mr carran has two children, namely h and j. the children reside primarily with their mother and spend time with mr carran. mr carran pays child support maintenance as assessed. at the date of commencement of cohabitation, mr carran had assets, liabilities and financial resources as outlined below:
mr carran has purchases in half shares with mr carran and ms q a property at town r including factory business. the purchase price was $400,000.00, of which mr carran contributed $200,000.00 at the time of commencement of cohabitation, ms carran had assets, liabilities and financial resources as set out below:
the sale proceeds possessed by ms carran have applied to the reduction of the mortgage of the o street property, that the parties are using as their matrimonial home. ms carran agrees and acknowledges that mr carran has solely established the business operated by him and operating from the properties set out above and that she has no interest financially or otherwise in those businesses. ms carran acknowledges that the assets, property and financial resources referred to in paragraph 11 above are solely owned by mr carran and they are his sole property and in respect of which she acknowledges she has no claim as to any proprietary interest unless otherwise stated in this agreement or otherwise agreed in writing between the parties. mr carran acknowledges the assets, property and resources referred to in paragraph 13 are solely owned by ms carran and are her sole property and in respect of which he acknowledges that he has no claim as to any proprietary interest unless otherwise stated in this agreement or otherwise agreed in writing between the parties. financial arrangements during cohabitation the clothing, jewellery, personal effects and household items owned by each of the parties before they commenced to live together and any clothing, jewellery, personal affects and household items acquired by each of them during the period of cohabitation shall be and remain the separate property of the partner who purchased and paid for that item or received that item as a gift. it is further the intention of the parties to, within 12 months of the date of this agreement, to transfer ownership of the t street property into both party’s names as joint tenants. that should the marriage not survive, it is the intention of the parties that should neither party be able to compensate the other for their one half share in the property at t street, or where both are desirous of compensating the other for their one half share in the said property, the said property shall be placed on the market for sale, by private treaty with a real estate agent and for a price agreed by the parties. the balance of the sale proceeds, after the payment of costs, commissions and fees, and for the discharge of any mortgage, shall then be divided equally between the parties. in the event that mr carran and ms carran are unable to agree on a real estate agent and/or sale price, then such real estate agent and/or sale price shall be as nominated by the president of the real estate institute of tasmania. that save as otherwise is provided for in this agreement, mr carran be solely responsible for and indemnify ms carran in respect of any and all liabilities attaching to any of the assets listed at paragraph 11 in this agreement and including but not limited to the commonwealth bank mortgage secured by those assets, bank av finance liability, bank aw finance liability and bank ax finance liability. that save as otherwise is provided for in this agreement, should mr carran choose to sell or otherwise deal with any of the assets listed in paragraph 11 above and with the proceeds of such sale or dealings purchase other real estate and/or businesses either solely or with persons other than ms carran then ms carran acknowledges that she has no claim or proprietary interest against such real estate and/or business. should the parties purchase any real estate or other valuable item during the course of their relationship as a couple, then such real estate or other valuable item will be purchased and registered in the joint names of the parties. the property shall be deemed to be the joint property of the parties regardless of which party has contributed the purchase price or percentage of purchase price. should either party purchase any real estate or other valuable item during the course of their relationship with the communicated intention of it being a distinct and individual purchase, then such real estate or other valuable item will be deemed to be the sole property of the party who purchased it. there may be circumstances when mr carran purchases any real estate or other valuable item by virtue of his business ventures. any such purchase shall not form part of the matrimonial asset pool and shall be considered a purchase by the business venture, and not mr carran himself. while the parties reside together they shall regulate their financial relationship as set out in the following paragraphs, but if from time to time mr carran and ms carran pay expenses which were payable by the other party under this agreement then such payments are not to give rise to any enforceable debt and any such payments are not to be seen as an abandonment of this agreement: the parties both meet all expenses from the groceries, normal household items, telephone, gas and electricity and all reasonable day to day expenses for the property at o street, town m (but subject to this agreement). unless otherwise agreed in writing, each party pay all council rates, land tax, insurance and other necessary outgoings in respect of the properties registered in their sole names and referred to in this agreement. unless otherwise agreed in writing, each party pay all registration and insurance costs in respect of any vehicles registered in their individual name. unless otherwise agreed in writing each party pay all repairs and maintenance on properties registered in their sole name. that should the parties establish a joint bank account then each will be solely entitled at any time to one half of the proceeds of such account, but that any bank account solely in the name of either party will remain the sole property of that party. this agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors and assigns of each party. mr carran and ms carran acknowledge that they each have no entitlement or claim to any gifts or inheritances received or which may at any time be received by the other party. the provisions contained in this agreement shall operate and apply in the event of any final separation between the parties and regardless of any question of fault or conduct on the part of the parties. the parties agree and acknowledge that if the relationship breaks down, irrespective of cause or reason, then all joint assets acquired during the period of cohabitation shall be divided by mutual agreement of the parties or in the event that no such agreement can be reached, then such asset or assets are to be sold and the proceeds divided equally between the parties. independent legal advice the parties are aware of their right to obtain independent legal advice on the content of this agreement. mr carran acknowledges that he has received independent legal advice prior to entering into this agreement and has given due consideration to that advice. ms carran acknowledges that she has received independent legal advice prior to entering into this agreement and has given due consideration to that advice. the parties acknowledge and agree the contents of this agreement are true to the best of each of their knowledge, information and belief. the parties have signed each page of this agreement.
in witness whereof the parties have set their hands and seals on the day and year first hereinbefore mentioned this day. signed by the said mr carran .........x............ in the presence of: witness: ms ay address: barrister & solicitor occupation: az law firm city ba signed by the said ms carran ........................ in the presence of: witness: ms bb address: l street occupation: city c law clerk
familiy law act 1975 certificate under section 90g (1) (b) i, ms ay of az law firm, city ba in tasmania, legal practitioner, certify that before this agreement between mr carran and ms carran was signed by mr carran, i provided mr carran with independent legal advice as to the following matters:-   the effect of this agreement on his rights, and (ii) the advantages or disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to him of making the agreement.
......8/12/2006......dated .........x............signed
familiy law act 1975 certificate under section 90g (1) (b) i, ms bc of bd law firm, in the state of tasmania, legal practitioner, certify that before this agreement between mr carran and ms carran was signed by ms carran, i provided ms carran with independent legal advice as to the following matters:-   the effect of this agreement on her rights, and (ii) the advantages or disadvantages, at the time that the advice was provided, to her of making the agreement.
......6.12.2006......dated .........x............signed
a note on recitals and operative clauses
what must be clear and unambiguous is that the parties objectively intended to oust the jurisdiction and put in place the methodology to resolve their financial affairs should the breakdown of the marriage occur. ... the fulfilment of those requirements may be gleaned from the recitals if the whole of the document addresses those matters and is properly executed.[90]
the common intention of the parties (cl 3-4)
determination of issues
issue 2: is the 2006 agreement, stated to be made under s 90b of the act, ‘fatally defective’ because the parties executed the agreement after they were married?
issue 3: a ‘financial agreement’?
... is not and cannot be a ‘financial agreement’ as defined by section 4 of the family law act 1975 ...[100]
the financial agreement entered into by the applicant wife, ms carran and the respondent husband, mr carran on 8 december 2006 is binding on the parties and enforceable.[101]
the parties to a marriage make a written agreement with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2) (s 90c(1)(a))  how, in the event of the breakdown of the marriage, all or any of the property or financial resources of either or both of the spouse parties at the time when the agreement is made, or at a later time and during the marriage, is to be dealt with, (b) the maintenance of either of the spouse parties: (i) during the marriage, or (ii) after divorce, or (iii) both during the marriage and after divorce.   the maintenance of either of the spouse parties: (i) during the marriage, or (ii) after divorce, or (iii) both during the marriage and after divorce.   during the marriage, or (ii) after divorce, or (iii) both during the marriage and after divorce.  ) after divorce, or (iii) both during the marriage and after divorce.  i) both during the marriage and after divorce.
at the time of making the agreement, the parties to the marriage are not the spouse parties to any other binding or non-binding agreement (whether made under this section or section 90b or 90d) with respect to any of those matters (s 90c(1)(aa))
the agreement is expressed to be made under this section (s 90c(1)(b))
a brief note with respect to the date upon which the 2006 agreement came into force and effect as a s 90c financial agreement
issue 4: a binding financial agreement?
signed by all parties (s 90g(1)(a))
contains, in relation to each party, a statement to the effect that the party to whom the statement refers has been provided with independent legal advice in accordance with certain terms (s 90g(1)(b), (1a)(b))
or ...  i) the effect of the agreement on the rights of that party, and (iv) whether or not, at the time when the advice was provided, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that party to make the agreement, and (v) whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.  ) whether or not, at the time when the advice was provided, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that party to make the agreement, and (v) whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.   whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that party to make the agreement, and (vi) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.  ) whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable.
the parties are aware of their right to obtain independent legal advice on the content of this agreement. mr carran acknowledges that he has received independent legal advice prior to entering into this agreement and has given due consideration to that advice. ms carran acknowledges that she has received independent legal advice prior to entering into this agreement and has given due consideration to that advice. the parties acknowledge and agree the contents of this agreement are true to the best of each of their knowledge, information and belief. the parties have signed each page of this agreement.
... the fact that a party has not received the prescribed legal advice does not alone render s 90g(1a) inapplicable, and second, [parker v parker [2012] famcafc 33] is authority for the proposition that the operation of the discretion in para (c) is not confined to “technical” breaches. the trial judge here also adopted that interpretation and we find no error in that approach. however ... the decision in parker provides no assistance in understanding what the discretion does entail, and in particular in identifying the factors to be taken into account in exercising the discretion. it is to these issues that this aspect of this appeal is directed. the trial judge correctly identifies ... that the plain words of s 90g(1a) “envisage a broad discretion vested in the court in circumstances where the pre-conditions to the exercise of that discretion prescribed otherwise in s 90g(1a)(a) to (e) are established”. his honour continued, again correctly in our view, that “[o]nce that discretion is enlivened, nothing within the section suggests, in terms, any restriction on the matters that might inform it.” we are also ad idem with the trial judge that “the court is required to inquire into the facts and circumstances surrounding the agreement so as to arrive at a conclusion as to whether those facts and circumstances justify the court exercising the discretion inherent in para (c) of [s 90g(1a)]” ... we would only add the necessary rider that it is the facts and circumstances surrounding the making and performance of the agreement which are relevant.[107]
as to the proper interpretation of s 90g(1a)(c), there is a divergence of views about the meaning of the words “unjust and inequitable”. namely whether it is limited to technical mistakes (per strickland j in senior v anderson) or a more wide ranging provision (per murphy j in hoult v hoult (no 2) [2012] famca 367). the paucity of argument on this issue means that it would be inappropriate to express an opinion about this interesting divergence in views. however, before relief pursuant to s 90g(1a) [can] be given ... it would be necessary to consider the arguments made by each party in relation to s 90ka. that section brings into play principles of law and equity applicable to determining the validity, enforceability and effect of contracts. because the wife has been able to establish grounds for equitable relief so as to set the financial agreement aside, then notwithstanding that the technical errors may no longer be fatal, because the financial agreement will be set aside the effect of s 90g(1a)(e) is that relief pursuant to s 90g(1a) would not be available.[109]
each spouse party was provided with a signed statement by the legal practitioner stating that the advice referred to in s 90g(2)(b) was provided to that party (s 90g(1)(c))
agreement has not been terminated or set aside by a court (s 90g(1)(d))
issue 5: should the 2006 agreement, even if it is capable of being binding under s 90g(1a), be set aside?
void, voidable or unenforceable? (s 90k(1)(b))
description and identification of assets
the husband’s assets (cl 6, 7, 11, 12)
the wife’s assets (cl 13, 14)
‘joint assets’ (cl 32)
how the agreement ‘deals with’ the parties’ property and financial resources (cl 15-17)
the o street property and the $75,000.00 sale proceeds from the n street, town m property (cl 14)
the t street property (cl 19-21)
husband’s use of sale proceeds to purchase ‘real estate and/or businesses’ (cl 23)
purchase of real estate or other valuable items (cl 24-25)
the husband’s purchases of real estate or other valuable items ‘by virtue of his business ventures’ (cl 26)
indemnification in relation to husband’s assets (cl 22)
clothing, jewellery, personal effects and household items (cl 18)
conclusion with respect to s 90k(1)(b)
hardship resulting from a material change in circumstances? (s 90k(1)(d))  if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $658,220.00 (as submitted by the husband) she will receive around 21% of the asset pool, (2) if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $378,220.00 (as submitted by the wife) she will receive around 12% of the asset pool, or (3) if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $723,220.00 (calculated by me, in the event that the agreement affords the wife the equitable interest in the o street property and the half-interest in the t street property) she will receive around 23% of the asset pool.   if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $378,220.00 (as submitted by the wife) she will receive around 12% of the asset pool, or (3) if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $723,220.00 (calculated by me, in the event that the agreement affords the wife the equitable interest in the o street property and the half-interest in the t street property) she will receive around 23% of the asset pool.   if the wife’s entitlement under the 2006 agreement is worth approximately $723,220.00 (calculated by me, in the event that the agreement affords the wife the equitable interest in the o street property and the half-interest in the t street property) she will receive around 23% of the asset pool.
conclusion with respect to s 90k(1)(d)
conclusion
associate: dated: 24 june 2022
dated: 24 june 2022
[1] family law act 1975 (cth) s 71a.[2] ibid s 90g(1b).[3] the husband’s affidavit, at [21], was subject to an objection from mr trezise during the husband’s examination in chief on the basis that it included opinion evidence, and was struck out on this basis.[4] affidavit of mr carran, 30 august 2021, [44]-[46]. the wife also said under cross-examination that the husband currently pays x and y’s tuition fees at k school and that she meets all other educational costs and expenses.[5] the wife, under cross-examination, said that h and g currently live with her for $50.00 per week as board.[6] the husband said, under cross-examination, that the valuations included in his financial statement were estimations based on bank valuations and other valuations undertaken during the course of this litigation. [7] he did not contest during cross-examination that the parties’ joint account had at times been used by the parties for commercial operations.[8] 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006, [14]. i note that the husband’s total and net assets appear to have been calculated incorrectly in the agreement. his total assets are stated as amounting to $3,865,000.00, though the figures listed actually amount to $3,655,000.00. subsequently, his total net assets are listed as amounting to $2,215,000.00 instead of the net total which is calculable using the figures given, $2,005,000.00. the discrepancy between the actual and stated total assets is $210,000.00 — this leads me to believe, as a best guess, that the value of the o street property was erroneously taken into account twice in the calculation of the husband’s total assets.[9] ibid [13].[10] affidavit of ms carran, 8 september 2021, [12].[11] affidavit of mr carran, 30 august 2021 (n 4), [25].[12] the husband proposes that this property be transferred, unencumbered, to the wife in the primary proceedings.[13] f and his partner lived in the u street property for a time in 2020 until it was sold. the husband says that f lives there rent free, and the wife says that she intended for f to pay $200.00 per week in rent but that the husband sought half of the rental income. [14] the husband agreed during cross-examination that these properties in town ab had been purchased during the marriage. the documentation is at times unclear as to the specific identities of the town ab properties but clarification on this issue is not required in these preliminary proceedings.[15] the husband agreed that the wife was a sounding board for his business decisions from time to time, including her assistance with removing an employee found to have been stealing from the business. the husband did not appear to challenge the wife’s description of her contributions to the business as described at [39] of her affidavit, including her role in his business often for no pay, making her unavailable to do other paid work as a result. [16] the husband conceded that the wife’s affidavit evidence (at [38]) was true to some extent, saying that her evidence was ‘exaggerated’. the wife maintained under cross-examination that decisions as to property acquisition during the relationship (business or otherwise) were always made jointly, notwithstanding that some properties were purchased in the husband’s sole name.[17] the wife gave evidence about the $75,000.00 she contributed to the relationship from the sale of the n street, town m property, noting that the property was sold sometime between the commencement of cohabitation and the execution of the agreement, with the $75,000.00 paid from the wife to the husband following the sale thereof. she confirms in her affidavit (at [33]) that upon separation she and the husband agreed that she receive $30,000.00 from the joint account and take ownership of her car, and that both of these agreed actions have occurred.[18] family law act 1975 (n 1) s 4 (definition of ‘financial agreement’).[19] ibid s 90g.[20] ibid s 90k(1)(b), (d), (e).[21] ibid s 90ka.[22] ibid; judiciary act 1903 (cth) s 32.[23] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140; briginshaw & briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336, 361-362 (dixon j), noting the need for ‘actual persuasion of [the] occurrence or existence’ of any fact in dispute before the same can be found, and as necessarily affected by ‘[t]he seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding ...’.[24] senior v anderson [2011] famcafc 129, [105]-[107] (strickland j). see also [88] (may j) at which the same principle is stated: ‘ ... the act refers to and defined a particular form of agreement called a “financial agreement”. further, as s 4 makes plain, a “financial agreement” has two essential components. it must first be “an agreement”, and it must also be an agreement that is made “under s 90b, 90c or 90d.’[25] jd heydon, heydon on contract: the general part (lawbook, 2019) 85 [3.10]. see also within the extract at paragraph 49 of these reasons.[26] 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006 (n 8), [3]-[4].[27] ibid [3]-[4], noting that [4] specifically says that the agreement is intended to replace ‘all other rights’ of the parties under the act.[28] jones v padavatton (1969) 2 er 616, 621 (salmon lj). see also cohen v cohen [1929] hca 15; (1929) 42 clr 91, 96 (dixon j), in which ‘[t]he parties did no more ... than discuss and concur in a proposal for the regular allowance to the wife for a sum which they considered appropriate to their circumstances at the time of marriage’.[29] guild v stasiuk [2020] famca 348, [67], noting that wilson j refers to a number of texts including heydon (n 25).[30] manner & manner [2015] fcca 3043, [57]-[59], at which judge jarret (as he then was) sets out the process clearly; the financial agreement must first be a contract (citing s 90ka of the act and may j’s remarks in senior v anderson (n 24)), then it must comply with ss 90b, 90c, or 90d (as defined by s 4), and finally it must meet the requirements of s 90g.[31] meehan v jones [1982] hca 52; (1982) 149 clr 571, 589 (mason j), at which his honour remarks upon the basis for an objective approach to contract interpretation — the terms of a contract represent the point, and the terms, upon which the parties ultimately reached agreement. any other statement or action reflecting their actual subjective positions, as excluded by the parol evidence rule, is not to be used as an interpretive aid ‘except in so far as they are expressed in the contract’, but with some exceptions including where the parties have omitted a term consistent with their presumed intention.[32] metropolitan gas company v federated gas employees’ industrial union [1925] hca 5; (1925) 35 clr 449, 455.[33] codelfa construction pty ltd v state rail authority (nsw) (1982) 149 clr 337, 352 (mason j), with his honour further stating that such evidence ‘is not admissible to contradict the language of the contract when it has a plain meaning’ and that ‘[g]enerally speaking’ facts will need to be known to both parties to be admissible, although ‘if the facts are notorious knowledge of them will be presumed’. see also ruane v bachman-ruane [2009] famca 1101, [62], at which cronin j referred to codelfa in the context of completeness and whether certain essential terms could be implied, extracting mason j’s remarks above, and further extracting the remarks of brennan j in which his honour appeared to ‘tighten’ the test (referring to remarks at 401 of codelfa): ‘[brennan j] said that the meaning of a written contract could be “illuminated” by evidence of the facts to which the written document referred because the language conveyed meaning according to the circumstances in which they were used’ and, further, said that ‘the necessity for a term to be implied had to appear from and in, the express terms of the contract not from the extrinsic circumstances’.[34] royal botanic gardens and domain trust v south sydney city council [2002] hca 5; (2002) 240 clr 45, 53 [10] (gleeson cj, gaudron, mchugh, gummow and hayne jj).[35] kostres v kostres [2009] famcafc 222, [113]-[115].[36] guild v stasiuk (n 30), [92]-[103]. citations omitted. emphasis in original.[37] simic v new south wales land and housing corporation [2016] hca 47; (2016) 260 clr 85, 117 [103]-[104] (gageler, nettle and gordon jj). citations removed. see also sullivan v sullivan [2011] famca 752, [124]-[129], in which a summary is provided of the law of rectification and the development thereof, specifically noting the distinction drawn between common and mutual mistake, and the summary at [129] that it must be shown that ‘there is a concluded agreement or in the alternative a common intention that continued unaltered until the execution of an agreement, and the agreement does not express the parties true common intention’, noting also the onus as described in that paragraph: ‘[h]owever, the onus is on the husband to establish that, the agreement signed by him on 16 april 2003 that refers to s 90b in cl 1 and recitals k, l and inferentially d, does not reflect the true intention of the parties, and he must provide clear proof that the parties intended to enter into a financial agreement under s 90c of the act, not s 90b’.[38] sindel v georgiou (1984) 154 clr 661, 667 (mason, murphy, wilson, brennan and dawson jj), noting that that case concerned the exchange of counterpart documents which differed in their terms which, in their honours’ view, went to the issue of offer, acceptance, and whether the parties had in fact concluded their agreement at the point of formation.[39] nick seddon and rick bigwood, cheshire & fifoot: law of contract (lexisnexis butterworths, 11th ed, 2017) 715 [12.9], noting the authors’ discussion of mcrae v commonwealth disposals commission [1951] hca 79; (1950) 84 clr 377 commencing at 719 [12.17] to distinguish ideas of common mistake and other kinds of mistake (including unilateral mistake and mistakes caused by the fault of one party’s negligence).[40] ibid 568 [11.45] in relation to rescission causing a contract to be deemed void ab initio (although not making it in fact void ab initio) in the context of an actionable misrepresentation, and 1246 [24.7] in relation to refusal to grant specific performance where to do so would impose hardship to the extent that specific performance would not be a fair remedy. [41] simic v new south wales land and housing corporation (n 38), 104 [48].[42] seddon and bigwood (n 40) 474 [12.42].[43] codelfa construction pty ltd v state rail authority (nsw) (n 34), 346.[44] fitzgerald v masters [1956] hca 53; (1956) 95 clr 420, 437-438 (mctiernan, webb and taylor jj).[45] heydon (n 25), 114-115 [3.480]. citations omitted.[46] emphasis added.[47] emphasis added.[48] family law act 1975 (n 1) s 4, at which ‘financial agreement’ is defined by reference to ss 90b, 90c and 90d.[49] wife’s submissions, 8 november 2021, 3.[50] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021, [3]-[10].[51] senior v anderson (n 24), [106].[52] hoult v hoult [2013] famcafc 109, [60].[53] provided there is no court order before 4 january 2010 to set the agreement aside, and that a court has not made a determination under s 79 or 83 on the basis that an agreement did not bind the spouses; items 8(2) and 8(3).[54] federal justice system amendment (efficiency measures) act (no. 1) 2009 (cth), item 1a.[55] ibid item 8a(2).[56] ibid items 8(6), 8a(3), providing that s 90g(1)(c) is to be read as referring to all of the contents of s 90g(1)(b) as retrospectively deemed to apply.[57] ibid item 8(6).[58] ibid item 8(7).[59] this is, of course, having regard to the provisions at s 90g(1a)(c) which, while it does not preserve equitable doctrine through s 90ka, it appears to import a statutory relative thereof to afford courts some measure of discretion within the limits of s 90g, noting the remarks in hoult v hoult (n 53), [211] (thackray j).[60] ibid [60].[61] family law act 1975 (n 1) s 71a.[62] senior v anderson (n 24), [94]-[97]. [63] dw & gt [2005] famca 161, [39]; stanford & stanford [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108, 122.[64] hsiao v fazarri [2020] hca 35; (2020) 270 clr 588, 608.[65] kaimal & kaimal [2020] famca 971, [62]; guild v stasiuk (n 30), [163], [175], [224], [237] (for comparison, the presumption of undue influence arising from fiduciary relationships casts the burden of proof upon the fiduciary, whereas a plaintiff alleging unconscionability first bears the onus to ‘enliven’ a special disadvantage which, if satisfied, shifts to the party defending the transaction to prove that no unconscionable conduct took place; see [321], [405]), [276], [334], [463].[66] frederick v frederick [2019] famcafc 87, [42].[67] kostres v kostres (n 36), [122]-[129]. emphasis added. in particular, i note their honours’ remarks at [127] (emphasised above) that ‘the terms of the agreement must accurately reflect the intention of the parties at the time of the making of the agreement, and be unambiguous’. their honours are correct to say that a court cannot give meaning to a contract ‘whose terms are so imprecise or ambiguous the parties’ intentions cannot be discerned’ (at [129]). i do wish to note, perhaps as a semantic point, that in specifying the need for unambiguous terms to reflect the parties’ intentions, and in grounding such a need for clarity in pt viiia and the overall context of the act, kostres may be inferring that financial agreements under the family law act inherently differ from ordinary contracts, but are nevertheless construed according to the ordinary objective test of a reasonable bystander to a commercial contract.[68] guild v stasiuk (n 30), [437].[69] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021 (n 51), [43], noting that the husband concedes a ‘change in circumstances’, not strictly a ‘material change in circumstances’, but nonetheless does not press the issue in favour of the question of hardship resulting therefrom. see also guild v stasiuk (n 30), [449], explaining the time of the agreement being ‘relevant only insofar as it fastens at a temporal level a point in time against which the word “since” may be reckoned’.[70] fewster v drake [2016] famcafc 214, [62] (aldridge and kent jj).[71] affidavit of ms carran, 8 september 2021 (n 10), [4], [37].[72] ibid [14(c)].[73] ibid [15(a)].[74] ibid [15(c)].[75] ibid [21(b), (d)], [39].[76] ibid [24(b)], [32].[77] ibid [37], [4(c)].[78] whitford v whitford [1979] famca 3, [32].[79] fewster v drake (n 71), [64].[80] daily v daily [2020] famcafc 304, [30].[81] frederick v frederick (n 67), [38]-[48].[82] ibid [45].[83] the wife’s submissions do not refer to s 90k(1)(e) as a ground upon which the 2006 agreement, if binding under s 90g, should be set aside. the use of ‘unconscionably’ in the submissions, and the placement of the submission under a separate hearing (‘other matters’), indicates that the wife nevertheless seeks to raise an issue of unconscionability.[84] wife’s submissions, 8 november 2021 (n 50), 8.[85] kaimal & kaimal (n 66), [80].[86] stubbings v jams 2 pty ltd [2022] hca 6, [39] (kiefel cj, keane and gleeson jj).[87] commercial bank of australia v amadio [1983] hca 14; (1983) 151 clr 447, 462 (mason j).[88] stubbings v jams 2 pty ltd (n 87), [40], at which their honours extract the factors stated in blomley v ryan [1956] hca 81; (1956) 99 clr 362, 405 (fullagar j): ‘poverty or need of any kind, sickness, age, sex, infirmity of body or mind, drunkenness, illiteracy or lack of education, lack of assistance or explanation where assistance or explanation is necessary’; also citing diprose v louth (no 1) (1990) 54 sasr 438, 447-448, in which the plaintiff was found to have been in a ‘position of emotional dependence’ vis-à-vis the defendant, it also being found that the defendant knew of this special disadvantage and ‘manufactured an atmosphere of crisis ... when none really existed’ to exploit the special disadvantage.[89] commercial bank of australia v amadio (n 88), 462; thorne v kennedy [2017] hca 49; (2017) 263 clr 85, 103 [38] (kiefel cj, bell, gageler, keane and edelman jj).[90] ruane v bachman-ruane (n 34), [64].[91] family law act 1975 (n 1) ss 72(1), 90b(2)(b), 90c(2)(b), 90e; ellerton & jennings [2021] fedcfamc1a 39, [35]-[37], noting that the 2006 agreement does not include any term or quantum in relation to the payment of spousal maintenance for a spouse, child, or children.[92] family law act 1975 (n 1) ss 90b(1)(aa), (4), 90c(1)(aa), (4), as at 8 december 2006.[93] wife’s submissions, 8 november 2021 (n 50), 2.[94] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021 (n 51) [4]; 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006 (n 8), [2], [14]. the husband also referred to graham v squibb [2019] famcafc 33, in which (at [65]-[66]) the trial judge’s decision to rectify the agreement was upheld on appeal. further the husband noted, as a distinguishing factor, that the wife in beckstead & beckstead [2021] fedcfamc2f 136 was in that case referred to in the agreement by her maiden name, although the husband’s submissions also erroneously refer to the conferral of jurisdiction for de facto relationships (and the differences in advice flowing therefrom) as her honour’s reason for refusing to rectify the agreement.[95] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021 (n 51), [3].[96] 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006 (n 8), [3]-[4].[97] family law act 1975 (n 1) ss 90b(1)(b), 90c(1)(b), 90d(1)(b).[98] beckstead & beckstead (n 95), [106]-[109]. [99] ibid [102], at which her honour judge harland refers to kaimal & kaimal (n 66) for the proposition that it is not necessary to enquire as to the quality or even the correctness of legal advice (given the availability of action against the solicitor), followed by a determination that the legal advice in that case was not independent by reason of a conflict to which the solicitor did not turn their mind, therefore causing the agreement to fail under s 90g. it appears that it was not the conferral of jurisdiction upon which her honour determined non-compliance with s 90g (and, in fact, it was not specifically raised in those proceedings) but, instead, her decision hinged on the failure of one party’s solicitor to give independent legal advice.[100] wife’s case outline, 10 september 2021, 1, [3(a)].[101] husband’s case outline, 30 august 2021, 1, [1].[102] i note that s 90c of the family law act 1975 has been varied since the 2006 agreement was executed. the version in force as at 8 december 2006 was that which was amended by the family law amendment act 2005 (cth) sch 1 items 93, 94. the differences between the version in force as at 8 december 2006 and the version currently in force (as at the time of these reasons) are small but, notably, subs (1)(aa) now refers to the parties to the marriage needing to not be the spouse parties to any other binding agreement, whereas the version in force as at 8 december 2006 provides less detail, in requiring there be no other agreement in force between the parties, without including the word ‘binding’. there was no evidence in this case to suggest there was another agreement, binding or otherwise, to which the wife and husband were parties in respect of the matters covered in the 2006 agreement. i have used the wording of s 90c, as currently in force, in the subheadings in this section, but i have qualified the phrasing of subs (1)(aa) to account for the legislative history.[103] 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006 (n 8), [15]-[17], [20]-[22], [23]-[26], [27]-[28], [30], noting that some terms impose an evidentiary burden to prove whether or not the term applies. see [25], in which a party seeking to rely upon it to establish their sole entitlement may have to produce evidence of having communicated their intention for the purchase in question to be a ‘distinct and individual purchase’.[104] guild v stasiuk (n 30), [128].[105] family law act 1975 (n 1) s 90da(1a), as at 1 march 2009, with s 90da(1) repealed by (and substituted with the text in) family law amendment (de facto financial matters and other measures) act 2008 (cth) sch 3 item 30.[106] 2006 agreement, 8 december 2006 (n 8), 7.[107] hoult v hoult (n 53), [288]-[291]. emphasis in original.[108] ibid [177]-[183], noting thackray j’s remarks with respect to the discretion in s 90g(1a) as not being limited to remedying mere ‘technical’ breaches of s 90g(1). see also raleigh v raleigh [2015] famca 625, [139]; estate of fan v lok [2015] famca 300, [122]-[123].[109] saintclaire v saintclaire [2013] famca 491, [140]-[141]. see also manner & manner (n 31), [157], at which his honour adopted the same approach.[110] guild v stasiuk (n 30), [128].[111] wife’s submissions, 8 november 2021 (n 50), 4.[112] family law act 1975 (n 1) s 90c(2)(a), noting that clauses 13 and 14, on this reading, sufficiently identify the wife’s property for the purposes of ‘dealing with’ it, and describe her property holding as at 8 december 2006 (as opposed to her property holding as at commencement of cohabitation’, as opens cl 13).[113] noting that any claim in equity on the basis of a constructive trust does not necessarily denote a proprietary claim to the extent of any interest therein; muschinski v dodds [1985] hca 78; (1985) 160 clr 583, 614 (deane j), at which his honour explains that the institution of a trust can be constructed as a remedy imposed by equity, regardless of actual or presumed intention, to preclude an unconscionable retention of beneficial ownership of property. a constructive trust is most often remedial in personam — that is, the beneficiary’s rights are against the trustee personally (for recovery of funds, injunction, accounting, or to fulfil other duties or compensate breach) and not against the property over which the trustee has legal title. claims in rem under a trust (including the right to follow misused trust property, through the process of tracing, to recover the property) would, in theory, be excluded by cl 16 (assuming the 2006 agreement is valid and enforceable) if a constructive trust was imposed over the o street home. see also jones v southall & bourke pty ltd [2004] fca 539, [55]-[65] with respect to equitable proprietary claims and legal proprietary claims; wollumbin horizons pty ltd (in liq) (no 3), re; staatz v berry [2019] fca 924, [149], [157]-[158], [166]-[167], in which derrington j discusses the authorities with respect to the constructive trust, muschinski v dodds [1985] hca 78; (1985) 160 clr 583, and authorities since deane j’s statement of principle therein, including baumgartner v baumgartner [1987] hca 59; (1987) 164 clr 137, west v mead [2003] nswsc 161, and imam ali islamic centre v imam ali islamic centre [2018] vsc 413.[114] wife’s submissions, 8 november 2021 (n 50), 5.[115] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021 (n 51), [18].[116] heydon (n 25) 286 [8.770].[117] giumelli v giumelli [1999] hca 10; (1999) 196 clr 101, 119 (gleeson cj, mchugh, gummow and callinan jj).[118] husband’s submissions, 20 december 2021 (n 51), [17], [22].[119] ibid [35] (u street property), [40] (motor vehicle), noting also nil liabilities at [46]-[48]; updated financial statement of mr carran, 30 august 2021, [35] (u street property), [36] (t street property).[120] updated financial statement of ms carran, 8 september 2021, [37], [42], [45], noting that i have included the full value of the motor vehicle at [40], as the husband intends to provide her with that motor vehicle.[121] consisting of the $75,000.00 equitable interest (not including any interest calculable thereon) in relation to the o street property, her half interest in the u street property, and the other assets in her possession ($63,219.00), noting that i have included her half-interest in the motor vehicle at [40] of her financial statement to calculate this amount, noting also the inclusion of the wife’s equitable interest consistently with stanford & stanford (n 64), 120 [37], requiring the identification of legal and equitable interests of the parties under s 79.[122] consisting of the $75,000.00 contribution, together with a half-interest in the t street property, a half-interest in the u street property, the other assets in her possession ($63,220.00), and the half-interest in the motor vehicle at [40] of her financial statement.[123] calculated using the figures contained at part b of each party’s financial statement.