last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
perrides & perrides [2022] fedcfamc2f 869
orders
the court orders that:  commencing 10 june 2022 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on tuesday, and from the conclusion of school or 5:00pm if a non-school day on friday until 10:00am sunday. (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on tuesday, and from 9:00am on sunday until the commencement of school on monday or 9:00 am if a non-school day noting that the mother is to collect y from the b primary school from the father at the commencement of school. (b) commencing june 2023 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00 pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00 am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on thursday. (c) commencing january 2024 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) commencing january 2025 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (e) such further and other times as may be agreed in writing between the parties.   in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on tuesday, and from the conclusion of school or 5:00pm if a non-school day on friday until 10:00am sunday. (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on tuesday, and from 9:00am on sunday until the commencement of school on monday or 9:00 am if a non-school day noting that the mother is to collect y from the b primary school from the father at the commencement of school.  ) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on tuesday, and from 9:00am on sunday until the commencement of school on monday or 9:00 am if a non-school day noting that the mother is to collect y from the b primary school from the father at the commencement of school.   commencing june 2023 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00 pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00 am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on thursday. (c) commencing january 2024 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) commencing january 2025 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (e) such further and other times as may be agreed in writing between the parties.   in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00 pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00 am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on thursday.  ) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm on thursday.   commencing january 2024 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (d) commencing january 2025 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (e) such further and other times as may be agreed in writing between the parties.   in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day).  ) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day).   commencing january 2025 (i) in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (e) such further and other times as may be agreed in writing between the parties.   in week 1 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (ii) in week 2 and each alternate week thereafter: from the conclusion of school (or 5:00pm if non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school on friday (or 9:00am if a non-school day).   such further and other times as may be agreed in writing between the parties.   commencing december 2024: (i) with the father on a week about basis, from the conclusion of the school term (or 5:00 pm if child is not at school) until 5:00 pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (ii) with the mother on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (b) commencing december 2025 (i) with the mother on a week about basis, from the conclusion of the school term (or 5:00 pm if child is not at school) until 5:00 pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (ii) with the father on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.   with the father on a week about basis, from the conclusion of the school term (or 5:00 pm if child is not at school) until 5:00 pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (ii) with the mother on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.  ) with the mother on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.   commencing december 2025 (i) with the mother on a week about basis, from the conclusion of the school term (or 5:00 pm if child is not at school) until 5:00 pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (ii) with the father on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.   with the mother on a week about basis, from the conclusion of the school term (or 5:00 pm if child is not at school) until 5:00 pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein. (ii) with the father on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.  ) with the father on a week about basis, from 5:00 pm on thursday week 1 of school holidays until 5:00pm the following thursday and each alternate week thereafter, with the exception of special occasion times as specified herein.   christmas (i) in even numbered years, with the father from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 3:00 pm christmas day. provided that the children spend time with the mother from 3:00 pm christmas day until 4:00 pm boxing day the same year. (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 3:00 pm christmas day. provided that the children spend time with the father from 3:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day the same year. (b) mother’s & father’s day (i) in the event that father’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the mother, the children spend time with the father from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on father’s day sunday. (ii) in the event that mother’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the father, the children spend time with the mother from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on mother’s day sunday. (c) birthdays (i) on each of the children’s and parties birthday, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not residing with at the time as follows: from 4:00pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day. from 9:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day. (d) catholic easter (i) in even numbered years, with the father from 5.00 pm on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the mother from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day), (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day). (e) greek easter (i) the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   in even numbered years, with the father from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 3:00 pm christmas day. provided that the children spend time with the mother from 3:00 pm christmas day until 4:00 pm boxing day the same year. (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 3:00 pm christmas day. provided that the children spend time with the father from 3:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day the same year.  ) in odd numbered years, with the mother from 4:00 pm christmas eve until 3:00 pm christmas day. provided that the children spend time with the father from 3:00pm christmas day until 4:00pm boxing day the same year.   mother’s & father’s day (i) in the event that father’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the mother, the children spend time with the father from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on father’s day sunday. (ii) in the event that mother’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the father, the children spend time with the mother from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on mother’s day sunday. (c) birthdays (i) on each of the children’s and parties birthday, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not residing with at the time as follows: from 4:00pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day. from 9:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day. (d) catholic easter (i) in even numbered years, with the father from 5.00 pm on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the mother from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day), (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day). (e) greek easter (i) the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   in the event that father’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the mother, the children spend time with the father from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on father’s day sunday. (ii) in the event that mother’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the father, the children spend time with the mother from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on mother’s day sunday.  ) in the event that mother’s day shall fall on a day that the children are otherwise in the care of the father, the children spend time with the mother from 3:30pm on the preceding saturday until 4:00pm on mother’s day sunday.   birthdays (i) on each of the children’s and parties birthday, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not residing with at the time as follows: from 4:00pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day. from 9:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day. (d) catholic easter (i) in even numbered years, with the father from 5.00 pm on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the mother from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day), (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day). (e) greek easter (i) the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   on each of the children’s and parties birthday, the children shall spend time with the parent with whom they are not residing with at the time as follows: from 4:00pm until 7:00pm if it falls on a school day. from 9:00am until 2:00pm if it falls on a non-school day.   catholic easter (i) in even numbered years, with the father from 5.00 pm on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the mother from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day), (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day). (e) greek easter (i) the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   in even numbered years, with the father from 5.00 pm on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the mother from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day), (ii) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day).  ) in odd numbered years, with the mother from conclusion of school on easter thursday until 7:00pm on easter saturday provided that the children spend time with the father from 7:00pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school on tuesday (or 10:00am if it is a non-school day).   greek easter (i) the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2:00pm sunday until the commencement of school (or 9:00 am if a non-school day) monday, noting that if the greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend paragraphs 5(d) prevail.   in accordance with either child’s reasonable wishes, (b) commencing 10 june 2022, with the mother on saturday at 2.00 pm during which time the children are otherwise in the care of the father, (c) commencing june 2023, with the mother on sunday at 2.00 pm during which time the children are otherwise in the care of the father, (d) with the father once per week at a time that is mutually agreed upon between the parties in writing, (e) with the parent the child is not residing with at the time during the long school holidays each tuesday at 2.00 pm, and (f) at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,   commencing 10 june 2022, with the mother on saturday at 2.00 pm during which time the children are otherwise in the care of the father, (c) commencing june 2023, with the mother on sunday at 2.00 pm during which time the children are otherwise in the care of the father, (d) with the father once per week at a time that is mutually agreed upon between the parties in writing, (e) with the parent the child is not residing with at the time during the long school holidays each tuesday at 2.00 pm, and (f) at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,   commencing june 2023, with the mother on sunday at 2.00 pm during which time the children are otherwise in the care of the father, (d) with the father once per week at a time that is mutually agreed upon between the parties in writing, (e) with the parent the child is not residing with at the time during the long school holidays each tuesday at 2.00 pm, and (f) at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,   with the father once per week at a time that is mutually agreed upon between the parties in writing, (e) with the parent the child is not residing with at the time during the long school holidays each tuesday at 2.00 pm, and (f) at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,   with the parent the child is not residing with at the time during the long school holidays each tuesday at 2.00 pm, and (f) at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,   at any or such other times as may be agreed to between the parties in writing,
noting that the parent who does not have care of the children is to initiate the telephone / facetime call in the first instance.   consuming alcohol to excess in the presence of the child or for a period of twenty-four hours prior to the children coming into his/her care, (b) abusing, denigrating, threatening, harassing or intimidating the other party, their immediate family, or allowing any other person to do so, (c) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in the proceedings on facebook or other social media websites or apps, (e) removing the children or either of them from the commonwealth of australia without the prior written consent of the other parent, (f) enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   abusing, denigrating, threatening, harassing or intimidating the other party, their immediate family, or allowing any other person to do so, (c) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in the proceedings on facebook or other social media websites or apps, (e) removing the children or either of them from the commonwealth of australia without the prior written consent of the other parent, (f) enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in these proceedings with or in the presence of the children, (d) discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in the proceedings on facebook or other social media websites or apps, (e) removing the children or either of them from the commonwealth of australia without the prior written consent of the other parent, (f) enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   discussing these proceedings or the issues raised in the proceedings on facebook or other social media websites or apps, (e) removing the children or either of them from the commonwealth of australia without the prior written consent of the other parent, (f) enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   removing the children or either of them from the commonwealth of australia without the prior written consent of the other parent, (f) enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   enrolling the children or either of them in childcare, kindergarten, or a school without consent from the other parent. (g) permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.   permitting the children or either of them to be in the presence of an operating firearm, or to allow either child to operate or discharge a firearm until either child attains the age of 11.
interstate travel  during their ordinary time with the children, and (b) the travelling party provides to the non-travelling party not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date a basic itinerary including the destination and departure/return dates.   the travelling party provides to the non-travelling party not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed departure date a basic itinerary including the destination and departure/return dates.
overseas travel  that the duration of overseas travel be no longer than two (2) weeks per occasion, (b) that the children travel overseas with either party no more than once per year, (c) that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party written notice of their intention to travel with the children no less than two (2) months prior to their intended travel date, (d) that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party with the following:- (i) a full itinerary of the children’s travel, (ii) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival, (e) that the travelling party receive the written consent of the non-travelling party noting that the non-travelling party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent, (f) that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   that the children travel overseas with either party no more than once per year, (c) that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party written notice of their intention to travel with the children no less than two (2) months prior to their intended travel date, (d) that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party with the following:- (i) a full itinerary of the children’s travel, (ii) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival, (e) that the travelling party receive the written consent of the non-travelling party noting that the non-travelling party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent, (f) that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party written notice of their intention to travel with the children no less than two (2) months prior to their intended travel date, (d) that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party with the following:- (i) a full itinerary of the children’s travel, (ii) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival, (e) that the travelling party receive the written consent of the non-travelling party noting that the non-travelling party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent, (f) that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   that the travelling party provide the non-travelling party with the following:- (i) a full itinerary of the children’s travel, (ii) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival, (e) that the travelling party receive the written consent of the non-travelling party noting that the non-travelling party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent, (f) that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   a full itinerary of the children’s travel, (ii) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival,  ) copies of the children’s airline ticket showing airline carrier, flight numbers, dates and time of departure and arrival,   that the travelling party receive the written consent of the non-travelling party noting that the non-travelling party shall not unreasonably withhold their consent, (f) that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   that the travelling party facilitate communication between the children and the other party at least once per week, (g) that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.   that make-up time with the children be arranged with the non-travelling party either immediately prior to the departure or immediately after the return noting that any make-up time to be confirmed, in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the children's departure date.
reasons for judgment
judge brown:
introduction oth parents manage the children well, are attentive and child focussed and relate warmly and positively to the boys. the impression is that the children have warm and loving relationships with each parent.[1]
i note that the parties continue to experience some conflict and tensions. i am not confident that this will substantially resolve but hopefully i am wrong about this. in any event, i do not think it appropriate that [ms perrides] have sole responsibility for any aspect of the children’s management ... as i cannot see any reason that [mr perrides] should be excluded from any areas of decision making.[2]
the evidence
the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable.[9]
after having assessed the degree of risk, the court must consider what is the proportionate response to the risk, which may include the imposition of some form of precaution or safeguard.
background
the mother suggests that i refuse to acknowledge and am not aware of [x]’s sensory processing disorder. although the mother did not include me or make me aware of the assessment i am now well aware of [x]’s sensory processing disorder and i have spoken to his ot and following his diagnosis we had a schedule at my home on a whiteboard with visual aids such pictures of what we are going to do. now each day at the beginning of the day i tell [x] what we will be doing for the rest of the day. he also has various physical activities set up in my backyard such as stepping stones, an obstacle course and a trampoline to help him use up his excess energy and focus on something. the ot specialist told me that the techniques that i was implementing to assist [x] were perfect.[12]
despite the great improvement that x has made to date with intervention and therapy, x will continue to require ongoing assistance to gain skills in self-management, gross motor skills, self-care, social skills, communication, independence, and regulation for his emotional and social development. if occupational therapy is ceased or frequency reduced he is likely to have regressed in his developmental progress and the gap between himself and his peers is likely to increase significantly.[13]
i am aware that the above suggestions about moving forward are slower than [mr perrides’] application and faster than [ms perrides’] preference ... however, i think that caution in this matter is wiser than moving too quickly, to ensure that the boys have adequate time to adjust to the regime suggested. equally, there is some value in starting the overnight process, as i think the children have a warm and good connection with their father, which of course will help them in their adjustment to overnight stays.[14]
i could see that these types of argument were empowering for him but for me they were slowly destroying me emotionally...over time i became wary and frightened of the husband.[15]  , aged 5 years, was very positive about school and also about both his parents. he was positive about spending time with both his mum and dad, and when asked about sleepovers, said they are good but also told me he misses mum when asked directly about this. i did not have an interview with [y] because he is very young. observed interaction indicates that both parents manage the children well, are attentive and child focussed and relate warmly and positively to the boys. the impression is that the children have warm and loving relationships with each parent.[16]
in relation to a longer term pattern in this matter, my view is that a reasonable regime is for the children to spend 5 overnights per fortnight with their father. i do not think that 3 overnights per fortnight provides adequate time for the children to develop and build connection with their father, especially over the longer term as they get older in later primary school and their adolescence. this may be a period when, consistent with developmental needs, they may wish to be spending more time with him rather than less time. also, and importantly, the impression over these 2 assessments is that the boys have a good relationship with their father, and [mr perrides] gives the impression that he is thoughtful and appropriate in his parenting. this is evidenced in his comments regarding his management of [x] and his very particular, and probably at times demanding, sensory issues.[17]
legal principles applicable  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.  aving a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.[28]  iolent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family, or causes the family member to be fearful.
the mother also alleges that i was abusive to her throughout the marriage but the physical abuse was directed towards me by the mother. she has slapped me on the face whilst i was sitting on the couch and slapped me on the back while i was walking away from her. another time i was unable to get [ms perrides] to stop yelling and i retreated with [x] to the bathroom and locked the door and began singing to [x] so he didn’t hear the yelling. [ms perrides] then kicked a hole in the bathroom door to try to get to us. [x] was crying hysterically at this point...i admit some of verbal arguments would turn into screaming matches and she would call me a piece of shit and a fat cunt, wanker, fuckwit. she would control every aspect of my life. i wasn’t allowed to see my friends. i wasn’t allowed to go to the gym. i wasn’t allowed to go out with work colleagues and i wasn’t even allowed to travel interstate for work.[32]
...it is not as if, as soon as communication difficulties between the parties, or other difficulties between them are identified, the discretion ought not be exercised... rather, the matter is one of balancing all relevant factors...[37]
whilst parental responsibility is vaguely defined, some insight into what is needed from a parent can be seen in s 65dac(3) which provides that if both parents have that responsibility, they are taken to be required to consult about parenting issues and make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision. it will again be remembered that the focus of the objects and principles in this act is on joint parenting.[41]  s a broad concept as described in s 61b and that task covers many things. parents are expected jointly to endeavour to promote their children’s development by ensuring they have the greatest potential in adulthood whilst at the same time enjoying the security of childhood they deserve.[42]
...it is not unreasonable for the court to take into account in assessing whether an unacceptable risk exists, the need of a custodial parent to be assured of the children’s protection. as primary caregiver, anxiety about the children’s exposure to potential harm is likely to impact adversely on that parent’s ability to care for the children.
conclusions
the parent who does not have the children residing with them during greek easter shall have the children from 2.00 pm sunday until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00 am if it is a non-school day, noting that if greek easter and catholic easter fall on the same weekend, then catholic easter arrangements prevail.
her proposal is predicated on the basis that the parent who does not have care of the children is to initiate the telephone/facetime call in the first instance.  hat is best for children is that their parents co-parent by agreement and without conflict and as selflessly as circumstances reasonably allow. when parents are unable to agree, the parents’ proposals embraced in competing applications involve again axiomatically, advantages and disadvantages for the children, each and all of which have ramifications for the children’s best interests.[47]
associate: dated: 5 july 2022
dated: 5 july 2022
[1] second family report of ms cc dated 31 march 2021 at page 10.[2] second family report of ms c dated 31 march 2021 at page 13.[3] hereinafter referred to as “the act”.[4] see evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[5] see fox v percy [2003] hca 22; (2003) 214 clr 118, 129 [31] (gleeson cj, gummow and kirby jj). [6] see deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82.[7] see deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61] (finn, thackray and strickland jj).[8] see slater & light [2013] famcafc 4.[9] see slater & light [2013] famcafc 4 at [37] (may, strickland and forrest jj), quoting johnson & page [2007] famca 1235; (2007) flc 93-344 at [68] (may, boland and stevenson jj).[10] see affidavit of ms perrides filed 20 july 2021 at [128].[11] see annexure a to the affidavit of ms perrides filed 20 july 2021.[12] see affidavit of mr perrides filed 4 april 2022 at [48].[13] see annexure 1 to the affidavit of ms perrides filed 20 april 2022.[14] first family report of ms c dated 5 august 2019 at page 11.[15] see affidavit of ms perrides filed 20 july 2021 at [168] – [169].[16] second family report of ms c dated 31 march 2021 at page 10.[17] second family report of ms c dated 31 march 2021 at page 11.[18] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[19] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[20] see b v b: family law reform act 1995 (1997) 21 fam lr 676, 755 [34] (nicholson cj, fogarty and lindenmayer jj). [21] see b v b: family law reform act 1995 (1997) 21 fam lr 676, 734 [26]. [22] see russell & russell and anor [2009] famca 28 at [141] (ryan j). [23] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da.[24] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(2). [25] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[26] explanatory memorandum, family law legislation amendment (family violence and other measures) bill 2011 (cth).[27] see mazorski v albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at 526 [26] (brown j).[28] see jurchenko & foster [2014] famcafc 127; (2014) 51 fam lr 588, 618 [123] (bryant cj, thackray and duncanson jj).[29] see eaby & speelman (2015) famcafc 104 at [21] (ryan j).[30] see in the marriage of jg & bg [1994] famca 160; (1994) 18 fam lr 255, 261 (chisholm j).[31] see in the marriage of patsalou [1994] famca 118; (1994) 18 fam lr 426, 428 (baker j).[32] see affidavit of mr perrides filed 4 april 2022 at [77].[33] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(3).[34] see mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, 466 [13] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[35] see mrr v gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [13]-[15].[36] astor & astor [2007] famca 355.[37] see astor & astor [2007] famca 355 at [195].[38] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61b. [39] family law act 1975 (cth) s 64b(2). [40] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65dac. [41] bartel & schmucker (no 3) [2012] famca 1094 at [18] (cronin j).[42] bartel & schmucker (no 3) [2012] famca 1094 at [21]. [43] see kuebler & kuebler [1978] famca 26; (1978) flc 90-434 at page 72,205.[44] line & line [1996] famca 145; (1997) flc 92-729.[45] see line & line [1996] famca 145; (1997) flc 92-729 at page 83,846.[46] in the marriage of b & b [1993] famca 143; (1993) flc 92-357 at page 79,780.[47] see zahawi & rayne [2016] famcafc 90 at [47].