last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ressam & benida [2022] fedcfamc2f 874
orders
the court orders that:  approaching the child. (b) communicating, or attempting to communicate, with the child. (c) inciting any other person to approach or communicate with the child on his behalf.   communicating, or attempting to communicate, with the child. (c) inciting any other person to approach or communicate with the child on his behalf.   inciting any other person to approach or communicate with the child on his behalf.   updates about significant matters regarding the child’s health and his progress at school, (b) information about decisions made by her in the exercise of her sole parental responsibility, (c) copies of any relevant reports about the child.   information about decisions made by her in the exercise of her sole parental responsibility, (c) copies of any relevant reports about the child.   copies of any relevant reports about the child.
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic
introduction
legal principles
chronology and procedural history   in week 1 from 10am saturday to 4pm monday and from 4pm thursday to 4pm friday, and (b) in week 2 from 4pm tuesday to 4pm wednesday.   in week 2 from 4pm tuesday to 4pm wednesday.   in week 1 from 10am saturday to 4pm tuesday, and (b) in week 2 from 4pm sunday until 4pm tuesday.   in week 2 from 4pm sunday until 4pm tuesday.
father’s case   the mother was possessive, controlling, and abusive throughout their relationship. (b) the mother applied excessively harsh and psychologically abusive disciplinary practices on x, and that she was also neglectful. (c) the mother is not capable of meeting x’s needs.   the mother applied excessively harsh and psychologically abusive disciplinary practices on x, and that she was also neglectful. (c) the mother is not capable of meeting x’s needs.   the mother is not capable of meeting x’s needs.
mother’s case   the father was possessive and controlling through their relationship, and has been emotionally, financially, physically and sexually abusive towards her. the mother says that some instances of abuse occurred in the presence of x. (b) the father continues to seek to control and undermine her post separation, particularly her parenting capacity. the mother says that the father has also engaged in stalking and anti-social behaviours since separation. (c) the father’s approach to parenting and his lack of support for x having a relationship with the mother, including his manipulation of x, has resulted in serious behavioural issues for x. (d) the father lacks insight into the future needs of x, specifically when one has regard to the father’s denial about the behavioural difficulties the mother says x has, the father’s inability to recognise the value of the mother’s relationship with x, and the events which occurred when the mother’s eldest brother recently passed away.   the father continues to seek to control and undermine her post separation, particularly her parenting capacity. the mother says that the father has also engaged in stalking and anti-social behaviours since separation. (c) the father’s approach to parenting and his lack of support for x having a relationship with the mother, including his manipulation of x, has resulted in serious behavioural issues for x. (d) the father lacks insight into the future needs of x, specifically when one has regard to the father’s denial about the behavioural difficulties the mother says x has, the father’s inability to recognise the value of the mother’s relationship with x, and the events which occurred when the mother’s eldest brother recently passed away.   the father’s approach to parenting and his lack of support for x having a relationship with the mother, including his manipulation of x, has resulted in serious behavioural issues for x. (d) the father lacks insight into the future needs of x, specifically when one has regard to the father’s denial about the behavioural difficulties the mother says x has, the father’s inability to recognise the value of the mother’s relationship with x, and the events which occurred when the mother’s eldest brother recently passed away.   the father lacks insight into the future needs of x, specifically when one has regard to the father’s denial about the behavioural difficulties the mother says x has, the father’s inability to recognise the value of the mother’s relationship with x, and the events which occurred when the mother’s eldest brother recently passed away.
relevant findings
credit
each witness sees events from his or her own perspective. over time there is sometimes a degree of rationalisation to fit objective material (documents) as it emerges into the understanding of events. some witnesses’ memories become refined by a strong belief in the rightness of their role, so that objectivity is lost to a degree... there is a tendency in all of us to put past events in a perspective which fits with our own beliefs, but there is an undisputed core of fact underlying many of [the]... allegations...[6]
the story of the parties’ relationship
physical discipline
family violence
sexual violence during the relationship
psychological, financial and emotional abuse
you are an irresponsible mother. you are irresponsible. you need to be a proper mother. you are making x’s development recede, if it goes backwards it’s your fault. you are negligent. if he gets a cold, it’s on you. if you are negligent then you are at fault for him being sick.
you need to change your relationship with your son. x’s reaction is your fault and your relationship with x has a deficiency which you need to fix.
you are emotionally unstable. you’re paranoid. you’re too sensitive. you are responsible.
father’s concerns about the mother’s parenting  in september 2018, the mother became “very forceful” about her involvement in the care of x. the mother insisted on feeding dinner to x despite him not responding well as he would throw his food. the mother would then become frustrated and place x in “time out”. the father asserts that the mother was easily frustrated because x responded well to the father as opposed to her. (b) the mother on one occasion was playing with x on a glass table and only cautioned x to get off the table when the father had seen them. the father asserts that the mother’s behaviour provided mixed messages and confusion for x. (c) on 25 september 2018, the mother “disrupted” x’s routine by again insisting that she bathe x herself. x again did not respond well to this, and ran to the father. the father says he encouraged x to allow his mother to bathe him. the father says that x did not settle to sleep until after midnight because of this disruption, and as result impacted his morning routine because the father allowed x to sleep in the next morning. (d) on 26 september 2018, the father says that an argument occurred with the mother because he was unable to drive the mother to work as x was still sleeping. he normally would drop the mother to work then drop x to day-care. later that day, when the father went to collect x from day-care, the mother had signed x out an hour prior. the father was unable to contact the mother or the maternal family, and at approximately 8pm that day the father presented at suburb h police station to report the incident. he was later advised by police that the mother was safe and they were unable to disclose her location. the father was also advised to seek some legal advice.   the mother on one occasion was playing with x on a glass table and only cautioned x to get off the table when the father had seen them. the father asserts that the mother’s behaviour provided mixed messages and confusion for x. (c) on 25 september 2018, the mother “disrupted” x’s routine by again insisting that she bathe x herself. x again did not respond well to this, and ran to the father. the father says he encouraged x to allow his mother to bathe him. the father says that x did not settle to sleep until after midnight because of this disruption, and as result impacted his morning routine because the father allowed x to sleep in the next morning. (d) on 26 september 2018, the father says that an argument occurred with the mother because he was unable to drive the mother to work as x was still sleeping. he normally would drop the mother to work then drop x to day-care. later that day, when the father went to collect x from day-care, the mother had signed x out an hour prior. the father was unable to contact the mother or the maternal family, and at approximately 8pm that day the father presented at suburb h police station to report the incident. he was later advised by police that the mother was safe and they were unable to disclose her location. the father was also advised to seek some legal advice.   on 25 september 2018, the mother “disrupted” x’s routine by again insisting that she bathe x herself. x again did not respond well to this, and ran to the father. the father says he encouraged x to allow his mother to bathe him. the father says that x did not settle to sleep until after midnight because of this disruption, and as result impacted his morning routine because the father allowed x to sleep in the next morning. (d) on 26 september 2018, the father says that an argument occurred with the mother because he was unable to drive the mother to work as x was still sleeping. he normally would drop the mother to work then drop x to day-care. later that day, when the father went to collect x from day-care, the mother had signed x out an hour prior. the father was unable to contact the mother or the maternal family, and at approximately 8pm that day the father presented at suburb h police station to report the incident. he was later advised by police that the mother was safe and they were unable to disclose her location. the father was also advised to seek some legal advice.   on 26 september 2018, the father says that an argument occurred with the mother because he was unable to drive the mother to work as x was still sleeping. he normally would drop the mother to work then drop x to day-care. later that day, when the father went to collect x from day-care, the mother had signed x out an hour prior. the father was unable to contact the mother or the maternal family, and at approximately 8pm that day the father presented at suburb h police station to report the incident. he was later advised by police that the mother was safe and they were unable to disclose her location. the father was also advised to seek some legal advice.
events surrounding the death of mother’s brother  in 2021, the mother’s brother, mr k, unexpectedly died. the mother, x, and the paternal grandmother, travelled to town f, nsw in 2021. (b) in 2021, the mother instructed her solicitors to advise the father of the death, that she had travelled to town f with x to be with family and to attend to the necessary arrangements, that the scheduled telephone call with x could not occur that night, and that she was unsure when exactly she would return to sydney. (c) that same evening, the father responded with an email to the mother’s solicitor which read:   in 2021, the mother instructed her solicitors to advise the father of the death, that she had travelled to town f with x to be with family and to attend to the necessary arrangements, that the scheduled telephone call with x could not occur that night, and that she was unsure when exactly she would return to sydney. (c) that same evening, the father responded with an email to the mother’s solicitor which read:   that same evening, the father responded with an email to the mother’s solicitor which read:
i’m sorry to hear about [mr k] and please pass my condolences to [ms benida] and her family. i am a bit concerned that there has been a unilateral decision made without my consent to take [x] to [town f] particularly when he is meant to be in my care tomorrow morning. your letter addresses my phone call with [x] which i was meant to have with him around the time at which you emailed me, does this mean that [x] will be at the changeover tomorrow at 10am. i feel for [x]’s plight but i also have concerns about [x], his arrangements and uncommunicated travelled (sic) during a covid outbreak. may you please respond as a matter of urgency.   prior to travelling, the mother contacted service nsw to check the travel restrictions and was advised that she, her mother, and x, could travel to town f under compassionate grounds (subject to stay at home orders and a negative covid-19 test). the mother, x, and the paternal grandmother, received a covid-19 test and isolated until 2021, when they received all negative results. (e) on the evening of 2021, the following text exchange occurred between the parents. this was at the same time that the father was corresponding with the mother’s solicitor: (i) mother’s text at 7.36pm   on the evening of 2021, the following text exchange occurred between the parents. this was at the same time that the father was corresponding with the mother’s solicitor: (i) mother’s text at 7.36pm   mother’s text at 7.36pm
hi [mr ressam]. further to my solicitors email from this afternoon about my brothers (sic) sudden passing. i will arrange a phone call for you and [x] tomorrow. just letting you know [x] is well and fine. will update you when i have more information. [x]  ) father’s text at 7.44pm
hi [x] just noticed your lawyers (sic) email. my condolences about [mr k] but may you please leave [x] behind since he is supposed to be in my care in the morning?  i) mother’s text at 7.59pm
hi we are already almost there. i will update you soon and to arrange make up time. please know [x] is safe and well. please have understanding for us in this difficult time.  ) father’s text at 8.05pm
i really feel for you [x] but you cannot just up and leave with [x] like that, particularly in the current context.   mother’s text at 8.08pm
this is a family crisis. i will update you soon.  ) father’s text at 8.20pm
there was no need to disregard me and no need for exposing [x]. i want to see [x] tomorrow.   in 2021, the father continued to message the mother. shortly prior to 1pm he messaged the mother noting that “x was a no show at the changeover today”, and he also advised that he could collect x from town f that evening. the mother informed the father shortly prior to 2pm that day, that they were awaiting their covid-19 test results, and in any event it was important that x remained with her during this difficult time. she also reassured the father several times that make-up time would be given to him, and she asked him not to come to town f to pick x up. at approximately 8.36pm the mother received a message from the father to say that he was in town f and had sought clearance from police to effect changeover. his text message warned “if you fail to organise this with me, i will be seeking further remedies with the authorities”. (g) at approximately 9.10pm in 2021, the mother observed the father’s car driving past the paternal grandmother’s home, and he then parked his car opposite the home. the mother called the police and advised that they would send a police car immediately. another set of police officers attended at the home to question the mother regarding the father’s allegation that she was “acting in breach of court orders in detaining a child”. (h) the mother explained the situation to the officers and informed them that the father was also aware of the situation, which they indicated was not what the father had told them. they did a welfare check on x, and the father was asked to leave and return back to sydney. (i) in 2021, the father wrote a lengthy email to the mother, setting out his concerns and grievances in respect of the mother’s actions in taking x to town f after the sudden and unexpected passing of her brother. (j) in 1, 3, and 6 august 2021, the mother facilitated telephone calls between the father and x. (k) the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   at approximately 9.10pm in 2021, the mother observed the father’s car driving past the paternal grandmother’s home, and he then parked his car opposite the home. the mother called the police and advised that they would send a police car immediately. another set of police officers attended at the home to question the mother regarding the father’s allegation that she was “acting in breach of court orders in detaining a child”. (h) the mother explained the situation to the officers and informed them that the father was also aware of the situation, which they indicated was not what the father had told them. they did a welfare check on x, and the father was asked to leave and return back to sydney. (i) in 2021, the father wrote a lengthy email to the mother, setting out his concerns and grievances in respect of the mother’s actions in taking x to town f after the sudden and unexpected passing of her brother. (j) in 1, 3, and 6 august 2021, the mother facilitated telephone calls between the father and x. (k) the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   the mother explained the situation to the officers and informed them that the father was also aware of the situation, which they indicated was not what the father had told them. they did a welfare check on x, and the father was asked to leave and return back to sydney. (i) in 2021, the father wrote a lengthy email to the mother, setting out his concerns and grievances in respect of the mother’s actions in taking x to town f after the sudden and unexpected passing of her brother. (j) in 1, 3, and 6 august 2021, the mother facilitated telephone calls between the father and x. (k) the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   in 2021, the father wrote a lengthy email to the mother, setting out his concerns and grievances in respect of the mother’s actions in taking x to town f after the sudden and unexpected passing of her brother. (j) in 1, 3, and 6 august 2021, the mother facilitated telephone calls between the father and x. (k) the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   in 1, 3, and 6 august 2021, the mother facilitated telephone calls between the father and x. (k) the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   the mother’s solicitor and the father exchanged numerous correspondence regarding changeover and make-up time between 30 july 2021 and 7 august 2021. the mother proposed that changeover occur on 8 august 2021 at city l and that make up time conclude on 19 august 2021, with time in accordance with orders resuming thereafter. the father it seems insisted on changeover occurring on 7 august 2021 at city m with “normal” handover to be on 21 august 2021. (l) on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   on 8 august 2021, the mother effected changeover with the father in city l. (m) the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.   the mother’s solicitors again wrote to the father on 16 august 2021, to confirm when x would come back into the mother’s care on 19 august 2021. there was no response. on 19 august 2021, the mother attended suburb n to receive x but the father did not attend with x. the father then on 20 august 2021, wrote to the mother’s solicitor advising that he could “confirm” that the parties could resume normal changeover on 21 august 2021 “after making up our time with x” and insisting that he had been “blindsided and on the backfoot (sic)” since 2021.
child’s behaviours   punching the mother to the side of the head, (b) spitting in the mother’s face, (c) throwing things at the mother and the maternal grandmother, (d) attempting to strangle the mother, pulling her hair and pushing her head against a wall, (e) picking up a knife and threatening to cut the mother’s throat, (f) punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   spitting in the mother’s face, (c) throwing things at the mother and the maternal grandmother, (d) attempting to strangle the mother, pulling her hair and pushing her head against a wall, (e) picking up a knife and threatening to cut the mother’s throat, (f) punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   throwing things at the mother and the maternal grandmother, (d) attempting to strangle the mother, pulling her hair and pushing her head against a wall, (e) picking up a knife and threatening to cut the mother’s throat, (f) punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   attempting to strangle the mother, pulling her hair and pushing her head against a wall, (e) picking up a knife and threatening to cut the mother’s throat, (f) punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   picking up a knife and threatening to cut the mother’s throat, (f) punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   punching the mother in the stomach, and (g) hitting and kicking the mother.   hitting and kicking the mother.
father’s lack of engagement with orders concerning therapy and behavioural assessment of child  he needed time to read the material provided which he received in november 2020 and which took a week or two to read – this does not explain a 10 month delay, (b) he had financial constraints which were not articulated – this does not explain the delay, (c) he needed to get legal advice about the terms of the agreement for family therapy – this is incredulous and does not explain the delay, indeed he never sought any advice, and (d) x was hospitalised – this does not explain the delay, x was in hospital for one day in november 2020 and was discharged on the same day.   he had financial constraints which were not articulated – this does not explain the delay, (c) he needed to get legal advice about the terms of the agreement for family therapy – this is incredulous and does not explain the delay, indeed he never sought any advice, and (d) x was hospitalised – this does not explain the delay, x was in hospital for one day in november 2020 and was discharged on the same day.   he needed to get legal advice about the terms of the agreement for family therapy – this is incredulous and does not explain the delay, indeed he never sought any advice, and (d) x was hospitalised – this does not explain the delay, x was in hospital for one day in november 2020 and was discharged on the same day.   x was hospitalised – this does not explain the delay, x was in hospital for one day in november 2020 and was discharged on the same day.
other relevant matters
140. following on from the upper respiratory infection discussed in 112 above, [x] (on 12 april 2020) called an ambulance to take [x] to the hospital for having a low temperature "35c", then high temperature "38.7c", shortness of breath, and vomiting. [x] was discharged that afternoon with no clinical concerns sustained (an x-ray and blood sample did confirm that he had mycoplasma pneumonia though). 141. on 13 april 2020, [x] texted me saying that she had taken [x] back to the hospital for the same reasons as above. i called the hospital at 03:30 am and i was informed that they had agreed to keep [x] in hospital on fluids but had no real clinical concerns. the nurse said he would probably go home that afternoon. 142. on both days, i went to the hospital to see [x], i neither witnessed him vomit, nor did i see any puke. each time, i would receive a text message to the effect, "[x] has just vomited again", after leaving his room. on the 13th i kept getting updates about [x] not being able to hold anything down including water. 143. on 14 april 2020 at 08:00 am, i called the hospital and i spoke to [ms p] who informed me that [x] would be discharged with me that afternoon. i kept getting the vomiting updates including a text in the afternoon speculating on whether [x] would be discharged or if he'd be kept overnight. 144. that afternoon, [x] was discharged with me. as soon as we walked out, [x] asked for water. i gave him his water bottle and he drank a quarter of it with no problem. 144.1. he was hungry so i also gave him a yoghurt sachet. 144.2. we headed to "[q]’s house", where i left him with my mother and [ms r] whilst i dashed to the supermarket. when he was offered dinner, [x] refused and told [ms r] and my mother that, "mummy said i need to vomit", and told them that "she put her finger in my mouth". 144.3. [x] repeated this to me again when we were going to the change-over 145. on the follow-up call from the hospital 15 april 2020, i informed the nurse of what [x] had revealed. i then asked if any of the hospital staff had actually witnessed [x] vomit. the nurse confirmed that no-one had actually witness it and she would note it for future reference. 146. i was very disturbed by this, and upon discussing this with my counsellor, he recommended that/ report this to child protection services. i did.
expert evidence
identified by the parents whether or not [x] is at unacceptable risk of harm living with [ms benida] due to her alleged emotional instability. identified by the family consultant the impact of ongoing conflict on [x]’s emotional and psychological well-being. whether or not [mr ressam] and [ms benida] would have a co-parenting relationship that would support [x] living with each of them equally.   benida] and [ms benida] express concern that [x] is not coping with the number of changeovers and different routines between [ms benida]’s house and [mr ressam]’s house. it is outside the scope of this assessment to fully understand the aetiology of [x]’s reported behaviour. however, a child of three years is learning their space within the world, especially within their family and increasing in independence. as such, they can display challenging behaviours as they test this growing independence. behaviours can include (but are not limited to) a feisty attitude (for example yelling when unable to get their own way), resisting requests, refusals, outbursts and tantrums. the behaviour displayed by [x] could be indicative of a normal developmental stage experienced by children of his age. alternatively, it could be an indication that he is experiencing increased stress as he adjusts to a new routine of living and spending time with each parent and adjusting to different parenting styles and routines. another possible explanation could be the impact of the conflict and the alleged denigration of each parent by the other, which may cause or exacerbate negative behaviour in an undesirable way. this is something that [x] is unlikely to adjust to over time. the potential negative impact of conflict on a child’s well-being is discussed further below. (emphasis added)   that x live with the mother and spend time with the father, prior to starting school in week 1 from saturday morning to monday afternoon and in week 2 from tuesday afternoon to thursday afternoon, and after he commences school each alternate weekend from thursday after school to tuesday before school (provided this is practical), (b) that the parents share parental responsibility, (c) that there be a restraint on physical punishments, (d) that the mother attend an anger management program (if there are concerns regarding her anger), (e) that the father attend a men’s behaviour change programme if there are concerns he is continuing to monitor the mother’s movements, and (f) that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.   that the parents share parental responsibility, (c) that there be a restraint on physical punishments, (d) that the mother attend an anger management program (if there are concerns regarding her anger), (e) that the father attend a men’s behaviour change programme if there are concerns he is continuing to monitor the mother’s movements, and (f) that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.   that there be a restraint on physical punishments, (d) that the mother attend an anger management program (if there are concerns regarding her anger), (e) that the father attend a men’s behaviour change programme if there are concerns he is continuing to monitor the mother’s movements, and (f) that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.   that the mother attend an anger management program (if there are concerns regarding her anger), (e) that the father attend a men’s behaviour change programme if there are concerns he is continuing to monitor the mother’s movements, and (f) that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.   that the father attend a men’s behaviour change programme if there are concerns he is continuing to monitor the mother’s movements, and (f) that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.   that there be non-denigration restrains upon both parents.
relevant considerations and determination
child’s views and nature of relationships
parental involvement in decision making and parental responsibility
likely effect of change
capacity of parents to provide for child’s needs, and attitude to child and to responsibilities of parenthood  that he had taken on-board the possibility of innocent explanations for incidents which he considered concerning for x while in the mother’s care, (2) that he had acknowledged he had a role to play in addressing x’s behaviours, and (3) that there was a need to reduce conflict between him and the mother and to improve communications.   that he had acknowledged he had a role to play in addressing x’s behaviours, and (3) that there was a need to reduce conflict between him and the mother and to improve communications.   that there was a need to reduce conflict between him and the mother and to improve communications.
family violence
lifestyle, culture and tradition
other relevant matters
benefit of meaningful relationship and need to protect
conclusion
associate: dated: 8 july 2022
dated: 8 july 2022
[1] see for example slater & light [2011] famcafc 1 at [45][2] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520 at [26] cited with approval by the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 (“mccall”) at [121][3] mccall at [122][4] mrr v gr [2010] hca 4 at [15][5] banks & banks [2015] famcafc 36[6] poniatowska v higginbotham [2009] fca 680 at [47], [75] (not disturbed on appeal)[7] father’s “case information” document emailed on 28 october 2020[8] apparently taking him around the block to settle him first [9] mother’s affidavit filed 31 august 2020 at paragraph 316[10] father’s “case information” document dated 28 october 2020[11] father’s affidavit filed 29 may 2020 at [147][12] see cross-examination of father on 29 october 2020, in particular t:26-27[13] father’s “case information” document dated 28 october 2020[14] browne & dunn (1894) 6 r 67[15] in the marriage of lc and tc [1998] famca 47; (1998) 23 fam lr 75 at [38]; see also conroy & penner [2022] fedcfamc1a 39 at [23][16] taupau v hvac constructions (qld) pty ltd [2012] nswca 293 at [130] [17] hull v thompson [2001] nswca 359 at [21][18] hull & thompson at [25] said in the context of an expert’s report, however, there is no reason as to why the same principles would not apply to evidence of lay witnesses[19] the orders made on 7 june 2021 expressly provide that neither party is to seek to obtain or rely upon the behavioural assessment report for the purposes of the substantive proceedings[20] father’s affidavit filed 29 may 2020, paragraphs 140-146.