last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
chadsey & chadsey [2022] fedcfamc2f 894
orders
by way of final order, the court orders that:
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge vasta
introduction
the original application of the father
what occurred before judge coates
the orders of 31 july 2013
the second application filed by the father
the final order handed down by coates j dated 31 july 2013 is attached. it granted me sole parental responsibility for my two daughters with an order that the two children live with me. the final order was also deemed to be of urgent nature due to the risks involved in the matter. the risks involved in this matter are of the same complexity and significance involving extreme risk as set out in my 2012 application. there is immediate detriment and uncertainty to [z], [z]’s two sisters, my family and to me if the respondent mother was to action any of the issues listed above, that the impact on the involved parties’ emotional development and wellbeing would be catastrophic.
the first court date of the second application
..that the mother had actually declined (sic) for the past nine months that [z] is actually my son. in her submission on friday, in her affidavit, she acknowledges that [z] is my son and that she has been playing games around the fact whether i am the father or not.
what occurred after that date before the matter came back before me  chadsey] has another child, [z], born [in] 2014 and presently aged two years. [ms chadsey] has yet to confirm whether i am [z]’s biological father.
13 july 2016
the trial
the third application made by the father
... [mr chadsey] was required to attend anger management as part of his divorce and child access proceedings. even though the psychologist stated the above as if it were fact, there was no order that he undergo such treatment. the order was simply that, if the father chose to undergo psychiatric or psychological treatment, the fact that he had done so would be looked at by the court. so there was, to start with, a misunderstanding as to why it was that the father was engaging in treatment. there is nothing in my order that talks about anger management.
13. in any event, the report continues:
...in the clinical interview he reported a somewhat taxing context of his divorce, preceded by a volatile marriage. taking his assertion at face value, then it would appear that the communication in the relationship between him and his ex-partner was somewhat disjointed and far of than optimal for the raising of children. he acknowledged the emotional impact on him but attributed fault to his partner. having said that, the dynamic of his past relationship made any kind of clinical assumption irrelevant and non-objective in the sense of that the power and control circle has a starting point and will continue with the proxy of the court. current paradigm suggests most commonly males as perpetrator. i am not at liberty to challenge that paradigm which is statistically speaking, most likely correct, however the interaction of non-compatible personalities escalated in my estimation the domestic situation of [mr chadsey]...
14. the report further said:
...in treatment we focused on general anger management principles (work book provided), future partner choices, dealing with perceived provocation, dealing with court proceedings and managing the ambiguity of court order implementation which was sighted by the treatment provider on request of [mr chadsey]. it was observed in treatment that [mr chadsey] is seeking a dialogue with his ex-partner but feels rejected on an emotional level. he utilises external resources such as psychological therapy (to deal with his emotional response and to acquire parenting and conflict resolution skills post-divorce), his mother and others to deal with that situation in a mature and child centred way.
15. the psychologist concludes that:
...i have no reservation to recommend a review of his mhcp at earliest convenience. whilst that report may talk about anger management, anger management was really not the main issue here at all. the main issue was that the father had absolutely no insight into the power imbalance that existed between him and his wife, the father being a teacher at the school of the mother. i did not made any finding on the issue of how the relationship began, because of the curtailing of the trial, but, even on the best case for the father, he began a sexual relationship with the mother when she had just turned 16, notwithstanding that she had been a student at the school at which he was teaching. the father has failed to grasp the absolute impropriety of such conduct and in all of the affidavits simply ignores that aspect. instead, the father speaks of the mother making vexatious and unproven complaints and that the complaints have all been dismissed. when one gets to the truth of the matter, they have not really even been investigated. there is nothing from the teacher’s registration board or equivalent authority to say that they know of all of the circumstances of [mr chadsey] and find that he is still a fit and proper person to teach in this country’s schools. that is the sort of evidence i would expect to justify what the father says when he says that he has been cleared of all these allegations. the father talks of the queensland police service clearing him, but it would seem that all the queensland police service could investigate was an allegation of unlawful carnal knowledge that occurred quite a number of years ago. it would seem to me that, notwithstanding that they may look at the matter, it would be very difficult to find that the prosecution of the matter was in the public interest. nevertheless, that does not diminish the seriousness of the impropriety that has occurred. what it shows is that the applicant father does not understand boundaries. that “not understanding boundaries” is why it is that the court has ensured that the contact that he has with children is supervised. in all of the interventions that the applicant father has undergone since i made the orders in march 2018, he has done absolutely nothing to confront that particular issue and really has come before this court today totally ignoring that situation. there has been nothing of any “psychiatric or psychological intervention undertaken by the father” that would show that any application, of which the father has leave to pursue, has any merit whatsoever.
having regard to everything that i have said, it seems to me that, notwithstanding that order 6 allowed for the father to have leave to bring this application, this application has no prospects of any success. it would be deleterious to the overall best interests of the children for the court to allow such litigation to continue, and so i therefore find that there has been no substantial change of circumstances as that term is understood in rice & asplund [1978] famcafc 128, (1979) flc 90-725.
the mother’s application for costs on that third application
the mother files an application
the conviction of the father
security for costs
submissions of the father
conclusion
dated: 8 july 2022