last updated: 28 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
blanchet & smola [2022] fedcfamc2f 900
orders
the court orders pending further order that:  during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school thursday to before school monday, starting the first thursday of each school term. (b) during term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays from after school on the last day of term to 5pm on the first wednesday of the school holiday. (c) during term 4 school holidays: (i) from after school on the last day of term to 4pm on christmas day. (ii) from 4pm on 2 january to 4pm on 7 january. (iii) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.   during term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays from after school on the last day of term to 5pm on the first wednesday of the school holiday. (c) during term 4 school holidays: (i) from after school on the last day of term to 4pm on christmas day. (ii) from 4pm on 2 january to 4pm on 7 january. (iii) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.   during term 4 school holidays: (i) from after school on the last day of term to 4pm on christmas day. (ii) from 4pm on 2 january to 4pm on 7 january. (iii) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.   from after school on the last day of term to 4pm on christmas day. (ii) from 4pm on 2 january to 4pm on 7 january. (iii) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.  ) from 4pm on 2 january to 4pm on 7 january. (iii) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.  i) from 4pm on 20 january to 4pm on 25 january.   changeovers on non-school days shall occur in the foyer at town a police station.
reasons for judgment
judge dunkley
documents relied on
father
mother
independent children’s lawyer
orders sought
1. that the children live with the father. 2. that the father have sole parental responsibility for the children. 3. the children shall spend time with the mother as follows:-
3.1 each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 3pm) friday to the commencement of school (or 9am) monday, 3.2 for one half of each new south wales gazetted school holiday periods, being the first half in odd numbered years, and the second half in even numbered years, 3.3 at other such times as agreed between the parties. on special occasions, order 7 shall be suspended and the following shall apply:- 4.1 on father’s day the father shall spend time with the children from 9am to 5pm. 4.2 on mother’s day the mother shall spend time with the children from 9am to 5pm. 4.3 for the children’s birthdays, the parent who does not have care of the child whose birthday it is shall spend time with the child from the conclusion of school (or 3pm) to 6pm on a school day or from 9am to 1pm on a non-school day. 4.4 for the easter period:
4.4.1 in even numbered years, the mother shall spend time with the children from 3pm friday to 9am monday. 4.4.2 in odd numbered years, the father shall spend time with the children from 3pm friday to 9am monday.
4.5 for the christmas period:
4.5.1 in even numbered years, the children shall spend time with the mother from 9am 24 december until 1pm christmas day and with the father from 1pm christmas day until 5pm boxing day. 4.5.2 in odd numbered years, the children shall spend time with the father from 9am 24 december until 1pm christmas day and with the mother from 1pm christmas day until 5pm boxing day. for the purpose of order 7.2 the “first half” of a school period means from 9.00am on the first day following the last day of the school term until 5.00pm on the sunday falling closest to the midpoint of the holiday period and the “second half’ of a school holiday period means from 5.00pm on the sunday falling closest to the midpoint of the school holiday period until 5.00pm on the final saturday of the holiday period.
6. changeover shall occur in front of the [town a] police station. the parties shall have telephone/facetime communication with the children when the children are not in their on monday, wednesdays and fridays between 6- 6.30pm. the parent who does not have care of the child shall initiate the call and the children are to be allowed privacy for the call. the mother shall submit to a hair follicle test for the detection of amphetamine-type substances, cannabis, opiates (including heroin and morphine), sedative-type drugs, cocaine and other drugs of abuse through the drug detection agency and the results are to be forwarded to the applicant’s solicitor upon receipt. the father shall enrol in and complete a men’s behavioural change program and the program parents not partners and shall provide evidence of his completion of these programs to the independent children’s lawyer. that each party refrain from making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children and that each party do all things necessary to ensure that no third party makes critical comments about the other party in the presence or hearing of the children. that each party advise the other party and keep the other party advised of their current address and contact telephone numbers (including both landline and mobile phone number if applicable) and advise the other party of any changes to these details within forty-eight (48) hours of such change occurring. that the parties be restrained from consuming drugs (with the exception of prescribed medication) and/or alcohol for a period of twenty four (24) hours prior to the parties spending time with the children and during the time spent with the children. in the alternative 1. the final orders made 25 august 2020 be confirmed. 2. the parties are directed to comply with the final orders made 25 august 2020.
1. all prior parenting orders are suspended. the mother has sole parental responsibility of the children [x] born [in] 2013 and [y] born [in] 2015 (“the children”) 3. the children live with the mother. 4. the children spend time with the father as follows:
a. each sunday for 2 hour period at a contact centre. in the alternative, from saturday 2pm until sunday 2pm in the presence [ms l] or [ms k].
5. changeover shall occur in the foyer of the [town a] police station. the children are to be presented to school on each day of required attendance no later than 8.45am and in the event that they are too unwell to attend school, a medical certificate is to be provided to the other parent and the independent children’s lawyer. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to a paediatrician for both children from her general practitioner and shall obtain the first available appointment for each of the children. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to a speech pathologist for both children and shall obtain the first available appointment for each of the children. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to an ent surgeon for [y] and shall obtain the first available appointment with the ent for [y]. the mother shall advise the independent children’s lawyer and the solicitor for the father of the date of the appointments with the paediatrician, ent surgeon and the first appointment with the speech pathologist. the mother and the father are each restrained from using illicit drugs while the children are in their care and for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into their care. within 14 days of receiving a request from the independent children’s lawyer, the mother and the father shall each submit to hair follicle drug testing for the presence of illicit drugs, and shall make the results from each test available to the icl and the solicitor for the other party within 7 days of receipt. for the purpose of order 13, the mother and the father are each restrained from cutting their hair shorter than 3cms. within 7 days of receiving a request from the independent children’s lawyer, the mother and the father shall each submit to carbohydrate deficient transferrin testing to assess alcohol consumption and shall make the results from each test available to the icl and the solicitor for the other party within 7 days of receipt. the father shall enrol in and complete, a men’s behavioural change program and the program parents not partners and shall provide evidence of his completion of these programs to the independent children’s lawyer. these orders are sufficient authority for each parent to be provided with copies of all school reports, school photograph order forms, notices and advices concerning the children and any activities involving the children.
1. all prior parenting orders are suspended. the mother has sole parental responsibility of the children [x] born [in] 2013 and [y] born [in] 2015 (“the children”) 3. the children live with the mother. 4. the children spend time with the father as follows: during school terms, from after school friday until before school monday, and for half of the school holidays, being the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. the father’s time as set out in order 4 shall occur in the presence of the father’s partner [ms c] or his mother [ms k]. changeover shall occur at the children’s school and if not a school day in the foyer of the [town a] police station. the children are to be presented to [town a] school on each day of required attendance no later than 8.45am and in the event that they are too unwell to attend school, a medical certificate is to be provided to the other parent and the independent children’s lawyer. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to a paediatrician for both children from her general practitioner and shall obtain the first available appointment for each of the children. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to a speech pathologist for both children and shall obtain the first available appointment for each of the children. within 28 days of the date of these orders, the mother shall obtain a referral to an ent surgeon for [y] and shall obtain the first available appointment with the ent for [y]. the mother shall advise the independent children’s lawyer and the solicitor for the father of the date of the appointments with the paediatrician, ent surgeon and the first appointment with the speech pathologist. the mother and the father are each restrained from using illicit drugs while the children are in their care and for a period of 12 hours prior to the children coming into their care. within 14 days of receiving a request from the independent children’s lawyer, the mother and the father shall each submit to hair follicle drug testing for the presence of illicit drugs, and shall make the results from each test available to the icl and the solicitor for the other party within 7 days of receipt. for the purpose of order 13, the mother and the father are each restrained from cutting their hair shorter than 3cms. within 7 days of receiving a request from the independent children’s lawyer, the mother and the father shall each submit to carbohydrate deficient transferrin testing to assess alcohol consumption and shall make the results from each test available to the icl and the solicitor for the other party within 7 days of receipt. the father shall enrol in and complete, a men’s behavioural change program and the program parents not partners and shall provide evidence of his completion of these programs to the independent children’s lawyer. these orders are sufficient authority for each parent to be provided with copies of all school reports, school photograph order forms, notices and advices concerning the children and any activities involving the children. each parent notify the other in writing of any changes to contact/residential details at least 24 hours prior to any change. each parent notify the other if the children are seriously injured, require hospitalisation and or in the event of an emergency. these orders are sufficient authority for each parent to contact and speak to the children’s treating health care professional and obtain medical information, reports and the like regarding the children. the mother and the father are each restrained from denigrating the other parent or their family in the presence of the children or within hearing of the children and from leaving the children in the presence of any third party that is denigrating the other parent or their family.
litigation history
2. that the father spend time with the children as follows:- from 4pm friday until 4pm sunday commencing 20 may 2022 and alternating each weekend thereafter. on friday 13 may 2022 between 12.30pm and 1.30pm. telephone/facetime contact each monday and wednesday between 6pm and 6.30pm with the father to initiate the call and the mother to ensure the telephone is switched on and allow privacy for the call. changeover is to occur at [town a] police station and is to be facilitated by the mother and the father’s sister, [ms l]. both the mother and father are restrained from consuming alcohol within 24 hours of the children coming into their care and whilst the children are in their care. both the mother and father are restrained from consuming illicit substances whilst the children are in their care.
evidence
i am seeking that the final orders be varied so that the children can live with me and spend time with the father.
child impact report
ms k
ms c
i have been present and heard both [y] and [x] tell [mr blanchet] and myself that they want to stay with us.
determination
associate: dated: 13 july 2022
dated: 13 july 2022
[1] see paras 27-30 mother’s affidavit filed 9 june 2022