last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mcallister & mcallister [2022] fedcfamc2f 901
orders
the court orders that:  the former matrimonial home, (b) other real estate, (c) business,   other real estate, (c) business,   business,
and such valuations may be joint valuations if agreed between the parties.
reasons for judgment
judge stewart
the meaning of a de facto relationship  the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family, and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the persons are not related by family, and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (f) the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (f) the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (f) the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (f) the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (f) the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (g) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.
a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
32. the appellant's primary argument that the parties' de facto relationship had broken down when the appellant was placed into an aged care facility such that the parties were no longer physically living together must be rejected. it is contrary to the text of s 4aa and to statutory context and purpose to which reference has been made. it is also contrary to real-world considerations. it would be productive of injustice if two people who live apart (including for reasons of health) were incapable of remaining in a de facto relationship. 33. living together for the purposes of s 4aa(1) will often, perhaps usually, mean cohabitation of some residence by a couple for some period of time. but cohabitation of a residence or residences is not a necessary feature of "living together". that phrase must be construed to take account of the many various ways in which two people may share their lives together in the modern world [26]. two people, for any number of reasons, may not reside in the same residence, but nonetheless be in a de facto relationship in the sense required by s 4aa. 34. the fact that here the appellant was placed into an aged care facility may be relevant to the existence or breakdown of a de facto relationship under the act , but it could not, of itself, be determinative of that issue. the same observation applies to the decline in the appellant's cognitive ability. 35. two decisions support the proposition that physical cohabitation at a single home or homes is not a necessary feature of an ongoing relationship whether by way of marriage or otherwise, it is not an irreducible minimum that all relationships must exhibit.
the hearing
the evidence   a residence at j street, suburb k (“the j street, suburb k property”) in the region l of melbourne which he had purchased in 1986 for $87,000. he had purchased that property with part of the proceeds of a transport accident commission (“tac”) award received by him in or around 1986 which was in the total sum of $200,000, (b) motor vehicles which he estimated to be worth around $23,300, (c) a caravan which he estimated to be worth around $4,500, (d) personal possessions which he estimated to be worth $10,000, and (e) savings of approximately $50,000.   motor vehicles which he estimated to be worth around $23,300, (c) a caravan which he estimated to be worth around $4,500, (d) personal possessions which he estimated to be worth $10,000, and (e) savings of approximately $50,000.   a caravan which he estimated to be worth around $4,500, (d) personal possessions which he estimated to be worth $10,000, and (e) savings of approximately $50,000.   personal possessions which he estimated to be worth $10,000, and (e) savings of approximately $50,000.   savings of approximately $50,000.
9. in or around 1997, [mr mcallister] became involved with a dispute with our neighbour. this dispute developed in to a feud which culminated in court proceedings. i felt that [mr mcallister] became obsessed with the situation with the neighbour. his behaviour became unbearable and the atmosphere within our home and its surrounds was toxic. the situation became worse with each passing day, our arguments became more frequent and intense, and i held concerns for the wellbeing of our children. we sought counselling through my employer, and also from family services at the [n council]. ultimately, the counselling was unsuccessful and i told [mr mcallister] that i was not able to continue in the relationship and asked him to move out. 10. on 9 august 1999, [mr mcallister] moved out of the [f street, suburb g] property. [mr mcallister] couch-surfed for some time before moving in to housing commission flats, where he has remained since.
23. i left the [f street, suburb g] property in june 2000 due to constant harassment by a neighbour. the harassment led to proceedings initiated in court and i was advised by my solicitors at the time that the neighbour was opportunistic and motivated by what he saw as an opportunity to seek a payout from me given that i owned real estate. i was advised by my solicitor to transfer the family home to [ms mcallister] and to leave the area to put an end to the neighbours unrelenting litigation and abuse. i had full trust in [ms mcallister] and agreed to do this. the consideration was as a gift and at the time i signed a statutory declaration confirming we were in a permanent and bona fide relationship.we redrew on the home at the time approximately $18,000 to cover legal fees. annexed hereto and marked "-1" is a true copy of the signed statutory declaration and transfer of land. 24. i vacated the property and resided at [suburb o] with the children as [ms mcallister] was at work during the day. in the evenings we would go to the [f street, suburb g] property and sleep there.
in the matter of the stamps act and in the matter of a transfer of land from mr mcallister to ms mcallister in respect of the land in certificate of title volume ... folio ... i, mr mcallister of f street, suburb g, in the state of victoria, do solemnly and sincerely declare as follows:- that i am the transferor in the above transfer of land. that the transferee ms mcallister and i are living together on a permanent and bona fide domestic basis. that no other person takes or is entitled to take an interest in the property in pursuance of the said instrument of transfer. and i make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true and by virtue of the provisions of an act of the parliament of victoria rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.   the respondent was involved in the transfer transaction, the advice for which was to solely protect the asset from a creditor. she knew that was the purpose and there is no suggestion that any advice received related to a financial settlement between the parties, (b) although clearly it records a declaration of the applicant alone, it is likely that the respondent was aware of the statutory declaration executed by the applicant at the same time. the document records that the parties are living together on a permanent and bona fide domestic basis. it is unlikely that the applicant would have made that statement if the transfer was truly to reflect some sort of financial settlement to the respondent and in circumstances where on the respondent’s case the applicant had moved out of the home and separation had occurred some 18 days earlier, (c) the applicant records his address as the f street, suburb g property which suggests that he was still living there at the time, (d) beyond the assertion that the respondent believed the transfer was a gift to her, a financial settlement and a statement in her evidence that the applicant achieved the peace of mind in knowing the house would belong to the children, there is no further particularity surrounding the concept of a gift or a financial settlement. whilst recognising the passing of the years since that time, i would have expected as much particularity as could be mustered surrounding this issue. if it were truly a gift i would have expected some attempt to particularise discussions surrounding the same. if it were truly a financial settlement it seems unusual and unlikely that it took place absent negotiations and in the complete absence of anything being “settled” on the applicant, particularly when the f street, suburb g property represented the parties’ lifetime accumulation of wealth to which the applicant had made a significant contribution, (e) although the evidence is not completely clear it seems that the applicant’s debt was in the vicinity of $100,000 at the time of the transfer. it seems unlikely that the applicant would relinquish his just entitlement to the remainder of the then net property of the parties, bearing in mind the f street, suburb g property had been purchased some 9 years earlier for more than that and the respondent likely had superannuation entitlements, (f) given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.   although clearly it records a declaration of the applicant alone, it is likely that the respondent was aware of the statutory declaration executed by the applicant at the same time. the document records that the parties are living together on a permanent and bona fide domestic basis. it is unlikely that the applicant would have made that statement if the transfer was truly to reflect some sort of financial settlement to the respondent and in circumstances where on the respondent’s case the applicant had moved out of the home and separation had occurred some 18 days earlier, (c) the applicant records his address as the f street, suburb g property which suggests that he was still living there at the time, (d) beyond the assertion that the respondent believed the transfer was a gift to her, a financial settlement and a statement in her evidence that the applicant achieved the peace of mind in knowing the house would belong to the children, there is no further particularity surrounding the concept of a gift or a financial settlement. whilst recognising the passing of the years since that time, i would have expected as much particularity as could be mustered surrounding this issue. if it were truly a gift i would have expected some attempt to particularise discussions surrounding the same. if it were truly a financial settlement it seems unusual and unlikely that it took place absent negotiations and in the complete absence of anything being “settled” on the applicant, particularly when the f street, suburb g property represented the parties’ lifetime accumulation of wealth to which the applicant had made a significant contribution, (e) although the evidence is not completely clear it seems that the applicant’s debt was in the vicinity of $100,000 at the time of the transfer. it seems unlikely that the applicant would relinquish his just entitlement to the remainder of the then net property of the parties, bearing in mind the f street, suburb g property had been purchased some 9 years earlier for more than that and the respondent likely had superannuation entitlements, (f) given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.   the applicant records his address as the f street, suburb g property which suggests that he was still living there at the time, (d) beyond the assertion that the respondent believed the transfer was a gift to her, a financial settlement and a statement in her evidence that the applicant achieved the peace of mind in knowing the house would belong to the children, there is no further particularity surrounding the concept of a gift or a financial settlement. whilst recognising the passing of the years since that time, i would have expected as much particularity as could be mustered surrounding this issue. if it were truly a gift i would have expected some attempt to particularise discussions surrounding the same. if it were truly a financial settlement it seems unusual and unlikely that it took place absent negotiations and in the complete absence of anything being “settled” on the applicant, particularly when the f street, suburb g property represented the parties’ lifetime accumulation of wealth to which the applicant had made a significant contribution, (e) although the evidence is not completely clear it seems that the applicant’s debt was in the vicinity of $100,000 at the time of the transfer. it seems unlikely that the applicant would relinquish his just entitlement to the remainder of the then net property of the parties, bearing in mind the f street, suburb g property had been purchased some 9 years earlier for more than that and the respondent likely had superannuation entitlements, (f) given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.   beyond the assertion that the respondent believed the transfer was a gift to her, a financial settlement and a statement in her evidence that the applicant achieved the peace of mind in knowing the house would belong to the children, there is no further particularity surrounding the concept of a gift or a financial settlement. whilst recognising the passing of the years since that time, i would have expected as much particularity as could be mustered surrounding this issue. if it were truly a gift i would have expected some attempt to particularise discussions surrounding the same. if it were truly a financial settlement it seems unusual and unlikely that it took place absent negotiations and in the complete absence of anything being “settled” on the applicant, particularly when the f street, suburb g property represented the parties’ lifetime accumulation of wealth to which the applicant had made a significant contribution, (e) although the evidence is not completely clear it seems that the applicant’s debt was in the vicinity of $100,000 at the time of the transfer. it seems unlikely that the applicant would relinquish his just entitlement to the remainder of the then net property of the parties, bearing in mind the f street, suburb g property had been purchased some 9 years earlier for more than that and the respondent likely had superannuation entitlements, (f) given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.   although the evidence is not completely clear it seems that the applicant’s debt was in the vicinity of $100,000 at the time of the transfer. it seems unlikely that the applicant would relinquish his just entitlement to the remainder of the then net property of the parties, bearing in mind the f street, suburb g property had been purchased some 9 years earlier for more than that and the respondent likely had superannuation entitlements, (f) given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.   given the respondent’s concession that she gambled large sums of money, which she said she did in the company of the applicant, her statement that the property was to be protected for the children strikes as disingenuous. she conceded there was no trust arrangement to hold the property on trust for the children and i note that post 1999/2000 when the f street, suburb g property was unencumbered, the respondent agreed that the property had later been mortgaged four times between 2003 and 2015.
36. i agree to allow an agent to come and collect [mr mcallister]’s belongings on behalf of [mr mcallister].
4. within 60 days of the date of these orders, the parties must each provide to the other any document which goes to the issue of whether the parties have been in a de facto relationship between 9 august 1999 and 17 may 2020 (“the disputed period”) including but not limited to: (a) centrelink records which address the parties’ relationship status, (b) bank statements, (c) text messages, (d) any receipts including but not limited to shopping and household expenses, (e) their income tax returns, if any.   on 11 may 2021 the respondent’s solicitors forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email seeking production of the material specified in the orders of 10 february 2021. (b) on 23 july 2021 the respondent’s solicitors forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email inter alia making a further request for disclosure pursuant to the orders of 10 february 2021 (c) on 23 september 2021 the respondent’s solicitors again forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email, repeating their earlier requests for disclosure and making a further request for disclosure pursuant to the orders of 10 february 2021.   on 23 july 2021 the respondent’s solicitors forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email inter alia making a further request for disclosure pursuant to the orders of 10 february 2021 (c) on 23 september 2021 the respondent’s solicitors again forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email, repeating their earlier requests for disclosure and making a further request for disclosure pursuant to the orders of 10 february 2021.   on 23 september 2021 the respondent’s solicitors again forwarded a letter to the applicant’s solicitors via email, repeating their earlier requests for disclosure and making a further request for disclosure pursuant to the orders of 10 february 2021.
discussion
associate: dated: 13 july 2022
dated: 13 july 2022