last updated: 18 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gambetto & farrelli (no 5) [2022] fedcfamc2f 918
orders
the court orders that:  mr c, as responsible officer at d pty ltd (“the d pty ltd subpoena”), (b) mr e as ceo at f pty ltd (“the f pty ltd subpoena”), (c) mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) ms farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   mr e as ceo at f pty ltd (“the f pty ltd subpoena”), (c) mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) ms farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) ms farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   ms farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   ms k.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
litigation history
applications for review
application for review filed by the mother on 9 may 2022
120 unrepresented parties   evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection by a party who is not represented in the proceeding by a lawyer, the court finds that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure of— (a) a confidential communication between the party and another person, or (b) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not) that was prepared, either by or at the direction or request of, the party,   a confidential communication between the party and another person, or (b) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not) that was prepared, either by or at the direction or request of, the party,   the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not) that was prepared, either by or at the direction or request of, the party,
for the dominant purpose of preparing for or conducting the proceeding.
...a communication made in such circumstances that, when it was made—   the person who made it, or (b) the person to whom it was made,
was under an express or implied obligation not to disclose its contents, whether or not the obligation arises under law.
...a document prepared in such circumstances that, when it was prepared—   the person who prepared it, or (b) the person for whom it was prepared,
rejection of documents for filing   the court may reject a document filed or received for filing if the document:   is not in the proper form in accordance with these rules, or (b) is not executed in the way required by these rules, or (c) does not otherwise comply with a requirement of these rules, or (d) is tendered for filing after the time specified in these rules or an order for filing the document, or is otherwise contrary to directions given, or (e) on its face, appears to the court to be an abuse of process, frivolous, scandalous or vexatious, or (f) is tendered for filing in connection with a current proceeding in a registry that is not the filing registry, or (g) is filed electronically and the person filing the document has not complied with the court’s electronic filing procedures.   is tendered for filing after the time specified in these rules or an order for filing the document, or is otherwise contrary to directions given, or (e) on its face, appears to the court to be an abuse of process, frivolous, scandalous or vexatious, or (f) is tendered for filing in connection with a current proceeding in a registry that is not the filing registry, or (g) is filed electronically and the person filing the document has not complied with the court’s electronic filing procedures.   on its face, appears to the court to be an abuse of process, frivolous, scandalous or vexatious, or (f) is tendered for filing in connection with a current proceeding in a registry that is not the filing registry, or (g) is filed electronically and the person filing the document has not complied with the court’s electronic filing procedures.   is tendered for filing in connection with a current proceeding in a registry that is not the filing registry, or (g) is filed electronically and the person filing the document has not complied with the court’s electronic filing procedures.   is filed electronically and the person filing the document has not complied with the court’s electronic filing procedures.
...no very precise notion of what is vexatious or oppressive or what otherwise constitutes an abuse of process. indeed, the courts have resisted, and even warned against, laying down hard and fast definitions in that regard. that is necessarily so. abuse of process cannot be restricted to "defined and closed categories" because notions of justice and injustice, as well as other considerations that bear on public confidence in the administration of justice, must reflect contemporary values and, as well, take account of the circumstances of the case. (footnotes omitted)
application for review filed by the father on 10 may 2022  mr c, as responsible officer at d pty ltd (“the d pty ltd subpoena”), (b) mr e as ceo at f pty ltd (“the f pty ltd subpoena”), (c) mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) mr farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   mr e as ceo at f pty ltd (“the f pty ltd subpoena”), (c) mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) mr farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   mr g in personal capacity and as responsible office at company h, company j and his family office (“the mr g subpoena”), (d) mr farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   mr farrelli (the respondent mother), and (e) ms k.   the application for review filed 10 may 2022, (b) exhibit b, and (c) paragraphs 1 to 23 of the father’s affidavit filed 4 july 2022.   exhibit b, and (c) paragraphs 1 to 23 of the father’s affidavit filed 4 july 2022.   paragraphs 1 to 23 of the father’s affidavit filed 4 july 2022.
application for review filed by the father on 23 may 2022  per the original)   application for review filed 23 may 2022, and the (b) draft subpoena to nsw education standards authority (attn: homeschooling unit) and affording counsel for the mother the opportunity to provide oral submissions i did not need to hear from the father further with respect to this application. whether x should continue to be home schooled or attend a public school is an issue for determination at the final hearing. i am satisfied in those circumstances that the subpoena is not an abuse of process, frivolous or vexatious and accordingly will grant leave to the father to file such subpoena.   draft subpoena to nsw education standards authority (attn: homeschooling unit) and affording counsel for the mother the opportunity to provide oral submissions i did not need to hear from the father further with respect to this application. whether x should continue to be home schooled or attend a public school is an issue for determination at the final hearing. i am satisfied in those circumstances that the subpoena is not an abuse of process, frivolous or vexatious and accordingly will grant leave to the father to file such subpoena.
application for review filed by the father on 15 june 2022.
reading the material contained under this charge the father’s assertions include that the mother “has failed to comply in full with order 13 (28 september 2021) despite multiple requests to do so.”
order 13 of 28 september 2021 was: by not later than 5pm on friday, 8 october 2021, to the extent she has not already done so, the mother shall provide to the father copies of all school reports, documents recording [x]’s home schooling registration, and (if any) medical or allied health reports or assessments about [x] for the past two years that are in her possession.
the father’s material under this heading asserts that the mother and her legal representative misled judge campbell at a hearing on 14 april 2022.
the father’s material with respect to the date listed asserts that the mother filing an amended response on 18 may 2022 seeking orders for no time between x and the father is:
...in my view direct evidence of a pattern of methodical destruction of meaningful child/father relationship as well as parental alienation.... complete disregard of the rules of disclosure by both the respondent and her lawyer. severe interference with the administration of justice by the respondent and her lawyer for at least the past 9 months by falsifying information and misleading other parties and judicial officers.
this states in full:
undertaking filed by the respondent on 18 may 2022. in her undertaking filed on 18 may 2022, the respondent claimed to be in compliance with all orders and disclosure rules. based on the information in this application, i seek that the respondent and her lawyer, ms worland, be found in contempt of court.   subject to subsection (1a), this section applies to a contempt of a court that:   does not constitute a contravention of an order under this act, or (b) constitutes a contravention of an order under this act and involves a flagrant challenge to the authority of the court.   constitutes a contravention of an order under this act and involves a flagrant challenge to the authority of the court.
principles and procedure to be applied [9] i take the principles and procedure to be applied to derive from the sections set out above, the general law and rule 21.08 of the family law rules. [10] contempt pursuant to section 112ap is a criminal proceeding and accordingly each element of each charge must be proven beyond reasonable doubt. (in the marriage of tate [2002] famca 356, (2002) 29 fam lr 195, (2002) flc 93-107) [11] contempt under section 112ap has four elements each of which must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. the first three involve the acts and intentions of the respondent. the fourth is a finding to be made by the trial judge. these four elements are: the respondent knew the terms of the orders. (mead and mead [2006] famca 435, (2006) flc 93-267 at 80, 536) the respondent deliberately did an act. the act must be wilful and deliberate as opposed to accidental or inadvertent. (in the marriage of english [1986] famca 69, (1986) flc 91-729 at 75, 294) the act must be intentional. this is not to say that the respondent must intend that the act was in breach of the order, which would make the respondent’s actions contumacious, but the respondent must have intend to do the act which is alleged to be the contempt. in the marriage of english, above. the act must involve a flagrant challenge to the authority of the court. in bande and cade [2011] famcafc 93, 45 fam lr 376 at 39 the...full court said:
the concept of a “flagrant challenge” involves conduct of an exceptional, striking or repeated nature. in ibbotson and wincen [1994] famca 103, (1965) 18 fam lr 164, (1994) flc 92-496 the full court held (at fam lr 175, flr 81, 162): “the use of the term “flagrant challenge” ... is intended to underline the exceptional or striking nature of the contravention in question and thus to differentiate it from what might be described as a general run of breaches which are intended to be dealt with under section 112ad ... it is a question of fact and degree whether the stringent terms of the section are satisfied.
conclusion
associate: dated: 15 july 2022
dated: 15 july 2022
[1] application in a proceeding filed on 22 december 2021 by the father.[2] father’s affidavit filed on 4 july 2022, paragraph 14.[3] father’s affidavit filed 4 july 2022, paragraph 23.