last updated: 25 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gironda & connor [2022] fedcfamc2f 936
orders
the court orders that:  $78,700 by way of final property settlement (‘the payment’), and (b) $14,592 by way of costs (‘the costs order’).   $14,592 by way of costs (‘the costs order’).   the wife and the company shall be at liberty to choose the identity of and appoint the selling agent and conveyancer, save that if not done within 30 days, then the husband (or his solicitor) shall choose the selling agent and the conveyancer, and (b) unless agreed and subject to the rights of the mortgagor, the sale price and conditions shall be determined by the selling agent, and (c) the selling agent shall advise both the wife, the company and the husband (or their solicitors) of any offers received, and in the event the wife and/or the company does not accept an offer over and above the sale price determined pursuant to the proceeding subparagraph, then the husband (or his solicitor) be at liberty to accept such an offer, (d) the sale proceeds be applied as follows: (i) firstly, to the payment of all costs, commission and expenses of the sale, (ii) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.   unless agreed and subject to the rights of the mortgagor, the sale price and conditions shall be determined by the selling agent, and (c) the selling agent shall advise both the wife, the company and the husband (or their solicitors) of any offers received, and in the event the wife and/or the company does not accept an offer over and above the sale price determined pursuant to the proceeding subparagraph, then the husband (or his solicitor) be at liberty to accept such an offer, (d) the sale proceeds be applied as follows: (i) firstly, to the payment of all costs, commission and expenses of the sale, (ii) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.   the selling agent shall advise both the wife, the company and the husband (or their solicitors) of any offers received, and in the event the wife and/or the company does not accept an offer over and above the sale price determined pursuant to the proceeding subparagraph, then the husband (or his solicitor) be at liberty to accept such an offer, (d) the sale proceeds be applied as follows: (i) firstly, to the payment of all costs, commission and expenses of the sale, (ii) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.   the sale proceeds be applied as follows: (i) firstly, to the payment of all costs, commission and expenses of the sale, (ii) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.   firstly, to the payment of all costs, commission and expenses of the sale, (ii) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.  ) secondly, to discharge the mortgage including arrears, if any, (iii) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.  i) thirdly, the sum of $78,700 be paid to the husband together with interest calculated in accordance with the family law rules, (iv) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.  ) fourthly, the sum of $14,450 be paid to the husband in satisfaction of the costs order, (v) lastly, the balance to the wife.   lastly, the balance to the wife.   the husband shall have leave to apply to a registrar of this court requesting that pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth), a registrar of the court shall sign all documents necessary in the name of the wife and/ or the company to effect the sale, and (b) in order to comply with the requirements of pexa, the husband shall nominate a solicitor other than his family law solicitor, who is authorised to sign documents for pexa transfers and such solicitor sign on behalf of the wife and/ or the company upon written request from the husband’s solicitor to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.   in order to comply with the requirements of pexa, the husband shall nominate a solicitor other than his family law solicitor, who is authorised to sign documents for pexa transfers and such solicitor sign on behalf of the wife and/ or the company upon written request from the husband’s solicitor to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all superannuation and other property (including choses-in-action) owned by or in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
whether to proceed undefended
we confirm we act on behalf of your husband, mr gironda, in family court proceedings scheduled for case assessment conference this thursday 8 october 2020 at 11am. we attach correspondence and a minute of proposed orders for your urgent attention. we encourage you to obtain legal advice in response to this correspondence and to have your representative contact the writer forthwith. you should otherwise make arrangements to appear yourself at the conference on thursday.
...we anticipate that the proceedings will be granted a short adjournment to allow us to serve you as proposed in the minute. once satisfied that you had been served with the court documents, the court has the capacity to make orders altering your financial interests in your absence. we advise that, to protect our client's interests, we have caused the caveat to be lodged on the property registered in your name at [the c street, suburb d unit]. we expect you should receive advice from the land titles office via post, if you have not already, confirming this. we again urge you to obtain independent legal advice and/or appear at the hearing listed this thursday, by dialling into the microsoft teams hearing at 11:00am on the link provided to you by email [from the registrar] dated 23 september 2020. should you obtain independent legal advice, we would welcome your representative contacting the writer as soon as practicable to discuss this matter.
i cannot find the meeting instructions. can you help me please?
it is ordered that: 1. the requirement for personal service be dispensed with. the husband effect service on the wife by forwarding to the wife, no later than 4.00pm this day, the husband’s initiating application and financial statement both filed 21 july 2020, by email to [the wife's email address]. the respondent wife file and serve by 20 november 2020 a response to initiating application and financial statement. 4. no later than the 20 november 2020 the husband produce to the wife: a) if not already exchanged a copy of all the documents mentioned in rule 12.02,
a) if not already exchanged a copy of all the documents mentioned in rule 12.02,
b) the following documents: that support the information contained in the financial statement, any inheritances, gifts or compensation payments received during cohabitation, any purchase or disposal of property in the 12 months prior to and since separation,
iv. any increase or reduction of liabilities since separation, the value of any superannuation interest of a party, including the basis on which the value has been calculated and any documents used to calculate the value
5. no later than the 20 november 2020 the wife produce to the husband:
a) her personal income tax returns for the last 3 years, b) the income tax returns for the last 3 years of any company/business in which the wife has an interest, c) the trust deed in relation to any trust in which the wife has interest, together with the trust tax returns for the last 3 years, d) the last tax return for the wife’s self-managed superannuation fund, e) statements for any bank account in the wife’s name, or accounts over which she has control (such as business/company accounts) for the last 12 months, f) evidence of any tax liability owing to the ato. all applications be adjourned to a case assessment conference on 10 december 2020 at 2.15pm.
b) the income tax returns for the last 3 years of any company/business in which the wife has an interest, c) the trust deed in relation to any trust in which the wife has interest, together with the trust tax returns for the last 3 years,
c) the trust deed in relation to any trust in which the wife has interest, together with the trust tax returns for the last 3 years,
e) statements for any bank account in the wife’s name, or accounts over which she has control (such as business/company accounts) for the last 12 months,
... we confirm you are to file responding material and provide discovery by friday, 20 november 2020. the matter has been adjourned for a further conference to be held on thursday, 10 december 2020 at 2:15pm, to allow you time to do so. as you advised the registrar this morning, we understand you intend to engage a solicitor to assist you in this matter. we welcome your legal representative contacting the writer to discuss the future conduct of this matter at the earliest convenience, once appointed by you.
... ... to avoid costs orders being made against you or our client seeking to proceed undefended, we ask you give this matter your urgent attention. we look forward to hearing from you.
... to avoid costs orders being made against you in these proceedings, we once again ask you to urgently engage a solicitor and have them contact our office prior to thursday's hearing.
... 8. the wife appear personally at the conciliation conference. the wife’s time to comply with order 3 made on 8 october 2020 is extended to 27 january 2021. the wife’s time to comply with order 5 made on 8 october 2020 is extended to 27 january 2021. the applicant’s lawyers serve a copy these orders on the wife by email to [email ...] no later than 4.00pm on 11 december 2020. and the court notes in the event that the wife does not comply with these orders and/or fails to attend the conciliation conference, the husband’s lawyer intends to request that the matter be listed forthwith for an undefended hearing. the wife did not participate in the case assessment conference this day. the court had sent her the invitation to the conference at an email address provided by her at the last hearing. additionally the registrar attempted to telephone the wife at 2.18pm, 2.33pm and 2.38pm and on no occasion did the wife answer the call. the matter then was finalised in her absence. the husband resides in [country e] but will be available to participate in the conciliation conference by electronic means.
... due to your nonparticipation, interim orders were made in your absence. ... once again, we urge you to obtain independent legal representation in relation to these proceedings and to have that representative contact our office as soon as practicable. our client remains hopeful that, with your participation in these proceedings, an amicable and efficient resolution can still be achieved.
the orders of 10 december 2020 indicate that if you do not comply with the above by 27 january 2021, we will be requesting that the proceedings be listed for an undefended hearing of our client’s application. at that undefended hearing, orders could be made against you which impact upon your financial interests, in favour of our client. we therefore reiterate our previous request to you that you obtain independent legal representation in relation to the proceedings, and have that representative contact our office as soon as practicable. (emphasis as in the original)
... no later than 29 march 2021 the applicant serve a sealed copy of this order on the respondent by email to her last known email address. the respondent appear and/or be represented on the first date that this matter is before the federal circuit court, noting that should she fail to do so and/or fail to comply with these orders, then the applicant intends to seek leave to proceed on an undefended basis, with his application filed 21 july 2020. ...
... we refer to the directions hearing held in this matter before the family court on wednesday 24 march 2021. once again, and notwithstanding previous orders, you failed to attend. we enclose by way of service orders made by the court in your absence. you will note that order 5 of the orders requires you to either appear personally or be represented at the next hearing in this matter, failing which our client shall seek to proceed on an undefended basis. the next hearing is now fixed for 26 may 2021. to avoid the court making undefended orders, including an order for the sale of the [c street, suburb d] property, you should ensure that you comply with all previous orders and the enclosed orders. once again, we urge you to obtain legal advice in this matter. please have your solicitor contact the writer forthwith. ... (emphasis as in the original)
... if you do not file your court documents and do not appear before the court on 11 august 2021, our client will be able to proceed on 23 september 2021 on an "unopposed basis". this means that he can ask the court to make orders in his amended initiating application. it is therefore highly likely that if you do not participate in these proceedings, orders will be made on 23 september 2021 which will significantly alter your financial interests, to your detriment. we once again urge you to turn your attention to this matter, and to urgently obtain legal advice in relation to it, to avoid orders being made as foreshadowed herein. ...
... if you or a lawyer on your behalf failed to attend [the 11 august 2021] hearing, our client will be given leave to seek unopposed orders. ...
i have only just read your message this morning. i don't have a lawyer because i don't have any money to pay for one. i am working through insolvency of my company business and it is very difficult for me to maintain stable mental health. what [mr gironda] et al are doing is fraudulent and will become apparent. i'm sorry but i can't do anything more this time i really just can't.
proceeding undefended
rule 1.04 overarching purpose   the overarching purpose of these rules, as provided by section 67 of the federal circuit and family court act, is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible. (2) parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. (3) a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and   parties to family law proceedings must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose. (3) a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and   a party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of a proceeding before the court (including negotiations for settlement) on the party’s behalf: (a) take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and   take account of the duty imposed on the party referred to in subrule (2), and   assist the party to comply with the duty. ...
rule 1.33 failure to comply with a legislative provision or order   if a step is taken after the time specified for taking the step by these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the step is of no effect. (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:   if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:   dismiss all or part of the proceeding, (b) set aside a step taken or an order made, (c) determine the proceeding as if it were undefended, (d) order costs, (e) prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).  phasis added)  0] first it would be wrong in this case to lose sight of the fact that there are two parties to this dispute. the wife is entitled to have her application filed 1 september 2000 heard.  ] ... speed and efficiency, in the sense of minimum delay and expense, are seen as essential to adjust resolution of proceedings.  ] the term undefended proceedings was also referred to in lanceley and lanceley [1994] famca 94, (1994) flc 92-491. the full court considered the position of a respondent who took no active part in proceedings. barblett dcj, frederico and lindenmayer jj said at 81,104:
...unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a 'judgment by default' in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief...
conclusion as to undefended hearing
wife's non-disclosure
rule 24.03 full and frank disclosure   a party required under this part to file a financial statement or affidavit of financial circumstances must make in the statement or affidavit a full and frank disclosure of his or her financial circumstances, including details of: (a) any vested or contingent interest in property (including real or personal property, superannuation and legal and equitable interests), and (b) income from all sources, including any benefit received in relation to, or in connection with, the party's employment or business interests, and (c) the party's other financial resources, and (d) any trust: (i) of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and (e) any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   any vested or contingent interest in property (including real or personal property, superannuation and legal and equitable interests), and (b) income from all sources, including any benefit received in relation to, or in connection with, the party's employment or business interests, and (c) the party's other financial resources, and (d) any trust: (i) of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and (e) any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   income from all sources, including any benefit received in relation to, or in connection with, the party's employment or business interests, and (c) the party's other financial resources, and (d) any trust: (i) of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and (e) any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   the party's other financial resources, and (d) any trust: (i) of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and (e) any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   any trust: (i) of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and (e) any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   of which the party is, or has been since the separation of the parties, the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  ) of which the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  i) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party's child, spouse or de facto partner is, or has been since the separation of the parties, a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  ) over which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and   of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  ) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  i) of which the party has, or has had since the separation of the parties, the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and  ii) over which a corporation has, or has had since the separation of the parties, a power mentioned in subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party is a director or shareholder of the corporation, and   any gift or other disposition of property made by the party since the separation of the parties, and (f) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.
rule 24.04 production of documents (proceeding other than for maintenance only)   unless the court or a registrar otherwise orders, a party required under this part to file a financial statement or affidavit of financial circumstances (other than a respondent in a proceeding for maintenance only) must serve on each other party who has an address for service in the proceeding the following documents:   copies of the party's 3 most recent taxation returns, (b) copies of the party's 3 most recent taxation assessments, (c) if the party is a member of a superannuation plan: (i) if not already filed or exchanged--the completed superannuation information form for any superannuation interest of the party, and (ii) for a self-managed superannuation fund--the trust deed and copies of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund, (d) if the party has an australian business number, copies of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (e) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   if not already filed or exchanged--the completed superannuation information form for any superannuation interest of the party, and (ii) for a self-managed superannuation fund--the trust deed and copies of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund,  ) for a self-managed superannuation fund--the trust deed and copies of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund,   if the party has an australian business number, copies of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (e) if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   if there is a partnership, trust or company (except a public company) in which the party has an interest, copies of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   the documents must be served within 14 days after the first court date.
6.01 general duty of disclosure   subject to subrule (4), each party to a proceeding has a duty to the court and to each other party to give full and frank disclosure of all information relevant to the proceeding, in a timely manner.
note: the proceedings to which the duty of disclosure applies include both parenting proceedings and financial proceedings. failure to comply with the duty may result in the court excluding evidence that is not disclosed or imposing a consequence, including punishment for contempt of court.   the duty of disclosure applies from the start of the proceeding and continues until the proceeding is finalised.
note: parties are also expected to comply with the duty of disclosure when complying with the pre-action procedures.   the duty of disclosure also applies to a litigation guardian appointed under part 3.5. (4) this rule does not apply to a respondent to an application alleging contravention or contempt.   this rule does not apply to a respondent to an application alleging contravention or contempt.
... 6.06 duty of disclosure—financial proceedings   the duty of disclosure applies to a financial proceeding. (2) subrules (3) to (9) do not apply to a party to a property proceeding who is not a party to the marriage or de facto relationship to which the application relates, except to the extent that the party’s financial circumstances are relevant to the issues in dispute. (3) without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances, including the following: (a) the party’s earnings, including income that is paid or assigned to another party, person or legal entity,   subrules (3) to (9) do not apply to a party to a property proceeding who is not a party to the marriage or de facto relationship to which the application relates, except to the extent that the party’s financial circumstances are relevant to the issues in dispute. (3) without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances, including the following: (a) the party’s earnings, including income that is paid or assigned to another party, person or legal entity,   without limiting subrule (1), a party to a financial proceeding must make full and frank disclosure of the party’s financial circumstances, including the following: (a) the party’s earnings, including income that is paid or assigned to another party, person or legal entity,   the party’s earnings, including income that is paid or assigned to another party, person or legal entity,   any vested or contingent interest in property, (c) any vested or contingent interest in property owned by a legal entity that is fully or partially owned or controlled by a party, (d) any income earned by a legal entity fully or partially owned or controlled by a party, including income that is paid or assigned to any other party, person or legal entity, (e) the party’s other financial resources, (f) any trust:   any vested or contingent interest in property owned by a legal entity that is fully or partially owned or controlled by a party, (d) any income earned by a legal entity fully or partially owned or controlled by a party, including income that is paid or assigned to any other party, person or legal entity,   any income earned by a legal entity fully or partially owned or controlled by a party, including income that is paid or assigned to any other party, person or legal entity,  of which the party is the appointor or trustee, or (ii) of which the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation, (g) any disposal of property (whether by sale, transfer, assignment or gift) made by the party, a legal entity referred to in paragraph (c), a corporation or a trust referred to in paragraph (f) that may affect, defeat or deplete a claim: (i) in the 12 months immediately before the separation of the parties, or (ii) since the final separation of the parties,  ) of which the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income, or (iii) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,  i) of which a corporation is an eligible beneficiary as to capital or income if the party, or the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a shareholder or director of the corporation, or (iv) over which the party has any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,  ) over which the party has any direct or indirect power or control, or (v) of which the party has the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,   of which the party has the direct or indirect power to remove or appoint a trustee, or (vi) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,  ) of which the party has the power (whether subject to the concurrence of another person or not) to amend the terms, or (vii) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,  i) of which the party has the power to disapprove a proposed amendment of the terms or the appointment or removal of a trustee, or (viii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,  ii) over which a corporation has a power referred to in any of subparagraphs (iv) to (vii), if the party, the party’s child, spouse or de facto spouse is a director or shareholder of the corporation,   any disposal of property (whether by sale, transfer, assignment or gift) made by the party, a legal entity referred to in paragraph (c), a corporation or a trust referred to in paragraph (f) that may affect, defeat or deplete a claim: (i) in the 12 months immediately before the separation of the parties, or (ii) since the final separation of the parties,   in the 12 months immediately before the separation of the parties, or (ii) since the final separation of the parties,  ) since the final separation of the parties,   liabilities and contingent liabilities.   paragraph (3)(g) does not apply to a disposal of property made:   with the consent or knowledge of the other party, or (b) in the ordinary course of business.   a party starting, or filing a response or reply to, a financial proceeding (other than by an application for consent orders) must file, at the same time:   a financial statement, and (b) a financial questionnaire in the form approved by the chief executive officer.   a financial questionnaire in the form approved by the chief executive officer.   if a party is aware that the completion of a financial statement will not fully discharge the duty to make full and frank disclosure, the party must also file an affidavit giving further particulars. (7) if a party’s financial circumstances have changed significantly from the information set out in the financial statement or an affidavit filed under subrule (6), the party must, within 21 days after the change of circumstances, file:   if a party’s financial circumstances have changed significantly from the information set out in the financial statement or an affidavit filed under subrule (6), the party must, within 21 days after the change of circumstances, file:   a new financial statement, or (b) if the changes can be set out clearly in 300 words or less—an affidavit containing details about the party’s changed financial circumstances.   if the changes can be set out clearly in 300 words or less—an affidavit containing details about the party’s changed financial circumstances.   without limiting subrule (1), unless the court otherwise orders, a party (the first party) who is required by this rule to file a financial statement (other than a respondent to an application for maintenance only) must, before the first court date, serve on each other party who has an address for service in the proceeding the following documents:   a copy of the party’s 3 most recent taxation returns, (b) a copy of the party’s 3 most recent taxation assessments, (c) if the first party is a member of a superannuation plan: (i) the completed superannuation information form for any superannuation interest of the party (unless it has already been filed or exchanged), and (ii) for a self-managed superannuation fund—the trust deed and a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund, (d) if the party has an australian business number—a copy of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (e) if there is a partnership, trust or company (other than a public company) in which the party has an interest—a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   the completed superannuation information form for any superannuation interest of the party (unless it has already been filed or exchanged), and (ii) for a self-managed superannuation fund—the trust deed and a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund,  ) for a self-managed superannuation fund—the trust deed and a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements for the fund,   if the party has an australian business number—a copy of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (e) if there is a partnership, trust or company (other than a public company) in which the party has an interest—a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   if there is a partnership, trust or company (other than a public company) in which the party has an interest—a copy of the 3 most recent financial statements and the last 4 business activity statements lodged by the partnership, trust or company.   without limiting subrule (1), a respondent to an application for maintenance only must bring to the court on the first court date the following documents: (a) a copy of the respondent’s taxation return for the most recent financial year, (b) a copy of the respondent’s taxation assessment for the most recent financial year, (c) copies of the respondent’s bank records for the 12 months immediately before the date when the application was filed,   a copy of the respondent’s taxation return for the most recent financial year, (b) a copy of the respondent’s taxation assessment for the most recent financial year, (c) copies of the respondent’s bank records for the 12 months immediately before the date when the application was filed,   a copy of the respondent’s taxation assessment for the most recent financial year, (c) copies of the respondent’s bank records for the 12 months immediately before the date when the application was filed,   copies of the respondent’s bank records for the 12 months immediately before the date when the application was filed,   the respondent’s most recent pay slip, (e) if the respondent has an australian business number—a copy of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (f) any document in the respondent’s possession, custody or control that may assist the court in determining the income, needs and financial resources of the respondent.   if the respondent has an australian business number—a copy of the last 4 business activity statements lodged, (f) any document in the respondent’s possession, custody or control that may assist the court in determining the income, needs and financial resources of the respondent.   any document in the respondent’s possession, custody or control that may assist the court in determining the income, needs and financial resources of the respondent.  ) this rule does not require a party to be served with a document that has already been provided to the party.  ] the law to be applied and the approach that may be adopted in cases where, through the lack of a full and frank disclosure, the court is unable to fully ascertain the extent of a party's wealth, is well settled (see stein and stein [1986] famca 27, (1986) flc 91-779, 11 flr 353, mezzacappa and mezzacappa [1987] famca 20, (1987) flc 91-853, 11 flr 957, black and kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) flc 92-287, 15 flr 343 and weir and weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338, 16 flr 154). ... [70] in weir and weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338, 16 flr 154 the full court (nicholson cj, strauss and nygh jj) dealt with an appeal against the refusal by the trial judge to make orders in respect of unascertained property because he could not quantify it. the court said at flc 79,593:
it seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure, which follows from his honour's findings in this case, then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. to do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature.
it does not matter what the principal might be said to be, a court has to do the best it can. it does the best it can, having regard to the evidence that is adduced and if the parties are not frank naturally there is going to be a measure of imprecision about any findings that the court can make.  6] under well established guidelines (black and kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) flc 92-287 at 79,133-79,134, weir and weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338 at 79,592-79,595, chang v su [2002] famca 156, (2002) flc 93-117 at [28]- [32], [57]-[72]), property settlement orders may make more generous provision for one party if it is inferred the other party improperly failed to fully disclose his or her financial affairs..... in this case the wife has not disclosed her assets or her liabilities or her income or deficiency in her income if that is the case.
the company  23 september 2021] [i]t was also directed that [b pty ltd] be put on notice that it is not sought that they be joined as a party to the proceedings, despite orders being made which would materially impact on financial interests held by the company. the reason why [the husband] does not seek to join [b pty ltd] to the proceedings is founded upon his contention that you as the respondent wife and [b pty ltd] are in effect, "one and the same".
joining the company
rule 3.01 necessary parties a person whose rights may be directly affected by an issue in a proceeding, and whose participation as a party is necessary for the court to determine all issues in dispute in the proceeding, must be included as a party to the proceeding.
example: if a party seeks an order of a kind referred to in section 90ae or 90af of the family law act, a third party who will be bound by the order must be joined as a respondent to the proceeding.
... rule 3.05 party may apply to be removed   a party to a proceeding may apply to the court to be removed as a party by filing an application in a proceeding.   the party must file an affidavit stating:   the relationship (if any) of the applicant to each other party, and (b) the evidence in support of the application.   the party must serve a copy of the application and affidavit on each other party to the proceeding.
the court orders that: on or before 4:00pm on 8 february 2022 the applicant file any short written submissions concerning whether or not [b pty ltd] should be:   joined to the proceedings as the second respondent, and (b) ordered to file any submissions or response within 30 days of being joined as the second respondent.   ordered to file any submissions or response within 30 days of being joined as the second respondent.
and the court notes that: the alter ego submissions of the applicant is acknowledged and has not been determined. b. judgment remains reserved. ...
the court orders that: [b pty ltd] be added as a party to these proceedings and be known as the second respondent. as soon as practical the solicitors for the applicant serve upon the second respondent by registered post to the registered office of the second respondent the following documents:  the order of 8 october 2020. (b) the order of 26 may 2021. (c) the order of 25 january 2022. (d) this order. (e) the amended outline of case of the applicant as provided on 7 october 2021. (f) the third amended application filed 11 august 2021. (g) the submissions of the applicant filed on 8 february 2022. (h) the letter to the respondent as director of [b pty ltd] dated 27 september 2021 (being annexure [-1] to the affidavit of [mr j] filed 4 october 2021.) as soon as practical the solicitors for the applicant file and serve, by email to the applicant and by ordinary post to the registered address of the second respondent, an affidavit of service of the documents described at paragraph 2 above of these orders. on or before 4.00pm on 26 april 2022 the second respondent file and serve a notice of address for service and any response or evidence sought to be relied on. in the event such documents are not filed the matter proceed as undefended against the respondents.  the amended outline of case of the applicant as provided on 7 october 2021.   the letter to the respondent as director of [b pty ltd] dated 27 september 2021 (being annexure [-1] to the affidavit of [mr j] filed 4 october 2021.)
and the court notes that: the matter proceeded against the respondent, [ms connor], on an undefended basis on 23 september 2021 and 7 october 2021. b. judgment remains reserved. ...
documents relied upon
husband's evidence and case
... contributions initial contributions
7. as at cohabitation, the husband had no assets or liabilities of significance.
8. the wife owned the assets outlined above. the wife also owned an apartment in [m street, suburb n] which was sold for $1.5million in july 2018 (as deposed to at paragraph 31 of the husband’s affidavit filed 21 may 2021).
contributions during the relationship during the relationship, the husband worked long hours in the wife’s [stores] and was underpaid during his employment. the husband completed extensive renovations to the wife’s [stores] for no additional pay.
12. the husband paid the wife the sum of $350 per week during cohabitation. the husband contributed by way of homemaker and caring for the wife when she was unwell. the husband abandoned his application for sponsorship with his employer in victoria when the wife suggested that the parties marry and apply for a spouse visa. the husband also gave up his rights to live and work in [country o] when he married the wife and did not return to [country o] to renew his visa. relevant 75(2) factors and furture needs section 75(2)(a) – the age and state of health of each of the parties the husband is 49 years of age and the wife is 60 years of age. the husband suffers from anxiety and depression. the wife also has a history of mental health issues but those details are unknown. ...
the applicable law
section 79 alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,
including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:   an order requiring:  either or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ) an order made under subsection (1) in property settlement proceedings may, after the death of a party to the marriage, be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party. (1b) the court may adjourn property settlement proceedings, except where the parties to the marriage are: (a) parties to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings, or (ba) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   parties to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings, or (ba) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) parties to a marriage who have divorced under the law of an overseas country, where that divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) parties to a marriage that has been annulled under the law of an overseas country, where that annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   parties to a marriage who have been granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country, where that legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,
on such terms and conditions as it considers appropriate, for such period as it considers necessary to enable the parties to the marriage to consider the likely effects (if any) of an order under this section on the marriage or the children of the marriage, but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to limit any other power of the court to adjourn such proceedings.  ) where the period for which a court has adjourned property settlement proceedings as provided by subsection (1b) has not expired and: (a) divorce or validity of marriage proceedings are instituted by one or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ba) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   divorce or validity of marriage proceedings are instituted by one or both of the parties to the marriage, or (ba) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) the parties to the marriage have divorced under the law of an overseas country and the divorce is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (bb) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,  ) the marriage is annulled under the law of an overseas country and the annulment is recognised as valid in australia under section 104, or (c) the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,   the parties to the marriage are granted a legal separation under the law of an overseas country and the legal separation is recognised as valid in australia under section 104,
a party to the first-mentioned proceedings may apply to the court for the hearing of those proceedings to be continued.   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
......   without limiting the power of any court to grant an adjournment in proceedings under this act, where, in property settlement proceedings, a court is of the opinion: (a) that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of the parties to the marriage or either of them and that, having regard to the time when that change is likely to take place, it is reasonable to adjourn the proceedings, and   that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of the parties to the marriage or either of them and that, having regard to the time when that change is likely to take place, it is reasonable to adjourn the proceedings, and   that an order that the court could make with respect to:  the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (ii) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, if that significant change in financial circumstances occurs is more likely to do justice as between the parties to the marriage than an order that the court could make immediately with respect to: (iii) the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,  ) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,  ) the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage,
the court may, if so requested by either party to the marriage or the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any), adjourn the proceedings until such time, before the expiration of a period specified by the court, as that party to the marriage or the relevant bankruptcy trustee, as the case may be, applies for the proceedings to be determined, but nothing in this subsection requires the court to adjourn any proceedings in any particular circumstances.   where a court proposes to adjourn proceedings as provided by subsection (5), the court may, before so adjourning the proceedings, make such interim order or orders or such other order or orders (if any) as it considers appropriate with respect to: (a) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or of either of them, or (b) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage. (7) the court may, in forming an opinion for the purposes of subsection (5) as to whether there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of either or both of the parties to the marriage, have regard to any change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage that may occur by reason that the party to the marriage: (a) is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   any of the property of the parties to the marriage or of either of them, or (b) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage.   any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage.   the court may, in forming an opinion for the purposes of subsection (5) as to whether there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of either or both of the parties to the marriage, have regard to any change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage that may occur by reason that the party to the marriage: (a) is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   is a contributor to a superannuation fund or scheme, or participates in any scheme or arrangement that is in the nature of a superannuation scheme, or (b) may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,   may become entitled to property as the result of the exercise in his or her favour, by the trustee of a discretionary trust, of a power to distribute trust property,
but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to limit the circumstances in which the court may form the opinion that there is likely to be a significant change in the financial circumstances of a party to the marriage.   where, before property settlement proceedings are completed, a party to the marriage dies: (a) the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   the proceedings may be continued by or against, as the case may be, the legal personal representative of the deceased party and the applicable rules of court may make provision in relation to the substitution of the legal personal representative as a party to the proceedings,   if the court is of the opinion: (i) that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,   that it would have made an order with respect to property if the deceased party had not died, and (ii) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,  ) that it is still appropriate to make an order with respect to property,
the court may make such order as it considers appropriate with respect to: (iii) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and (c) an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.  i) any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or (iv) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and  ) any of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the marriage, and   an order made by the court pursuant to paragraph (b) may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party.   the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1), or a family court of a state, shall not make an order under this section in property settlement proceedings (other than an order until further order or an order made with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings) unless: (a) the parties to the proceedings have attended a conference in relation to the matter to which the proceedings relate: (i) in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or (b) the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a). (10) the following are entitled to become a party to proceedings in which an application is made for an order under this section by a party to a marriage (the subject marriage ): (a) a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,   the parties to the proceedings have attended a conference in relation to the matter to which the proceedings relate: (i) in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or (b) the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).   in the case of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1)--with the chief executive officer, or a senior registrar or registrar of the court, or (ii) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or  ) in the case of the family court of that state--with a senior registrar or registrar of that family court, or   the court is satisfied that, having regard to the need to make an order urgently, or to any other special circumstance, it is appropriate to make the order notwithstanding that the parties to the proceedings have not attended a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a), or (c) the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).   the court is satisfied that it is not practicable to require the parties to the proceedings to attend a conference as mentioned in paragraph (a).  ) the following are entitled to become a party to proceedings in which an application is made for an order under this section by a party to a marriage (the subject marriage ): (a) a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,   a creditor of a party to the proceedings if the creditor may not be able to recover his or her debt if the order were made,  ) a person: (i) who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the subject marriage, and (ii) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship, (ab) a person who is a party to a part viiiab financial agreement (that is binding on the person) with a party to the subject marriage, (b) any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.   who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the subject marriage, and (ii) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship,  ) who could apply, or has an application pending, for an order under section 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship,  ) a person who is a party to a part viiiab financial agreement (that is binding on the person) with a party to the subject marriage, (b) any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.   any other person whose interests would be affected by the making of the order.  a) subsection (10) does not apply to a creditor of a party to the proceedings: (a) if the party is a bankrupt--to the extent to which the debt is a provable debt (within the meaning of the bankruptcy act 1966 ), or (b) if the party is a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement--to the extent to which the debt is covered by the personal insolvency agreement. (10b) if a person becomes a party to proceedings under this section because of paragraph (10)(aa), the person may, in the proceedings, apply for:   if the party is a bankrupt--to the extent to which the debt is a provable debt (within the meaning of the bankruptcy act 1966 ), or (b) if the party is a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement--to the extent to which the debt is covered by the personal insolvency agreement.   if the party is a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement--to the extent to which the debt is covered by the personal insolvency agreement.   an order under section 90sm, or (b) a declaration under section 90sl, in relation to the de facto relationship described in that paragraph.  ) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and   an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and   either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage:  when the application was made, the party was a bankrupt, (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party became a bankrupt, and (c) the bankruptcy trustee applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,  ) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party became a bankrupt, and   the bankruptcy trustee applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   the court is satisfied that the interests of the bankrupt's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,
the court must join the bankruptcy trustee as a party to the proceedings.  ) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to property settlement proceedings, then, except with the leave of the court, the bankrupt party to the marriage is not entitled to make a submission to the court in connection with any vested bankruptcy property in relation to the bankrupt party. (13) the court must not grant leave under subsection (12) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (14) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,  ) the court must not grant leave under subsection (12) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (14) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,  ) if: (a) an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   an application is made for an order under this section in proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   either of the following subparagraphs apply to a party to the marriage (the debtor party ): (i) when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and (c) the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   when the application was made, the party was a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, or (ii) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and  ) after the application was made but before it is finally determined, the party becomes a debtor subject to a personal insolvency agreement, and   the trustee of the agreement applies to the court to be joined as a party to the proceedings, and (d) the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,   the court is satisfied that the interests of the debtor party's creditors may be affected by the making of an order under this section in the proceedings,
the court must join the trustee of the agreement as a party to the proceedings.  ) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to property settlement proceedings, then, except with the leave of the court, the party to the marriage who is the debtor subject to the agreement is not entitled to make a submission to the court in connection with any property subject to the agreement. (16) the court must not grant leave under subsection (15) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (17) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:  ) the court must not grant leave under subsection (15) unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances. (17) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:  ) for the purposes of subsections (11) and (14), an application for an order under this section is taken to be finally determined when:   the application is withdrawn or dismissed, or (b) an order (other than an interim order) is made as a result of the application. by section 79(4)(e) the shopping list of largely prospective factors of section 75(2), that are the same factors to be considered when considering spousal maintenance, are to be had regard to. section 75(2) provides as follows:   an order (other than an interim order) is made as a result of the application. by section 79(4)(e) the shopping list of largely prospective factors of section 75(2), that are the same factors to be considered when considering spousal maintenance, are to be had regard to. section 75(2) provides as follows:
section 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance   in exercising jurisdiction under section 74, the court shall take into account only the matters referred to in subsection (2). (2) the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   himself or herself, and (ii) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and a) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to:  a party to the marriage, or (ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (na) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and (o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 74, a court shall disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. (4) in this section:   in this section:
"party" means a party to the marriage concerned. the court has wide powers as set out as section 80 of the act: section 80 general powers of court   the court, in exercising its powers under this part, may do any or all of the following: (a) order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by instalments,   order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic sum, (ba) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order, (e) appoint or remove trustees, (f) order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order, (i) impose terms and conditions, (j) make an order by consent, (k) make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.  ) order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a party to a marriage, (c) order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payment of any sum ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured in such manner as the court directs, (d) order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that any necessary deed or instrument be executed and that such documents of title be produced or such other things be done as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order,   order that payments be made direct to a party to the marriage, to a trustee to be appointed or into court or to a public authority for the benefit of a party to the marriage, (h) make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make a permanent order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings or an order for a fixed term or for a life or during joint lives or until further order,   make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice, and (l) subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   subject to this act and the applicable rules of court, make an order under this part at any time before or after the making of a decree under another part.   the making of an order of a kind referred to in paragraph (1)(ba), or of any other order under this part, in relation to the maintenance of a party to a marriage does not prevent a court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the party. (3) the applicable rules of court may make provision with respect to the making of orders under this part in relation to the maintenance of parties to marriages (whether as to their form or otherwise) for the purpose of facilitating their enforcement and the collection of maintenance payable under them. (4) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   the applicable rules of court may make provision with respect to the making of orders under this part in relation to the maintenance of parties to marriages (whether as to their form or otherwise) for the purpose of facilitating their enforcement and the collection of maintenance payable under them. (4) if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   if a bankruptcy trustee is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the bankrupt. (5) if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   if the trustee of a personal insolvency agreement is a party to a proceeding before the court, the court may make an order under paragraph (1)(d) directed to the debtor subject to the agreement.   subsections (4) and (5) do not limit paragraph (1)(d).
just and equitable and the preferred approach ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”. the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) – the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) – ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) – the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
step one: identify the property pool.
the principles if the shareholding is a controlling one, the value appropriate for family court purposes will generally be fairly easily determined. in mallet v mallet (1984) flc 91-507, at p 79,115, (1984) 156 c.l.r. 605, at pp 616 and 617, gibbs c.j. said:
“... where, however, a company is merely a convenient means of holding the assets, and the person who owns the shareholding in question is able to put the company into liquidation at will, the real value of the shares will be likely to be the amount which the holder would receive if the company were voluntarily wound up. and since the purpose for which a valuation is made may affect the court's attitude (commissioner of succession duties (sa) v. executor trustee and agency co. of south australia limited (1947) 74 c.l.r. at pp. 373-374), there is much to be said for the view that court will be more ready to value shares on a liquidation basis in a case such as the present than in a revenue or even in a compensation case.”
in such cases there is also usually no concern about the ability of the shareholder to realise the value ascribed to the shares.
in this case
apparent equity $ 400,000
husband net assets (10,700)
step two: contribution
step three: section 75(2) factors
step four: conclusion, calculations and just and equitable?
application for costs
section 117 costs   subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and
...
associate: dated: 15 july 2022
dated: 15 july 2022