last updated: 25 august 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wolfe & varni [2022] fedcfamc2f 937
orders
the court orders:
costs
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction  an issue as to the father’s paternity of x, and (b) a hearing of the application – contravention filed by the father on 9 january 2018.   a hearing of the application – contravention filed by the father on 9 january 2018.   cohabitation under section 69q of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), (b) the registration of birth under section 69r of the act, and (c) a finding of the court inherent in the orders of 31 december 2013 under section 69s of the act, would justify the making of a declaration of parentage naming the father as the natural father of x even without the father’s consent. i will make the declaration with the final orders at the end of these reasons.   the registration of birth under section 69r of the act, and (c) a finding of the court inherent in the orders of 31 december 2013 under section 69s of the act, would justify the making of a declaration of parentage naming the father as the natural father of x even without the father’s consent. i will make the declaration with the final orders at the end of these reasons.   a finding of the court inherent in the orders of 31 december 2013 under section 69s of the act, would justify the making of a declaration of parentage naming the father as the natural father of x even without the father’s consent. i will make the declaration with the final orders at the end of these reasons.
would justify the making of a declaration of parentage naming the father as the natural father of x even without the father’s consent. i will make the declaration with the final orders at the end of these reasons.
the proceedings   during school term each alternate week from after school friday until start of school on monday, (b) each other alternate week from the end of school on thursday until 8:00pm that evening, (c) for half of the school holiday, and (d) on special occasions such as easter, christmas, father’s day and her father’s birthday.   each other alternate week from the end of school on thursday until 8:00pm that evening, (c) for half of the school holiday, and (d) on special occasions such as easter, christmas, father’s day and her father’s birthday.   for half of the school holiday, and (d) on special occasions such as easter, christmas, father’s day and her father’s birthday.   on special occasions such as easter, christmas, father’s day and her father’s birthday.   the mother provide to the father copies of the child’s school reports and school photographs, (b) the mother be solely responsible for obtaining an australian passport for the child, to be retained by the mother, (c) the mother be permitted to travel with the child outside the commonwealth of australia without the consent of the father, and (d) the father be restrained from approaching attending or contacting the child’s school.   the mother be solely responsible for obtaining an australian passport for the child, to be retained by the mother, (c) the mother be permitted to travel with the child outside the commonwealth of australia without the consent of the father, and (d) the father be restrained from approaching attending or contacting the child’s school.   the mother be permitted to travel with the child outside the commonwealth of australia without the consent of the father, and (d) the father be restrained from approaching attending or contacting the child’s school.   the father be restrained from approaching attending or contacting the child’s school.
a. all of the exhibits entered in the matter so far, b. copies of the parties trial affidavits being:
i. the affidavit of the mother sworn 18 february 2019, ii. the affidavit of the father sworn 5 july 2019, and iii. the affidavit of [mr g] sworn 17 february 2019,
for consideration by [dr d] in preparation for the next occasion. direct that at 10:00am on 3 april 2020, the respondent father produce to the legal representatives for the applicant mother, in answer to the calls made during the hearing to date, the copy held by him of [dr d]’s report dated 25 september 2018, and left by him in [town e] during the hearing to date, and referred to him during his evidence in cross-examination, and his statement or report from the child support agency in relation to the current arrears owed by him of child support payable by him for [x], received by him within the last few weeks, as referred to by him in his evidence in cross-examination. the matter is adjourned part heard to 10:00am on 3 april 2020. grant leave to the independent child’s lawyer to relist the matter before the court on the giving of 5 days notice to the court, and to the parties, as to the matters in relation to which the relisting is made. up to and including the making of final orders in this matter, and following delivery of judgment, the respondent father is restrained from approaching or attending the school of the child [x], born [2012], being [b school, b street, suburb c].
the orders sought
the material relied upon at hearing   outline of case document prepared by mr campton sc (exhibit a1), (2) amended initiating application filed 19 february 2019, (3) the affidavit of the mother, sworn or affirmed 18 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019, together with the exhibits to the affidavit (totalling 532 pages of exhibits),[3] and (4) the affidavit of mr g, sworn or affirmed on 17 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019.   amended initiating application filed 19 february 2019, (3) the affidavit of the mother, sworn or affirmed 18 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019, together with the exhibits to the affidavit (totalling 532 pages of exhibits),[3] and (4) the affidavit of mr g, sworn or affirmed on 17 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019.   the affidavit of the mother, sworn or affirmed 18 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019, together with the exhibits to the affidavit (totalling 532 pages of exhibits),[3] and (4) the affidavit of mr g, sworn or affirmed on 17 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019.   the affidavit of mr g, sworn or affirmed on 17 february 2019 and filed 19 february 2019.   exhibit a4 – being a final apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) for the protection of the mother from the father made 7 march 2019 for a period of 12 months in the suburb al local court, (b) exhibit a5 – being a print of an email from the father to the mother’s solicitors, copied to the icl, dated 24 june 2019, (c) exhibit a6 – being a two page print out from the child support agency in relation to the current administrative assessment of child support payable by the father to the mother for 1 august 2019 to 31 august 2019 and statement of arrears, (d) exhibit a7 – being documents produced on subpoena by the department of justice being pages marked with blue or purple tags, (e) exhibit a8 – being material produced on subpoena by ao hospital being documents marked with purple tags, (f) exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a5 – being a print of an email from the father to the mother’s solicitors, copied to the icl, dated 24 june 2019, (c) exhibit a6 – being a two page print out from the child support agency in relation to the current administrative assessment of child support payable by the father to the mother for 1 august 2019 to 31 august 2019 and statement of arrears, (d) exhibit a7 – being documents produced on subpoena by the department of justice being pages marked with blue or purple tags, (e) exhibit a8 – being material produced on subpoena by ao hospital being documents marked with purple tags, (f) exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a6 – being a two page print out from the child support agency in relation to the current administrative assessment of child support payable by the father to the mother for 1 august 2019 to 31 august 2019 and statement of arrears, (d) exhibit a7 – being documents produced on subpoena by the department of justice being pages marked with blue or purple tags, (e) exhibit a8 – being material produced on subpoena by ao hospital being documents marked with purple tags, (f) exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a7 – being documents produced on subpoena by the department of justice being pages marked with blue or purple tags, (e) exhibit a8 – being material produced on subpoena by ao hospital being documents marked with purple tags, (f) exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a8 – being material produced on subpoena by ao hospital being documents marked with purple tags, (f) exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a9 – being documents produced on subpoena by nsw police being documents marked with purple tags, (g) exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a10 – being prints of five emails from the father to the mother’s solicitor and the independent child’s lawyer dated 4 and 22 october 2019, 22 april 2020 and 17 december 2020, and one from the father to the mother’s solicitor dated 22 december 2020, (h) exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a11 – being prints from the child support agency website of the assessments from 1 september 2019 to 28 february 2022 of the arrears owed, and some past payments in relation to the father’s payments to the mother through the agency of child support for x, (i) exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a12 – being a schedule of the mother’s costs claimed in relation to the father’s application - contravention filed 9 january 2018 and for 4 march 2019 regarding the parentage testing issue, and (j) exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   exhibit a13 – being written submissions prepared by mr campton sc.   case outline document (exhibit r1), (2) his response filed 27 july 2018, and (3) his affidavit sworn filed on 5 july 2019.   his response filed 27 july 2018, and (3) his affidavit sworn filed on 5 july 2019.   his affidavit sworn filed on 5 july 2019.   exhibit r3 – being a document headed “company as” relating to the hire of ski equipment, (b) exhibit r4 – being a bundle of documents from company at, being five service tax invoices and six cash register receipts, and (c) exhibit r5 – being three empty australia post express post satchels each addressed to x and each marked “return to sender”.   exhibit r4 – being a bundle of documents from company at, being five service tax invoices and six cash register receipts, and (c) exhibit r5 – being three empty australia post express post satchels each addressed to x and each marked “return to sender”.   exhibit r5 – being three empty australia post express post satchels each addressed to x and each marked “return to sender”.   exhibit icl2 – being the expert’s report by dr d dated 25 september 2018, (b) exhibit icl3 – being an email from the independent child’s lawyer to the father dated 3 september 2020, and (c) exhibit icl4 – being a letter dated 13 september 2019 from dr d to the independent child’s lawyer setting out quotes for a supplementary report based on documents provided, and for attendance for cross-examination at the hearing.   exhibit icl3 – being an email from the independent child’s lawyer to the father dated 3 september 2020, and (c) exhibit icl4 – being a letter dated 13 september 2019 from dr d to the independent child’s lawyer setting out quotes for a supplementary report based on documents provided, and for attendance for cross-examination at the hearing.   exhibit icl4 – being a letter dated 13 september 2019 from dr d to the independent child’s lawyer setting out quotes for a supplementary report based on documents provided, and for attendance for cross-examination at the hearing.
credit finding
mr campton sc: so you know that [ms wolfe] is also seeking orders that you pay the costs that were thrown away by her in having to come to court on 4 may 2019, don’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: right. because that was unnecessary, wasn’t it? father: well, it would seem so now. mr campton sc: yes? father: yes. mr campton sc: and you had signed [x]’s birth certificate? father: yes. mr campton sc: and in fact, you’ve got a copy of her birth certificate in your exhibits, haven’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: right. and you even had the birth certificate translated into italian, didn’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and you also put [x]’s baptismal certificate in your exhibits, didn’t you? father: that’s correct, yes. mr campton sc yes. and so you’ve known ever since she was born that you were the father, didn’t you? father: i would say so, yes. mr campton sc: and so i would suggest to you that what you were trying to do on 4 march before the court was twofold. first of all, you were trying to avoid and ensure that the hearing dates allocated in this court later in march were vacated because you hadn’t done your affidavit. do you agree or disagree with that? father: yes, i agree. mr campton sc: yes. and you were using the fact of the parenting testing as a device to have those trial dates vacated? father: no. no that’s not correct mr campton sc: and nextly, this was a further methodology of causing anxiety or upsetting or intimidating [ms wolfe], wasn’t it? father: well, i – i don’t think so. mr campton sc: well? father: no, that’s no, that wasn’t my intention. mr campton sc: well, did you think about it? father: no. mr campton sc: you knew you were the father of [x] when you sought the parentage testing order, didn’t you? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: right. it was a mischief to seek the order, wasn’t it? father: no. it was a truth – our truism. mr campton sc: sorry? father: it was a truth. mr campton sc: it was a truth? father: yes. seeking the truth. no mischief. mr campton sc: but you knew you were the father anyway? father: well, i – i wasn’t certain. mr campton sc: you were as certain as you could be, weren’t you? father: i was as certain as i could be, yes. [7]
mr campton sc: can you go to paragraph 54 on page 10. have you found that? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. so [dr d] records there that he asked you if you had anger management problems? father: yes. mr campton sc: do you accept that he did do that? father: yes. mr campton sc: and that you responded that it was a gland issue, something about the thyroid? father: yes. mr campton sc: that’s just nonsense, isn’t it? father: no. no, it’s not. there’s a hereditary condition in my family. and i’ve noticed with my sister, she gets quite short. and i thought it – it might have been – because it’s a late-onset degenerative disease or condition, and i thought that it may have been something that i was experiencing. mr campton sc: i want to suggest to you that nowhere in your evidence or [dr d] did you say that you’ve had any treatment for anything relating to an abnormal thyroid? father: that’s right. yes, i didn’t. mr campton sc: yes? father: it was still undergoing investigation from doctors. mr campton sc: who’s investigating it? father: i’ve had a couple of gps look into it. i – i can’t remember which. mr campton sc: who are they? father: well, i – i was between, at the time, two cities. so it – it may... mr campton sc: i just asked their names. who are they? one doctor – what’s his name? father: doctor – geez, he’s well known in [town e]. that’s embarrassing.[8]
mr campton sc: [dr d] records that you told him that [ms wolfe] had had visits from strangers that you didn’t know, is that right? that’s what he records. that’s what you told him, isn’t it? father: i thought she said she was isolated. mr campton sc: sir, i’m just recording – i’m putting to you what [dr d] has recorded that you told him in paragraph 40. you told him that [ms wolfe] had visits from strangers that you didn’t know? father: that’s right.[9]
mr campton sc: yes. and then in paragraph 115, he records – i think you said that because you saw [x], that a finger scan or a retinal scan of [x] wasn’t required? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: yes. he records this in paragraph 115: he asked you why you needed all this confirmation about [x]’s identity and that you said it was just the way society was moving. and then he has this statement: that you recently had blood tests, you needed to re-confirm your identity due to the paranoia in society. what blood tests did you have? father: which – which statement was – sorry. mr campton sc: yes. look at 115. second sentence. a record that you told [dr d] that you had recently had blood tests to re-confirm your identity. when did that happen? father: geez, i – i don’t even recall making that statement. i have had some blood tests recently, though. mr campton sc: well, this would have been prior to september 2018? father: yes. i – i was getting a series of blood tests for various conditions, so... mr campton sc: to re-confirm your identity. why were you concerned about your identity? father: i really don’t know. i...i... mr campton sc: okay? father: i don’t recall making this statement. mr campton sc: who was the doctor who undertook the blood tests? father: i have had several doctors take blood tests. [n] medical centre at the hospital, [o street]. i’ve had a blood test since being – residing in [town e] from the – [p] pathology, and i think [suburb q] – [suburb q] medical centre as well. mr campton sc: sir, in paragraph 61 of [dr d]’s report, he says this:   varni] went on to explain that it had been hard to begin dating again because of [ms wolfe]’s strong reputation in town.
did you say that to him? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes? father: yes. mr campton sc: he says you also explained:
everywhere she goes, i feel like i’m a stain.
did you say that to him? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and he records that you said that this included the [region r], [suburb s], [suburb t], [suburb u], [suburb v], but not [town e]? father: yes. i was – i was frequenting those places quite a bit... mr campton sc: yes? father: when i was in sydney. yes. mr campton sc: so what you were telling [dr d] was that the fact of your relationship with ms wolfe was known throughout the [region r], [suburb s], [suburb t], [suburb u] and [suburb v]? father: yes. i would say so. mr campton sc: sir, do you think, sitting there with the benefit of hindsight, that really there might have been a degree of paranoia about that? father: i don’t think so. mr campton sc: okay? father: not – not when someone holds a position as public as that, as – as – and as intimate as [tradesperson] in the community. a lot gets said in the local [workplaces]. you ask – ask anybody. mr campton sc: okay. all right. his honour: [region r] and suburb s – a [tradesperson] in [region r], word will get back to [suburb s]? father: well, it depends on where they – where that person may frequent. mr campton sc: okay. father: at the time, [ms wolfe] was going between [region r] – i – i believe working at [region r] – had – had a workplace at [region r] and had a university campus that she attended at [suburb s]. so... mr campton sc: okay. father:...you know, both places house people that socialise. so...[10]
mr campton sc: now, in paragraph 43 of [dr d]’s reports, he records that you complained it was necessary for you to pay a service to find information about your daughter. is that true? father: pay a service? mr campton sc: yes? father: which paragraph is that? mr campton sc: 43 on page 9? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. so who was the service you paid to find out information?‑ father: i – i haven’t paid a service. it’s just a general sweeping statement based on the events. mr campton sc: don’t you think that it would have been pretty terrifying even for [ms wolfe] to read in this report that [dr d] had reported that you said you had paid a service to find out information? father: that’s his reporting. objection. i’m not responsible for what he puts in his report. mr campton sc: i wasn’t really asking about that, [mr varni]. i was asking if you think that might have been pretty terrifying for [ms wolfe] to know that? father: again, objection. i’m not responsible for what he states in his report. his honour: that’s not an answer to the question. and if you’re objecting to the question, i’m overruling your objection. so please answer the question? father: it may have been.[11]
mr campton sc: page 9 of the second tab – or third tab in the exhibits, an email. this is an email from you to my client, 25 december 2016. so let’s just put that in time. this is three years after you’ve separated:
you seem to forget that when you pass away, she will be staying with me. that’s why it’s important. your two-minute fling won’t exist when you unexpectedly pass on. consider this and consider your selfish actions, foolish.
mr campton sc: you sent that email, didn’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: sir – and what you were doing in that email was threatening my client’s life, weren’t you? father: no. mr campton sc: there can be no other construction to it, can there? father: there can be. [ms wolfe] is a smoker. was a smoker. his honour: and why would that make her unexpectedly pass on? father: well, i’ve seen people just unexpectedly appear with terminal cancer in my lifetime. i – i just assume that, you know, it might be something that we may have to look out for since her habit was – it was quite – quite frequent. i – i – i saw her smoking many cigarettes. his honour: unexpectedly contracting cancer is not unexpectedly passing on, is it? father i don’t agree. mr campton sc: can you look at page 244 of the text messages. have you found that? father: yes. mr campton sc: [ms wolfe] is saying to you:
but how many times do i have to tell you i’m not in love with you. i don’t want to be with you. just move on, [mr varni]. god, it has been ages. i don’t know why you think we’re still getting back together.
and your response is:
why do you want to live this way? it will hurt your daughter and the strangers you meet. i’m always going to be there. you will never have something meaningful with another man, and your daughter will never feel like her life is perfect.
what you’re trying to do there is again coerce my client into reconciling with you well after you’ve separated, isn’t it? father: yes. yes, that’s what i was doing.[12]
mr campton sc: sir, have you thought for one moment about how all of these messages that we’ve identified in the evidence will make [ms wolfe] feel? father: no. not at all. the reason is because she has hired counsel to represent her. i – i don’t feel that there’s a need. his honour: that’s not an answer to the question. have you thought at all about how all of these messages that have been identified would make [ms wolfe] feel? father: when i had a chance to read all of these messages by myself, i did have an emotional response and i – i was surprised at some of the messages that i had sent, yes.[13]
his honour: [mr varni], when i repeated mr campton’s question to you about having your attention directed to all of those messages and how did you think that made [ms wolfe] feel, your answer to me, when you eventually gave one, was wholly and solely about how they made you feel when you re-read them? father: yes, your honour. his honour: do you understand that? father: yes, your honour. his honour: you didn’t give me any answer about how you think they would have made [ms wolfe] feel. now, what’s your answer to that? how do you think they would have made [ms wolfe] feel, not you? father: annoyed. annoyed.[14]
mr campton sc: so you decide you will kick him? father: yes. mr campton sc: you break his finger? father: i don’t agree. mr campton sc: you don’t think you broke his finger? father: i can’t be certain. mr campton sc: you accept that his finger was broken, don’t you? father: well, it may have been, may have been existing. mr campton sc: well, you pleaded guilty to the police facts at court about him having a broken finger out of the incident from the kick, aren’t you? father: i also stated in the police facts that mr – that [mr g] might have had an existing injury. his honour: he may have been sitting there with a broken finger? father: it’s possible. [15]
mr campton sc: there’s then a police event record of 2011, so 2011? father: yes. mr campton sc: and it records you just ended a relationship with this woman. who that would have been – [ms w]? father: that would have been [ms w]. yes. mr campton sc: okay. and it records that you were sending multiple text messages to [ms w]? father: yes. mr campton sc: and she attended the police station to find out how to get it to stop? father: yes. mr campton sc: right? father: yes, that’s right. mr campton sc: you remember that happened? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. and do you remember that the police contacted you and asked you to stop? father: yes, yes. mr campton sc: and the – there’s another event record from 2011 recording that [ms w] would come home and there would be gifts on her doorstep. do you remember doing that? father: yes. mr campton sc: and then she was employed at [employer y] in [suburb z], was she? father: yes, from what i can remember, yes. mr campton sc: yes. and in 2011, it’s recorded that you put on a social media post all photographs of the house next door to [ms w]’s that was up for lease? father: well, i needed a place to live and i thought, you know, live close to people you know. yes. mr campton sc: so what had happened was that you had decided that you were going to apply to lease the property right next door to [ms w]’s? father: no, no, that’s a false claim. i – it wasn’t the first place that i looked at. i looked at several other places before pursuing that place.[16]
mr campton sc: can you see that some of the issues that arose with the terms of the relationship between you and your prior girlfriends or partners have a similarity with some of the issues that currently resonate in the relationship you have with [ms wolfe]? father: have you lived with [ms wolfe]? his honour: not an answer to the question. mr campton sc: i haven’t. but can you see a similarity about that? father: yes.[17]
mr sperling: sir, carrying on from that, when you were asked some questions, you were asked about going to the police to have the mother charged with perjury? father: yes. mr sperling: okay. and you said, “not just [ms wolfe] but a complaint of perjury generally”? father: yes. mr sperling: who were you referring to as to “not just [ms wolfe]”? father: well... mr sperling: i’m just asking you the names of the people? father: i don’t know names of people. it’s... mr sperling: okay? father:...very hard to pinpoint exactly where it was – who it was. mr sperling: what do you understand to be meant by a complaint of perjury? father: well, changing – changing a document to influence an outcome. mr sperling: changing a document to influence an outcome? father: yes. mr sperling: okay. and, in relation to that, you talk about a document that has been provided to the court or... father: yes. mr sperling:...swear documents, something like that? father: yes. mr sperling: okay. so you’re saying it’s not just [ms wolfe] but somebody else? father: could be, yes. mr sperling: could be? father: yes. mr sperling: well, it’s your complaint, sir. all i’m asking you is what you – who you’re complaining did it? father: well, i can’t – i can’t say because i had only suspicions and i have no – yes, no evidence. mr sperling: is that in relation to the email that you were referring to, the hotmail account? father: yes. mr sperling: was it referring to something else? father: i can’t remember. i can’t remember. mr sperling: it could have been? father: it’s possible, yes. i just...i just... mr sperling: other documents? father: yes, it’s possible. his honour: it’s possible but you made the complaint? father: i know. but... his honour: you can’t remember what your complaint was? father: it was a long time ago. his honour: it was last year, wasn’t it? father: yes but a lot has happened since last year, between now and last year. his honour: do you make regular complaints to the police about perjury? father: no, not...not regular. just when...just when... his honour: well, it’s something that you would be likely to remember the detail of if you were making a complaint to police, wouldn’t it? father: i am sensitive with things. if i notice a change in my phone that i haven’t made or a change in...like, in the... his honour: no, i didn’t ask you about that, i’m asking you about your lack of memory of what you were complaining about? father: i... his honour: the hotmail account? father: yes. his honour: mr sperling asked you if there was any other matter and your indication was that you can’t remember? father: i can’t. his honour: may have been? father: i can’t remember. [18]
mr campton sc: okay. so what i want to suggest to you is that the theories that you’ve just given in your evidence are a great example of those preoccupations that drive you. do you agree or disagree with that? father: i think they’re examples of somebody with higher order thinking that that might be able to, you know, base their opinions on events that occur after the fact. mr campton sc: who has the higher order thinking? father: i think in this case it would be myself. [19]
the evidence
mr campton sc: had you thought rather than perhaps giving your daughter a telephone or a [toy], that you could pay some of the child support arrears? father: yes, i definitely have considered it, but the – there were reasons why i...didn’t act on my own. i had wage deductions from my employer at the time, and i only within the last two years have changed my employment conditions from full time down to casual with one employer. the other employer remained full time. and the other reason is because child support is one difficult to reach. i have been to the centrelink office and tried contacting them, waited on the phone in excess of 45 minutes to an hour. third, the child support office haven’t done a proper assessment of my financial status. mr campton sc: right. so because of those reasons, you don’t want to pay the arrears. you would buy your daughter, say, a computer or a telephone? father: well, it assists her education, yes.[21]
this is constable [the mother could not recall the name used] from [city m] police station. we are informing you that [mr varni] has been in a car accident and has been sent to hospital.
i sent the text. how would you feel if something really happened to me?
mr campton sc: in paragraph 19, she records that she received a text message from your phone from someone being identified as a constable at [city m] saying you’ve been in a car accident and sent to hospital? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes? fahter: yes, that did occur. mr campton sc: and that happened, didn’t it? father: yes, it did. mr campton sc: and i want to suggest this is all part of your – i will call it – controlling and coercive behaviour while you’re living with [ms wolfe]? father: i object and disagree. mr campton sc: you disagree with that? father yes. mr campton sc: now, let’s get this straight: you were never involved in an accident, were you, at this time? father: no. there was no accident. mr campton sc: no. this was all part of you impersonating a police officer, wasn’t it? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and i want to suggest to you that – is what you’ve put in your outline document accurate? exhibit r1? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. you’ve put on the second page of the chronology at about point 4:   varni] sends [ms wolfe] a text – from a particular number – impersonating a police officer.
so that was true, wasn’t it? father: yes. mr campton sc: and then the message says:
hello [ms wolfe], my name is – something – from the police. your partner has been involved in an accident. we would like you to come and identify the body.
father: that’s correct. mr campton sc: right? so is that what you said? father: well, there – there were events leading in – leading into that statement, yes. his honour: is that what you said? father: that is what i – that is what i said. mr campton sc: yes. so what you were doing is you sent this horrific text – can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and [ms wolfe] says after receiving the message, she tried to ring your number. you didn’t answer. she called all the hospitals and the police, but you couldn’t be traced? father: that’s correct. mr campton sc: right. and then you eventually answered your phone, saying, “i sent the text. how would you feel if something really happened to me?” father: that’s right. mr campton sc: sir, do you think that was a very disturbed thing to do? father: no, because there was a lesson behind it. mr campton sc: you were teaching [ms wolfe], were you? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. his honour: do you agree that your version of the message as set out in your case outline would have led [ms wolfe] to assume that you were deceased? father: yes. mr campton sc: sir, you agree that that’s you trying to control [ms wolfe]’s behaviour, isn’t it? father: no. mr campton sc: well, that’s why you’re teaching her lesson, isn’t it? father: i was offended. mr campton sc: sir, you teach someone a lesson to control their behaviour, don’t you? father: it depends. mr campton sc: well, what else could be the object of the lesson other than to control someone’s behaviour? father: you could teach them a skill. mr campton sc: it was your word “lesson”, wasn’t it? father: no. mr campton sc: sir, i want to suggest to you that that’s what you just told his honour no more than a minute and a half ago? father: i – i think – i think you need to read both statements side by side to understand what actually happened. his honour: your previous answer was, “no, there was a lesson behind it”? father: well, that’s right. there was a lesson behind it.[22]
mr campton sc: now, you say in paragraph 12.12 on page 4 that you go some photos of [x] that were sent to you via mms. his honour: 12.2, mr campton. mr campton sc: and you say you had a co-worker who knew how to collect gps coordinates from the image? father: that’s correct. mr campton sc: and in your outline of case document, exhibit r1, you, i think, identified that person. that was a [mr af] from [employer ag]? father: yes, he is my – my manager at... mr campton sc: so he showed you how to trace the location of a photograph at the time? father: yes. there was no – there was no direct link to [ms wolfe]. he just showed me how to do that. mr campton sc: yes. but you then used that information, that is, the tracking information, to locate where [ms wolfe] and [x] were, that’s right? father: well, i tested his information to see if it was correct, yes. mr campton sc: yes. and you realise that that was a pretty terrifying circumstance for [ms wolfe], don’t you? father: well, i didn’t really know where it was going to lead to. mr campton sc: well, go to your next page of your affidavit, page 5, paragraph 12.4. you checked the gps coordinates and then found where your daughter was living with her mother and then you turned up there? father: that’s right. yes. mr campton sc: right. and do you think that might have been a bit of a terrifying event, to see you suddenly turn up? father: well, assuming that it was correct, and it ended up being correct, yes.[23]   varni] brought [x] over at 9:00pm last night because he had to work. he could not look after her so i am looking after her.
you seem to forget that when you pass away she will be staying with me. that’s why it’s important. your two-minute fling won’t exist when you unexpectedly pass on. consider this. then consider your selfish actions. foolish.
i wasn’t getting much time with my daughter and i was quite frustrated that i only had 45 minutes with her. i’d had a bad day at work earlier that day and i lost my patience. i approached the table that [mr g] was sitting at and i asked him to leave. i was adamant. he refused. i asked a second time. he refused. i lost my cool and pushed [mr g]. he stumbled and stood up. i attempted to tackle [mr g] to carry him outside. but i lost my balance after receiving a push from [mr g] and fell to the ground. when i returned to my feet we were surrounded by other community members at the pool including life-guards and people separating the two of us to ensure nothing escalated further. upon being separated [mr g] insulted my work by stating, “you’re a lousy dad. you don’t even pay for her,” to which i retaliated and kicked him. we were again separated. and police intervened.
the offender [a reference to the father] justified his aggressive behaviour by stating that he was expecting the new partner to do the “right thing and introduce himself, maybe shake my hand”, however, the offender said that when this did not happen he felt angry and upset. it was at this point when he demanded the victim to leave the premises. the offender admitted that he became enraged and had lost his sense of awareness with regards to where he was and the fact there were parents and children in the vicinity.
mr campton sc: okay. so this man’s sitting in the coffee shop. you’ve heard that [ms wolfe] was dating someone new. you weren’t getting much time with your daughter, so you were frustrated because you only had 45 minutes with the swimming lesson, yes? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: “i had a bad day at work” and you lost your patience? father: yes. mr campton sc: so what you then did is you walked over to where [mr g] was and you said you wanted him to leave, on your version, that’s right? father: yes. mr campton sc: he said no, yes? father: yes. mr campton sc: you were adamant? father: yes. mr campton sc: ...on your version, you asked him a second time, on your version? father: yes. mr campton sc: he said no? father: yes. mr campton sc: so then you decided to assault him? father: yes, that’s correct. mr campton sc: he stumbled and stood up, and you attempted to tackle him? father: that’s correct. mr campton sc:...to carry him outside, on your version? father: yes. mr campton sc: you lost your balance, on your version, and you fell to the ground? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: you say, on your version, when you returned to your feet you were surrounded by other community members, including lifeguards at the pool who were “separating us” and, importantly, you say, to ensure nothing escalated further? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: you say that [mr g] said – insulting you – “you’re a lousy dad. you don’t even pay for her”? father: that’s right. yes. mr campton sc: okay. so what is the appropriate parental thing to do? because your daughter is there by that time, isn’t she? father: yes. mr campton sc: so you decide you will kick him? father: yes. mr campton sc: you break his finger? father: i don’t agree. mr campton sc: you don’t think you broke his finger? father: i can’t be certain. mr campton sc: you accept that his finger was broken, don’t you? father: well, it may have been, may have been existing. mr campton sc: well, you pleaded guilty to the police facts at court about him having a broken finger out of the incident from the kick, aren’t you? father: i also stated in the police facts that mr – that [mr g] might have had an existing injury. his honour: he may have been sitting there with a broken finger? father: it’s possible. [24]
i know that my behaviour upset my daughter that day. she told me during our phone conversations authorised by her educators at [am kindy], [suburb an]. i apologised to her and bought her something special from the toyshop which was sent to her via express post and received at the day care.
mr campton sc: now, i want to suggest you also that at these times in 2014 at changeover times – paragraph 47, your honour – and into 2015, that you would say very nasty, hurtful and degrading things to [ms wolfe] at changeover, such as, “you’re nothing but a slut. you slut yourself around. look after my daughter, bitch”? father: i – i’m not going to say that those exact words were used, but i have definitely said offensive things to [ms wolfe], yes. mr campton: and [x] was there, wasn’t she? father i – i couldn’t honestly tell you that she was present right beside her mother at that point in time.[25]
mr campton sc: you had an opportunity, didn’t you, to have a look at the exhibits to [ms wolfe]’s affidavit, didn’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: and exhibit 2 are the text messages that passed between you. you’ve looked at those, haven’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: and you would agree that they contain degrading and disgusting language, don’t they? father: well, it would depend on the receiver, i would imagine. mr campton sc: sir, you were attempting to use the text exchanges between yourself and my client to intimidate her, to harass her, to cause her anxiety and to make her frightened, weren’t you? father: i – i – i disagree. i don’t think that was an intention of mine at all. mr campton: all right. well, here’s one – page 137, your honour, of the exhibit – from you “you’re a fucking disgrace” have you got the exhibit with you? father: which number was that? his honour: page 137 in the exhibit bundle. you don’t have it there with you? father: no. mr campton: do you have the exhibits here with you somewhere at court? father: yes. mr campton sc: here’s another set of them so you can have a look at them? father: yes. mr campton sc: all right. the first part of that conversation is [ms wolfe], isn’t it: “you’re a fucking disgrace, calling me a slut in front of [x].” can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: continuing, “one day, [mr varni], she’s going to understand that you will lose her.” can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: and you respond, “does that make you feel better? your lazy dick is waiting for you. go and get paid like a good slut.” can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: right. continuing on further down, “fuck you and your single wives club. you’re all shit in bed, and you all can’t be faithful. fuck yourself.”? father: which – which page was that? mr campton sc: 137? father: yes. yes. mr campton sc: can you go to 148. this is in december 2014. can you see the image that you’ve sent my client, “i will eat your family.”. that’s disgusting, isn’t it? father: it is, but there – there was a personal joke between the two of us that i thought she might appreciate. mr campton sc: right? father: yes. mr campton sc: so my client responds, “what’s wrong with you?” can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: that’s disgusting, isn’t it? father: to somebody who didn’t understand the joke, i’m sure it would be, yes. mr campton sc: look at page 158. his honour: in your view, you were having a joke with [ms wolfe], were you? father: yes. there’s a – because there’s a – there’s a contextual reference to something outside of that image. mr campton, sorry, that number again? mr campton sc: thank you, your honour. go to page 158. december 2014, top of the page, “where’s my daughter? where the fuck is my daughter, you lazy bitch?” can you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: further down the page, “give me my daughter or i will take her from you. i mean it, bitch.” do you see that? father: yes. mr campton sc: so go to page 159. sir, look at that image there: father: [x] is holding his [toy]. mr cammpton sc: are you doing your best to try and terrify [ms wolfe], are you? father: i believe that image there is of a toy that was found in my daughter’s happy meal at mcdonald’s. i don’t... mr campton sc: go to page 160, the next page. you would agree that they’re disgusting things that you’ve sent – images that you’ve sent to my client? father: i – i – i do admit that they aren’t appropriate, but anyone who knows me would know that – my style of humour. i didn’t create those images, i will state. his honour: but you placed them in the messages, didn’t you? father: yes.[26]
before the order made by justice harper, i could only use police to perform welfare checks on my daughter because her mother relocated and refused to disclose her address and telephone number. i was frustrated by these changes and the sensitivity both of the police and [ms wolfe] when i tried to contact my daughter to check on her, talk to her and be there for her and i was met by threats for court action, avos, and on occasion i was told by the police that i was a nuisance and i would be charged for menacing.
i have called on the police service to administer welfare checks on my daughter because [ms wolfe]’s refusal to follow her court orders has jeopardised my relationship with my child, caused confusion about my role as a father, and left me feeling insecure about her welfare and unsure of whether or not she is safe and protected. my daughter [x] was at a vulnerable age (between the ages of 3 and 4 years) where she could not communicate, defend herself, or run away from danger. and i feared for her safety. as a [community worker] i come across statistics all the time about fatalities due to falls, accidents, neglect, and children being abused violently and sexually. [ms wolfe] left my daughter in the care of people from her circle of friends whom i’d only met on one or two occasions. this made me feel quite anxious and unsure about my daughter’s welfare. i have advised police and child protection services of this on several occasions.
the father contacted police stating he was concerned for the welfare of his child, as she lives with the mother who had been ignoring his correspondence. the father stated that his child had not gone to kindergarten that day and wanted police to check on her welfare. the father had no other concerns. about 4:30 pm on 25/9/2015 police attended the loc and spoke to the mother and the grandmother of the child. the child appeared well clothed and well fed. the child also appeared happy, was playing and very talkative with police. the grandmother stated that the mother and the father were currently in the process of separating and going through family law court and that the father often sends police around to check on the child. the victim stated to police that the father told her he would turn up at the child’s kindergarten and take the child and so the mother decided to keep the child at home that day. the mother stated to police that different police attended her house at least twice a [sic] to check on her child and that it is a nuisance and becoming harassing. the mother believes that the father is using police to get to her. police have nil concerns for the child and believe that the father is making the concern for welfare calls in an attempt to better his position in family law court. this event has been created to document that the father is a habitual caller and will say he is concerned for his child to upset the victim. a warning will be created on the father’s cni so that anyone attending future jobs for “concern for welfare” regarding the child can first call, instead of showing up at her house in multiple times a week. police have tried contacting the father, however he does not answer his phone, a voice message has been left.”
when asked about his request for welfare checks, he stated that on two occasions he had notified the child protection services. he had repeatedly contacted the police despite no problems having been identified. [mr varni] explained, “i wouldn’t need to be such a nuisance if i had proper contact. i can’t go to her house, so i have to go through third parties. all the other third parties are closed off because of these avos.” he complained that it was necessary to pay a service to find information out about his daughter. this had become more problematic since her family had relocated and changed their telephone number.
then at paragraph 48, “when asked about the welfare checks, [mr varni] referred to “the drug side of things” and being wary that she was staying with a stranger”.
when questioned whether the numerous welfare checks instigated by him could be viewed as a form of harassment or paranoia, [mr varni] responded, “i’m sure it could be both. the reason why is because the orders weren’t followed. it’s just a normal response to inaction.”
mr sperling: when was the last time that you had a welfare check? mother: i was heavily pregnant with [h], so it was 2018. mr sperling: okay. and for the welfare check, it’s the case that the police would come around? mother: that particular case, they just called me. they tended to just call me towards the end, yes. his honour: even when you were at home? mother: yes. mr sperling: and in relation to that, there was occasions where the police were coming around to see you? mother: all the time, yes. mr sperling: okay. and when they’d come around, [x] would be there? mother: yes. mr sperling: and [x] would see the police? mother: yes. mr sperling: and interact with them? mother: yes. mr sperling: did she ever mention to you about why the police were coming around to see her? mother: yes. mr sperling: what did she say? “why do the police always come to our house?” what did you say in response? mother: i told her that “they’ve come to make sure you’re okay.” mr sperling: all right. anything else? mother: no. that’s all i would say. [28]
mr campton sc: ...you agree that you contacted the police on over 100 occasions between 2015 and early 2018 about these welfare checks, don’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: and that was part of a process of harassing and intimidating my client, trying to make her more anxious, wasn’t it? father: well, she had obligations to order number 9, which she wasn’t following. so i had dealt with the legal authorities prior to engaging with the police for welfare checks, and the legal authorities were just acting in the interests of my daughter. and i – i prefer that, rather than attending at the premises or any location on my own, i would prefer to have somebody unbiased and impartial representing my daughter that is a professional and represents children’s interests – the protection of children at that time. mr campton sc: do you agree that you haven’t answered my question just then? you can agree or disagree, it’s up to you. father: i disagree. mr campton sc: you think you did answer my question? father: yes. mr campton sc: can you remember what the question was? father: no. mr campton sc: okay. i will ask you again. what i’m suggesting to you is that calling the police over 100 times over that three-year period for welfare checks was actually you trying to intimidate and harass [ms wolfe] and make her more anxious? father: no, i don’t agree. mr campton sc: you don’t agree with that? father: no. mr campton sc: okay. you know that the police records have been produced on subpoena? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and you’ve had an opportunity to read those, haven’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and you know, for example, that the police have recorded that you’re a habitual complainer. you know that, don’t you? father: yes.[29]
mr campton sc: i think you concede in your affidavit that the police told you that if you continued your conduct about making complaints to them or asking them to undertake welfare checks, you were going to be charged with a criminal offence? father: that’s correct, yes. mr campton sc: yes? father: i just – i felt that there was – it was necessary because there was no – i didn’t qualify for legal aid. i had applied. mr campton sc: okay. is it also that you made a complaint about [ms wolfe]’s parenting of [x] to the new south wales minister for education? father: yes.[30]
mr campton sc: well, i’m just trying to find out if there’s a connection between you undertaking these studies and having these statistics and the notifications you’re making to facs, to police, to the department of education, to all the other people we’ve spoken about this morning? father: the – they were formative years for my daughter. i – i just – i was overprotective, i feel. mr campton sc: yes? father: and i feel that i just wanted to know that she was competent and she was, you know, good at her skills, you know. that’s all it really was. i just wanted to make sure that, you know, she – i had seen her from, you know, birth up until, you know, she had learned her first word, she learned her first steps. i just wanted to make sure that she was – she developed properly. mr campton sc: but you knew that she was well cared for because you saw her all the time? father: yes, but i – there were reasons for me to question. mr campton sc: but do you accept that the fact of the questions and the way you interacted with [ms wolfe] just caused more conflict and anxiety? father: well, that’s one side of the argument. mr campton sc: well, don’t you agree that it’s a pretty important side of the argument because [ms wolfe] is the person who’s providing the care and nurturing for [x]? father: i think both have their importance. mr campton sc: can you see that if [ms wolfe] is suffering from terror and/or anxiety, that isn’t in [x]’s best interest? father: i can see that, but there are ways to manage it. mr campton sc: right. okay. his honour: when you give that answer, i take it as meaning you’re saying that there are ways for [ms wolfe] to manage her terror and her anxiety? father: i’m – i’m not... his honour: because that’s what you were asked about? father: i’m not a professional, your honour. i his honour: well, you said there are ways to manage it. was that a meaningless answer? father: does she really experience fear and terror? i don’t know. i’m not an expert. mr campton sc: right. you would say to his honour after everything that i’ve asked you about that there’s no objective foundation for [ms wolfe] to be terrified about your conduct? father: i – i feel that there’s a marked overreaction here.[31]   2003 – a consultation note, “some [indecipherable] over assault of girlfriend last dec when found out she was 2 timing him. also sought out & assaulted boyfriend. court case (now resolved).” (b) 2003 – a consultation note, “physical assault on girlfriend and her new boyfriend at end of last year (not impulsive, but planned). (c) 2004 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d felt suicidal on sat night and had made a noose which he believed would not be strong enough to hang himself. stated he left the noose in the kitchen by the microwave.” (d) 2005 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d taken what he thought was in ecstasy tablet 2 weeks ago. stated he hadn’t felt quite right ever since. on the night he’d taken it he had been hearing voices when he went to bed, believed his friends were outside his window calling for him. felt very concerned read this and spoke to his mother who reassured him no one was there. told his mother he taken a pill. since then he’s been feeling paranoid and thinks people are talking about him behind his back. this is happening when he is at uni or in the street, it is not happening when he is at home.”   2003 – a consultation note, “physical assault on girlfriend and her new boyfriend at end of last year (not impulsive, but planned). (c) 2004 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d felt suicidal on sat night and had made a noose which he believed would not be strong enough to hang himself. stated he left the noose in the kitchen by the microwave.” (d) 2005 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d taken what he thought was in ecstasy tablet 2 weeks ago. stated he hadn’t felt quite right ever since. on the night he’d taken it he had been hearing voices when he went to bed, believed his friends were outside his window calling for him. felt very concerned read this and spoke to his mother who reassured him no one was there. told his mother he taken a pill. since then he’s been feeling paranoid and thinks people are talking about him behind his back. this is happening when he is at uni or in the street, it is not happening when he is at home.”   2004 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d felt suicidal on sat night and had made a noose which he believed would not be strong enough to hang himself. stated he left the noose in the kitchen by the microwave.” (d) 2005 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d taken what he thought was in ecstasy tablet 2 weeks ago. stated he hadn’t felt quite right ever since. on the night he’d taken it he had been hearing voices when he went to bed, believed his friends were outside his window calling for him. felt very concerned read this and spoke to his mother who reassured him no one was there. told his mother he taken a pill. since then he’s been feeling paranoid and thinks people are talking about him behind his back. this is happening when he is at uni or in the street, it is not happening when he is at home.”   2005 – a consultation note, “reported that he’d taken what he thought was in ecstasy tablet 2 weeks ago. stated he hadn’t felt quite right ever since. on the night he’d taken it he had been hearing voices when he went to bed, believed his friends were outside his window calling for him. felt very concerned read this and spoke to his mother who reassured him no one was there. told his mother he taken a pill. since then he’s been feeling paranoid and thinks people are talking about him behind his back. this is happening when he is at uni or in the street, it is not happening when he is at home.”
mr campton sc: there’s then a police event record of 2011, so 2011? father: yes. mr campton sc: and it records you just ended a relationship with this woman. who that would have been – [ms w]? father: that would have been [ms w]. yes. mr campton sc: okay. and it records that you were sending multiple text messages to [ms w]? father: yes. mr campton sc: and she attended the police station to find out how to get it to stop? father: yes. mr campton sc: right? father: yes, that’s right. mr campton sc: you remember that happened? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. and do you remember that the police contacted you and asked you to stop? father: yes, yes. mr campton sc: yes, yes. and the event record is 2011, does that sound right? father: yes, yes. mr campton sc: okay? father: i remember that. mr campton sc: and the – there’s another event record from 2011 recording that [ms w] would come home and there would be gifts on her doorstep. do you remember doing that? father: yes. mr campton sc: and then she was employed at [employer y] in [suburb z], was she? father: yes, from what i can remember, yes. mr campton sc: yes. and in 2011, it’s recorded that you put on a social media post all photographs of the house next door to [ms w]’s that was up for lease? father: well, i needed a place to live and i thought, you know, live close to people you know. yes. mr campton sc: so what had happened was that you had decided that you were going to apply to lease the property right next door to [ms w]’s? father: no, no, that’s a false claim. i – it wasn’t the first place that i looked at. i looked at several other places before pursuing that place. mr campton sc: yes. did you think that that might have been all conduct trying to control your relationship, or recommence a relationship between you and [ms w]? father: well, no, no, not at all. mr campton sc: yes? father: because again, it wasn’t the first place that i looked at. it was just an option at the time. mr campton sc: the house next door to hers? father: well, it was an option. it wasn’t the only option, but it was an option. mr campton sc: yes. if you think about what you’ve read in [dr d]’s report and what you’ve read in [ms wolfe]’s affidavit, upon [ms wolfe] knowing these things have happened in the past, do you think that might cause [ms wolfe to worry and be very anxious about your conduct? father: she could have asked me about my conduct. mr campton sc: okay. the note from the police from 2011 records [ms w] complaining that you’re calling her all the time at work and on her mobile phone. did that happen? father: i did call her, yes. mr campton sc: yes. and it also records that at or about that time that you would walk around the store at [employer y] where she worked, pretending to stop – shop, sorry? father: no, that’s not correct. mr campton sc: okay? father: i had a job in the area at the time. mr campton sc: just happened to be you were in her shop? father: well, there aren’t that many shopping centres...few places and i – i was getting around on foot. i didn’t have a car at the time, so... mr campton sc: well, that was at [suburb z], wasn’t it? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes, but you weren’t living at [suburb z], were you? father: i wasn’t – wasn’t living there. i was working there. mr campton sc: see, what you were doing was again engaging in this controlling and coercive behaviour with [ms w], weren’t you? father: no. mr campton sc: all right. it’s recorded also in the police event that [ms w] said that you would send her sexually explicit text messages? father: well, yes, but we had exchanged sexually explicit text messages. mr campton sc: yes. you sent photographs of an erect penis? father: it’s possible, yes. mr campton sc: yes. pictures of her being asleep, taken without her knowledge? father: i don’t recall that. mr campton sc: right. and the event records that [ms w] asked you to stop this conduct and you wouldn’t. is – would that be accurate? father:: i was pursuing a relationship. we had different interests. mr campton: can you see any similarities between your behaviours with [ms w] and [ms au] and with [ms wolfe]? father: they’re not the only women that i’ve dated in the years. his honour: that’s not an answer to the question you were asked. nothing to do with the question you were asked? father: i can see some similarities, yes. but the – the main similarity is that these reactions are happening at the end of the relationship. they’re not happening during the relationship. there are no complaints during the relationship. these are complaints happening at the end of the relationship on – with each individual. his honour: and that’s exactly what mr campton has asked you about? father: yes. mr campton: can you see some similarities at all here? father: yes.[32]
mr campton sc: had you thought rather than perhaps giving your daughter a telephone or a [toy], that you could pay some of the child support arrears? father: yes, i definitely have considered it, but the – there were reasons why i didn’t act on my own. i had wage deductions from my employer at the time, and i only within the last two years have changed my employment conditions from full-time down to casual with one employer. the other employer remained full-time. on the other reason is because child support is (1) difficult to reach. i have been to centrelink office and tried contacting them, waited on the phone in excess of 45 minutes to an hour. third, the child support office haven’t done a proper assessment of my financial status. mr campton sc: right. so because of those reasons, you don’t want to pay the arrears. you would buy your daughter, say, a computer or a telephone? father: to well, it assist her education, yes.
when asked about his contribution for child support, he responded that this was taken care of by the government is deducted from his wages at [employer ag], despite his primary employment being at [employer aw] at [town e]. when asked if he was in arrears, he acknowledged this to be the case. he explained that he needed to pay for other things, including swimming lessons which had been changed by the mother without consultation. he explained that he would provide gifts of the best quality each fortnight. when this was identified to be an unusual approach to parenting a five-year-old girl, [mr varni] responded that this was all he could do is contact had been limited to half-our telephone conversations.
mr campton sc: and as part of your engagement with the department of justice administering your sentence, you undertook or engaged in a mental health plan from your general practitioner, did you not? father: no. mr campton sc: no. okay. so you’re confident about that? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes? father: it was discussed. we – we... mr campton sc: discussed? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes? father: never engaged. there’s just no need. mr campton sc: okay. so discussed only? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. and it was suggested to you that you undertake an anger management program, was it not? father: at which point? mr campton sc: as part of the administration of your sentence by the department of justice? father: well, i – i – i can’t remember. it was never – it was never a condition with the – with the order. it was never a – something i had to fulfill. it was an opportunity, i believe. but i’ve never been told by the department of justice that i need to complete an anger management program. mr campton sc: so you say they didn’t suggest that to you? father: it – it was a suggestion, but i’ve never been – it has never been enforced. mr campton sc: never been required? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. and was it also suggested to you that you undertake attendance upon a psychiatrist or psychologist to address your anger and emotional control? father: that has been said before, yes. mr campton sc: that was suggested, yes? father: yes. mr campton sc: but it didn’t happen? father: no, i did. i did. i went to – i was referred to the men’s – men’s shed from mr campton sc: yes? father: [ao] mental health. mr campton sc: yes. and when did you do that? father: a long time ago. that – that would have been – i think that was even before... mr campton sc: yes? father:...the – the – the incident occurred – the incident at the swimming pool occurred. mr campton sc: before the pool incident? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. so after you were convicted, do you agree that it was suggested to you by a department of justice representative that you attend either a psychiatrist or a psychologist for the purposes of addressing your anger management or emotional control? father: could you repeat that? mr campton sc: yes. do you agree that after your conviction, as part of the administration of your sentence, you were suggested by a department of justice representative that you attend a psychiatrist or a psychologist to address your anger management or emotional control? father: yes, it was – it was suggested. yes. mr campton sc: yes. and so did it occur? father: only – at that point in time, no. but at a previous point in time... mr campton sc: okay? father: i did, yes. mr campton sc: so they suggested it and you didn’t attend? father: well, yes, i didn’t attend. mr campton sc: okay. and if it’s recorded in the notes that you did attend upon such a person, do you think they’ve just got it wrong, or you’ve got it wrong? father: i think it could be – it’s probably me. i’ve – as i said, i’ve been pretty busy. mr campton sc: yes. okay. so if you have attended upon someone, i assume that you can’t remember who it is that you would have attended on? that is just logical, isn’t it? father: there’s only one psychiatrist i remember. mr campton sc: well, perhaps you can answer my question. if you have attended upon a psychiatrist or a psychologist after the event at the swimming pool, you just can’t remember ever attending, is that right? father: sorry. after the swimming pool, no. there has been no psychiatrist. mr campton sc: sure? father: yes. mr campton sc: and so if it’s recorded in the material produced on subpoena that you have attended, if it is right, would you agree that you have attended and that you’ve forgotten all about it? father: no. because there’s no way of proving that i was there.[35]
mr campton sc: [dr d] records that you told him that you would snap when frustrated. that’s true, isn’t it? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and in the last sentence, he records that you just see yourself as having the same problems as every other average person, that’s right? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes? father: well ... mr campton sc: okay. and? father: i think just a bit modest. mr campton sc: okay. can you look at paragraph 55 for me, then, thanks. [dr d] records as at september 2018, you weren’t receiving any psychological or psychiatric treatment. right. that was true, wasn’t it? september ’18 was when... father: 55? mr campton sc: let me slow it down for you? father: yes. mr campton sc: [dr d] records at the front of his report that he spoke to you on 17 and 18 september last year. and he records that as at september of last year, you weren’t receiving any psychological or psychiatric treatment? father: that’s correct. mr campton sc: yes. and that’s still the case today, isn’t it? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. can you go to paragraph 119 of [dr d]’s report for me. this is where [dr d] records that he identified for you that [x] had been traumatised by exposure to your angry behaviour towards [ms wolfe] and to her partner, [mr g]. can you see that? father: yes. mr campton: all right. and you agree that [dr d] asked you about this circumstance? father: yes. mr campton: and he records that you said:
yes, i’m not always in control of those situations.
do you agree that you said that? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. okay. does that tie into what’s in the community justice notes about you’ve gone too far to think logically? does that sound right? too far gone to logically think? father: yes and no. the reason is – it has got a lot to do with how fatigued i am. mr campton sc: sorry? father: it has got a lot to do with how fatigued i am. mr campton sc: how fatigued? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. okay. do you think that in january of 2018 where – i withdraw that. do you think that when you told [dr d] in september of ’18 that you knew that you weren’t always in control of those situations, it might have been perhaps an idea to try and get some help about that? father: no. mr campton sc: is that because you don’t need any help? father: no, it’s because i do too much. mr campton sc: you do too much? father: yes, i – i’ve got a pretty full-on workload. mr campton sc: okay? father: or had back then.[36]
...explained that his “natural contact” had been removed because of [the] mother, “that’s all it is”. when asked if there had been specific reasons for this, he responded, “of late, there are things i can understand. i was violent towards her current partner.” that said, he dismissed the police records as inaccurate and biased. he explained, “they don’t see the surrounding pressure on me to erupt in such a way. all they’re doing is reporting the incident at the moment. they’re not looking at the background issues.” he explained that he had submitted two section 60i certificates given the contravention of orders for contact. he acknowledged that this did not justify his response.
he disclosed an avo to protect [ms au] due to his threatening sms correspondence. he had threatened that he had a bullet for each of her friends and would shoot her and her friends. he regretted this comment as it had been “taken out of context” the police had taken an extreme stance in response. in his view, it should have been “taken in the context as a figure of speech”. when asked if he had threatened other girlfriends, he reported that there [was] and avo taken out by [ms w] at the end of their relationship.
no. no, it’s not. there’s a hereditary condition in my family. and i’ve noticed with my sister, she gets quite short. and i thought it – it might have been – because it’s a late-onset degenerative disease or condition, and i thought that it may have been something that i was experiencing.
the father concedes that he does not mention those issues in his evidence because, “it was still undergoing investigation from doctors”. when asked who was investigating the issue for him, he responded, “i’ve had a couple of gps look into it. i can’t remember which.” when pressed for the name of a doctor his response was “one doctor – what’s his name? dr – geez, he is well known in town e. that’s embarrassing.” he then asserted that he had seen the doctor in town e on three occasions in 2018 – he could not remember his name during cross-examination in august 2019.
when informed of the arrangements for the family assessment the following day, [mr varni]’s response was unusual. he questioned, “what if it’s not [x]? i know my daughter but what if they have done that to fool us? to win the court case? what are the chances? how are you going to i.d.my daughter? how secure is this whole thing? you don’t do facial recognition on entry? these are good things that could [community work] students would question.” he was assured that this had never been a problem in such assessments. he showed me a photo of [x]. the following day, during the assessment, he reassured the report writer that he knew that it was his daughter and there were no such concerns.
then at paragraph 115, dr d records, “when asked about the request to confirm x’s identity, he responded that this was “just the way society is moving”. thus, when he recently had blood tests he needed to reconfirm his identity due to “the paranoia and society”. he confirmed that there was no need to finger scan or retinal scan x as he had known that it was her straight away.
mr campton sc: he has recorded you saying those things? father: that’s correct. there are some pretty impressive toys out there too. mr campton: yes. so he records – so you agree that you said those things to him? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and he records that you showed him a photo of [x], that’s right? father: yes. mr campton sc: yes. and then in paragraph 115, he records – i think you said that because you saw [x], that a finger scan or a retinal scan of [x] wasn’t required? father: that’s right. mr campton sc: yes. he records this in paragraph 115: he asked you why you needed all this confirmation about [x]’s identity and that you said it was just the way society was moving. and then he has this statement: that you recently had blood tests, you needed to re-confirm your identity due to the paranoia in society. what blood tests did you have? father: which – which statement was – sorry. mr campton sc: yes. look at 115. second sentence. a record that you told [dr d] that you had recently had blood tests to re-confirm your identity. when did that happen? father: geez, i – i don’t even recall making that statement. i have had some blood tests recently, though. mr campton sc: well, this would have been prior to september 2018? father: yes. i – i was getting a series of blood tests for various conditions, so mr campton sc: to re-confirm your identity. why were you concerned about your identity? father: i really don’t know. i – i... mr campton sc: okay? father: i don’t recall making this statement.[37] mr campton sc: who was the doctor who undertook the blood tests? father: i have had several doctors take blood tests. [n] medical centre at the hospital, [suburb v]. i’ve had a blood test since being – residing in [town e] from the – [p] pathology, and i think [suburb q] – [suburb q] medical centre as well.
she told me that he bought her staff and would take care of her. this was good. she again hesitated and added, “but he’s not really a nice person, because he broke [mr g]’s finger and he hurt my mum’s arm and he came to school with me and mummy and he got me a computer, a phone and a pink camera.” the best thing about her dad was that he bought her toys. she smiled broadly. the worst thing was that he did bad stuff. this would happen a lot.”
at the conclusion of the assessment, [x] was asked about her experience. she told me that she enjoyed playing with her dad. she could not identify anything she didn’t like about the assessment. she had not been scared. she also enjoyed spending time with her paternal grandparents, nono and nana, and her aunty [ms az]. when asked if she would like to see them, [x] sighed. she commented, “yeah, because i do miss them.” she told me that she would like to see them a lot. when asked if there would be any problem with this, [x] responded, “i think there’s just one problem. when i went there, my dad wasn’t being very nice to my mum and he heard my mum’s arm.”
when asked about [mr varni], she denied that she had any concerns about his emotional state or behaviour. she viewed him as a good father. she did not have any knowledge of his forensic history. to her knowledge, he had never been violent. she viewed him as a “very loving, tender, caring person”. although she stated that she was very alarmed to hear that there was such a history of violent behaviour, she stated that [ms wolfe] had informed her of the avos. she understood this to have been at the behest of the maternal grandmother. she didn’t view [mr varni] as being a threat to anyone.
mr campton sc: does that tie into what’s in the community justice notes about you’ve gone too far to think logically? does that sound right? too far gone to logically think? father: yes and no. the reason is – it has got a lot to do with how fatigued i am. mr campton sc: sorry? father: it has got a lot to do with how fatigued i am. mr campton sc: how fatigued? father: yes. mr campton sc: okay. okay. do you think that in january of 2018 where – i withdraw that. do you think that when you told [dr d] in september of ’18 that you knew that you weren’t always in control of those situations, it might have been perhaps an idea to try and get some help about that? father: no. mr campton sc: is that because you don’t need any help? father: no, it’s because i do too much. mr campton sc: you do too much? father: yes, i – i’ve got a pretty full-on workload. mr campton sc: okay? father: or had back then.[38]   will benefit from a meaningful relationship with each of her parents, provided that she is protected from further episodes of family conflict, family violence, denigration and questioning of her parents’ care. her father’s lack of insight and failure to take responsibility for his aberrant behaviour predicted ongoing difficulties. it is probable that [x] and her mother will continue to be stressed by his expressed views and behaviour. this will limit the benefit accorded to the maintenance of a meaningful relationship.
lacked insight into his contribution to the evolution to the cessation of regular contact with his loved daughter. it remains probable that he will continue to harass the mother and not respect rules which he viewed as lacking in validity. he lacked insight into paranoid preoccupations which had driven such behaviour. [he] thus continued to justify his actions and lacked the capacity to reflect thoughtfully on his contribution to the current circumstances. it was a concern that his extended family supported his position. they appeared to do so in the context of both limited knowledge and denial. (my emphasis)  9] the father’s parenting capacity was identified to be impaired due to his mental state, poor anger management, preoccupations regarding the mother and distress at his limited contact. his judgement was poor in prioritising [x]’s needs. thus, despite being in arrears for child support he continuing [sic] to regularly provide lavish and inappropriate gifts without respect for appropriate limits imposed by her mother. his perception of [x]’s developmental needs was seen to be impaired. he lacked a developmental framework for considering her needs, resulting in the persistent provision of lavish and inappropriate gifts. on occasion, he had confronted the mother and her partner in his presence, culminating in uncontrollable parental conflict and family violence. [141] the father lacked the capacity to provide appropriate accommodation and reliable transport for [x] should she stay with him in [town e]. such arrangements would be impractical. the parents lacked the capacity to communicate respectfully and solve any problems which might arise in such circumstances. [144] the father’s mental state was indicative of underlying pathology which impacted upon his parenting capacity. he exhibited long-standing and wide-ranging suspicions regarding the behaviour of the mother and his former partners. these paranoid preoccupations were strongly suggestive of either a paranoid personality disorder or a delusional disorder...his preoccupations had led to repeated instances of threatening behaviour towards the mother, her partner and previous partners...he lacked insight into the inappropriate nature of his suspicions, jealousy and actions. this had driven him to continue to harass the mother and father respect limits placed by authorities, including the courts, the police, the school, and day care centre. he had repeatedly harassed the mother by his persistent welfare checks, failure to provide adequate child support and provision of inappropriate gifts. his perception of the unjust nature of his personal circumstances and paranoid concerns for [x] safety had driven his notifications to child protection services. [145] although i would recommend that the father be treated with low-dose anti-psychotic medication, it is likely that this would have limited impact on his concerns and behavioural problems. further, it is probable that he would refuse such treatment if offered. he would be likely to present in a manner which would limit the capacity for treating doctor to formulate a diagnosis which would require such an intervention. similarly, there was no indication that the father was motivated or would be receptive to psychological intervention. this was evidenced by his interactions with the report writer. when repeatedly taken to his inappropriate views and actions, he rejected the concerns expressed. thus, it is unlikely that his behaviour will change. it was a concern that the father was supported in his views by the paternal extended family who minimised the extent of his inappropriate behaviour. (my emphasis)
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[41] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[42]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[42]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[44]   assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (2) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, 'psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law' (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty's statement (which also has echoes in the english author's statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court's formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
section 60cc – the primary considerations
the physical violence towards me and [mr g] has left me afraid of [mr varni] and what he might do to harm me, [x] and my family...even now i am always hypervigilant when i leave my home and i look around to see whether [mr varni] is stalking me or has somehow found out where i lived. i am afraid that when i am in the street he will see me or see [x] and come and make a scene or attack me...i tried my best to support [mr varni] in his role as a father to [x]...i stopped [mr varni] seeing [x] because i believe that he could harm her physically and emotionally if he continued to see her...when i think of [mr varni] spending time with [x] i feel sick and afraid. if i know i have to see [mr varni] i am afraid and i will not meeting without someone else being present. i am afraid he will attack me or follow me...i am always very anxious after i have been to court and i have seen [mr varni]. i cannot sleep and i feel on edge. i try as much as i can to hide this from those around me but i feel extremely anxious. this continues for at least two weeks after my court attendance...i am very afraid that [mr varni] will physically attack [x] as revenge for me leaving or because she does not do what he tells her to do...if [x] is ordered to go and stay with [mr varni] and he be supervised by either his mother or sister i will be very anxious and sick for the whole time that she is away.
section 60cc – the additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as x’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to x’s views.
the nature of x’s relationship with each of her parents and with other persons including grandparents or other relatives.
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x, and to spend time with x, and to communicate with x.
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain x.
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with her father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
the capacity of each of x’s parents to provide for her needs, including her emotional and intellectual needs.
the father’s parenting capacity was identified to be impaired due to his mental state, poor anger management, preoccupations regarding the mother and distress at his limited contact. his judgement was poor in prioritising [x]’s needs. thus, despite being in arrears for child support he continuing [sic] to regularly provide lavish and inappropriate gifts without respect for appropriate limits imposed by her mother. his perception of [x]’s developmental needs was seen to be impaired. he lacked a developmental framework for considering her needs, resulting in persistent provision of lavish and inappropriate gifts. on occasion, he had confronted the mother and her partner in in his presence, accommodating in uncontrollable parental conflict and family violence.   his uninvited attendance at the maternal grandmother’s home, bashing on the door and yelling his demands that x be surrendered to him, (b) locking the mother out of the home and refusing to pass x into her care on the night of the parents’ separation, (c) his persistence in refusing to leave x’s birthday party in 2013 contrary to the agreement between the parents necessitating an attendance by police, (d) his attempt to break into the mother’s home in early 2014 through her bedroom window necessitating another attendance by police and issue of an apprehended violence order, (e) his attendance uninvited at x’s second birthday party in 2014 and parking himself at a table nearby reading the paper, (f) his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   locking the mother out of the home and refusing to pass x into her care on the night of the parents’ separation, (c) his persistence in refusing to leave x’s birthday party in 2013 contrary to the agreement between the parents necessitating an attendance by police, (d) his attempt to break into the mother’s home in early 2014 through her bedroom window necessitating another attendance by police and issue of an apprehended violence order, (e) his attendance uninvited at x’s second birthday party in 2014 and parking himself at a table nearby reading the paper, (f) his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   his persistence in refusing to leave x’s birthday party in 2013 contrary to the agreement between the parents necessitating an attendance by police, (d) his attempt to break into the mother’s home in early 2014 through her bedroom window necessitating another attendance by police and issue of an apprehended violence order, (e) his attendance uninvited at x’s second birthday party in 2014 and parking himself at a table nearby reading the paper, (f) his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   his attempt to break into the mother’s home in early 2014 through her bedroom window necessitating another attendance by police and issue of an apprehended violence order, (e) his attendance uninvited at x’s second birthday party in 2014 and parking himself at a table nearby reading the paper, (f) his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   his attendance uninvited at x’s second birthday party in 2014 and parking himself at a table nearby reading the paper, (f) his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   his persistence in causing police attendance at the mother’s home for wholly unnecessary welfare checks (up to 100!) in the course of which x had to be viewed by the attending police under the police themselves worked out the father’s motivations and resorted to welfare checks by telephone call, (g) his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   his assault on the mother at the paternal grandmother’s home on 1 november 2016, and (h) causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.   causing the car door to strike the mother on 7 may 2017 while x was in the car.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of x’s parents, and any other characteristics of x that the court thinks are relevant.
the attitude to x, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents.
any family violence involving x or a member of x’s family.
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of x’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in the proceedings of the order, any findings made by the court in, or in the proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter.
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x.
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
section 61da – the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders - what is the appropriate order in relation to parental responsibility?
mr campton sc: sir, look at 405 at the bottom:
“what are you, the cum thief? you used my seed to make a baby for another man’s family. she is my family, not yours and no one else’s.”
and over the page:
“i’m not trying to control you, i want to come home. there’s a difference.
sir, what you’re doing, continually, is just harassing my client again and again and again, trying to control her behaviour, aren’t you? father: i don’t agree. mr campton sc: sir, you will see on page 410 that’s the commencement of the 85 text messages that you sent on one day. do you remember that? father: yes, i do. yes. and the reason for that is because your client refuses to follow her orders. mr campton sc: so what you do is engage in conduct to try and coerce my client into doing what you want, don’t you? father: by nature, i am a law enforcer. i – i – i am only looking out for the interests of my daughter when i enforce an order that is made by the court. his honour: you understand that you don’t enforce the orders, do you? fathre: well, this is the problem. nobody does. his honour: you understand that you don’t enforce the orders, don’t you? father: yes, your honour. mr campton sc: you’ve actually kept some of my client’s underwear, haven’t you? father: no. mr campton sc: page 9 of the second tab – or third tab in the exhibits, an email. this is an email from you to my client, 25 december 2016. so let’s just put that in time. this is three years after you’ve separated:
you sent that email, didn’t you? father: yes. mr campton sc: sir – and what you were doing in that email was threatening my client’s life, weren’t you? father: no. mr campton sc: there can be no other construction to it, can there? father: there can be. [ms wolfe] is a smoker. was a smoker. his honour: and why would that make her unexpectedly pass on? father: well, i’ve seen people just unexpectedly appear with terminal cancer in my lifetime. i – i just assume that, you know, it might be something that we may have to look out for since her habit was – it was quite – quite frequent. i – i – i saw her smoking many cigarettes. his honour: unexpectedly contracting cancer is not unexpectedly pass on, is it? father: i don’t agree. mr campton sc: can you look at page 244 of the text messages. have you found that? father: yes. mr campton sc: [ms wolfe] is saying to you:
mr campton sc: what you’re trying to do there is again coerce my client into reconciling with you well after you’ve separated, isn’t it? father: yes. yes, that’s what i was doing.[47]
conclusion
the costs applications
in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle proceedings in the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the 2 provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgement under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”.   the ordinary position in proceedings under the family law act 1975 (cth) (the act) is that each party is to bear his or her own costs (s 117(1)). where the court is of the opinion that circumstances justify it in doing so, the court may make such order as to costs as it considers just (s 117(2)). thus, an order may be made for the payment of costs on an indemnity basis, although such orders are exceptional (in the marriage of l and c l kohan [1992] famca 116, (1992) 16 fam lr 245 at 259, (1993) flc 92-340 at 79,614, limousin v limousin (costs) (2007) 38 fam lr 478, [2007] famca 1178, d and d (costs) (no 2) (2010) flc 93-435, [2010] famcafc 64). [10] it is, however, a mistake to think that if a costs order is made, that order can only be on a party and party basis or on an indemnity basis. the words “such order as to costs ... as the court considers just” permit the court to fashion an order that is apt to the circumstances. one such well-known example is assessment on a trustee basis, which is more generous than party and party costs, but falls short of an indemnity. orders for a partial indemnity or for a particular period are obvious possibilities. the court may also fix costs in a particular sum, taking account of all relevant circumstances, that type of order too is neither one for party and party costs nor an indemnity costs order. for convenience, in these reasons we shall refer to such orders as a “special costs order”. [11] decisions as to the appropriate basis for any costs order are, of course, guided by principle. in applications under s 117 of the act for costs of whatever kind, the court must have regard to the considerations set out in s 117(2a). paragraph (g) requires the court to take into account any relevant matter. [12] as the decision in colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 46 fcr 225 at 233–4, [1993] fca 536, 118 alr 248 at 256–7, [1993] fca 536, 28 ipr 561 at 569–70 (colgate-palmolive) and the extensive authorities referred to in it make clear, the categories for the making of special costs orders are not closed and may be made whenever the particular facts and circumstances warrant it. that position is reflected in s 117(2) of the act. [13] it is necessary to consider first whether there should be an order for costs before turning to whether the quantum of the costs should be left to the application of the scale contained within sch 3 of the rules or assessed or fixed on some other basis. [40] ....... the court is not bound only to make an order on a party and party basis or on an indemnity basis. it may take an intermediate course if that is the order that is just in all of the circumstances. a special costs order may be assessed by reference to a particular period of time or set of events. alternatively, the court may fix a sum for costs that exceeds party and party costs but falls short of an indemnity.
associate: dated: 15 july 2022
dated: 15 july 2022
[1] transcript 26 august 2019, page 13.[2] transcript 8 february 2021, page 23.[3] i note that although mr campton sc advised the court on the first day of the hearing that he was not requiring the court to look at all of those exhibits, the folder of exhibits to the mother’s affidavit was marked as exhibit a3 and accordingly, the whole of the exhibit is in evidence.[4] transcript 27 august 2019, page 217.[5] transcript 28 august 2019, page 229.[6] transcript 26 august 2019, page 101.[7] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 150-151.[8] transcript 27 august 2019, page 161.[9] transcript 27august 2019, page 170.[10] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 173-174.[11] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 178-179. [12] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 186-187.[13] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 191-192. [14] transcript 27 august 2019, page 192.[15] transcript 27 august 2019, page 199. [16] transcript 27 august 2019, page 211.[17] transcript 27 august 2019, page 235.[18] transcript 28 august 2019, pages 260-261. [19] transcript 28 august 2019, pages 246-247.[20] expert’s report, paragraphs 31 and 119.[21] transcript 28 august 2019, page 238.[22] transcript 27 august 2022, pages 168-170.[23] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 177-178.[24] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 198-200. [25] transcript 27 august 2019, page 180. [26] transcript 27 august, pages 180-183. [27] this being exhibit a4. [28] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 120 and 121.[29] transcript 27 august 2019, page 164.[30] transcript 28 august 2019, page 234. [31] transcript 28 august 2019, pages 236-237. [32] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 211-213.[33] this is recorded in exhibit a6.[34]this is recorded in exhibit a11.[35] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 145-146.[36] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 162-163.[37] transcript 27 august 2019, page 173.[38] transcript 27 august 2019, page 163.[39] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[40] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[41] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[42] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[43] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[44] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[45] transcript of 27 august 2019 page 166.[46] transcript of 27 august 2019 page 151.[47] transcript 27 august 2019, pages 186-187.[48] sadasivam & seshan [2019] famcafc 76; keskin & keskin [2019] famcafc 236; darley & darley (no 4) [2021] famcafc 54.[49] penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4; (1980) 144 clr 311.[50] pbf as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania) & trf & lkl [2005] famca 158; (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at 130.[51] medlon and medlon (no 6) (indemnity costs) [2015] famcafc 157; (2015) flc 93-664.[52] latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59; (1990) 170 clr 534.[53] mother’s trial affidavit paragraph 113.