last updated: 1 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
denys & kellett [2022] fedcfamc2f 971
orders
the court declares that:
and the court orders that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland:
the parties’ cases
legal principles
de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship working out if persons have a relationship as a couple (2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following:   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case. (5) for the purposes of this act:   a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.
to what extent did the parties share a common residence?
did the parties have a sexual relationship?
what degree of financial dependence or interdependence did the parties have?
to what extent did the parties have a mutual commitment to a shared life?
ownership, acquisition and use of property
care and support of children
reputation and public aspects of the relationship
ms denys’s witnesses
ms j
ms k
ms l
ms m
ms n
mr kellett’s witnesses
mr d
ms o
ms g
witness credibility
conclusion
a person’s intention is a fact and as such it “is as much the subject of evidence as the state of his digestion” (hodge m malek, phipson on evidence (thomson reuters, 19th edition, 2018)). as with any other fact, that intention may be inferred from other facts that have been established and it may require an evaluation of all of the evidence so as to determine the actual intention of the person. this is quite different to imputing or imposing an intention on a person which they did not have, which is, in effect, to create a fact that in reality does not exist. such a course is not permissible and we consider that his honour erred in doing so.
associate: dated: 25 july 2022
dated: 25 july 2022