last updated: 10 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
vang & chung [2022] fedcfamc2f 1364
orders
the court orders that:
costs application
the court notes that:
the court further orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge morley
material relied upon
consideration  principally on the basis of an abuse of process in that the schedules attached to each of the subpoenas were asserted to be cast so wide as to be oppressive to each of the subpoenaed entities, and (2) further, on the basis that they were so wide that they would have required each of the subpoenaed entities to virtually hunt through the whole of their records for the corporation in their corporate records for the individual or documents, where in specie or in data, held by him relating to the conduct of his business so as to attempt to identify documents which may fall within the terms of those schedules.   further, on the basis that they were so wide that they would have required each of the subpoenaed entities to virtually hunt through the whole of their records for the corporation in their corporate records for the individual or documents, where in specie or in data, held by him relating to the conduct of his business so as to attempt to identify documents which may fall within the terms of those schedules.
any financial investments you act on behalf of [mr chung] [the husband] his trust or any corporations related to him.
please provide below for the period 28 august 2014 until now.
documents and records related to changes in company shares, changes in board members, and company ownership structure,
the law ] in 1978, in lucas industries ltd. v. hewitt 45 flr175 and 189-90, smithers j explained the use of the subpoena, and its abuse, in the following terms:
the purpose of the process of subpoena is to facilitate the proper administration of justice between parties. for that purpose it is the policy of the law that strangers who have documents may be put to certain trouble in searching for and gathering together relevant documents and bringing them to court. it is according to the same principle that persons who have knowledge of facts are put to the inconvenience of being brought to court and required to give evidence. ...it would, no doubt, be a good reason for failure to produce documents that the effort and expense involved in doing so was greater than ought reasonably to be required. this is a matter which would at that stage be capable of rational resolution by the court according to the circumstances. so far as the effort and expense in arranging for production of particular documents in any case exceeded what was reasonable, their non-production would be acceptable to the court. but if a subpoena be wholly set aside on the grounds that on its face it is oppressive, then the subpoena wholly fails and there is the possibility that although some or even substantial compliance might have been undertaken with a minimum of effort, the whole procedure may be needlessly frustrated.  ] in 1984, in purnell bross v. transport engineers pty. ltd. 73 flr160 at 174-5, powell j summarized circumstances in which the court would exercise its power to set aside a subpoena. having done so, he took a global view of the court's power, saying:
it seems to me, however, that when, as one does, one finds assertions that the court's power to set aside a subpoena is but part of the inherent jurisdiction of the court (see, for example, r. v. lewes justices, ex parte secretary of state (supra) at 240 per lord parker cj, 244 per bridge j (as he then was) coupled with assertions that a subpoena will be set aside if it be used for an impermissible, or illegitimate, purpose, or, if to require compliance with it would be oppressive (see, for example, commissioner for railways v. small (supra) at 573-575 per jordan cj) it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, in reality, the court's power to set aside a subpoena is but one aspect of the court's inherent jurisdiction to prevent an abuse of its process by a party to litigation, and that, accordingly, the particular classes of case which i have recorded above are to be regarded as no more than examples of situations which the courts, in the past, have held, and, in the future, would hold to be cases of an abuse of process.
a subpoena duces tecum is a writ issued by the court upon application by or on behalf of a party. it commands a person to whom it is directed, to attend before the court and to search for and produce to the court, documents relating to the cause or matter. it carries upon its face a warning of the possible consequences for non-compliance being attachment and fine. they are in the nature of peremptory orders demanding obedience. discovery and inspection of documents is a pre-trial procedure to ascertain the existence, nature and contents of relevant documents. whilst the process of discovery is subject to the control of the court and the court can determine matters such as the validity of objection to production for inspection and generally enforce the duty to make disclosure and grant inspection, the function and the practice and procedure relating to it differs from the issue of subpoean [sic] whether issued against a stranger or against a party to proceedings.[1]  ] we should not let the opportunity pass without making some observation about use of the provisions of order 28 as an aid to discovery. [25] in our view, order 20 governs the practice and procedure for pre-trial discovery and inspection and order 28 should only be used to ensure the production of appropriate documents at the hearing of any application.
... the first is obeying the subpoena, by the witness bringing the documents to the court and handing them to the judge. this step involves the determination of any objections of the witness to the subpoena, or to the production of the documents to the court pursuant to the subpoena. the second step is the decision of the judge concerning the preliminary use of the documents, which includes whether or not permission should be given to a party or parties to inspect the documents. the third step is the admission into evidence of the document in whole or in part, or the use of it in the process of evidence being put before the court by cross-examination or otherwise ... upon the first step the person to whom the subpoena is addressed may seek to, and have, the subpoena set aside on the ground that it was improperly issued and an abuse of the power to compel the production of documents in any one of a number of ways. such a case is where the subpoena is used for the purpose of discovery. the essential feature of discovery in this connection, as appears from burchard’s case ([1891] 2 q.b. 241, at pp. 247, 248) and small’s case ((1938) [1938] nswstrp 29, 38 s.r. (n.s.w.) 564, at p. 574, 55 w.n. 215) is that the person to whom the subpoena is addressed will have to make a judgment as to which of his documents relate to issues between the parties. it is oppressive to place upon a stranger the obligation to form a judgment as to what is relevant to the issue joined in a proceeding, to which he is not a party. hence it is an abuse of the use of a subpoena to impose this obligation. it follows that it is an abuse to use any subpoena, i.e. even to a party to obtain discovery.[2]
associate: dated: 21 october 2022
dated: 21 october 2022
[1] in the marriage of sharpe [1990] famca 63; (1990) 100 flr 115, 118.[2] waind v national employers’ mutual general insurance association limited (1978) 1 nswlr 372, 381[e]-[f], 381[g]-382[a].