last updated: 15 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
giordano & stone (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1081
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mcclelland:
introduction
relevant legal principles  subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.   if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
consideration
the parties’ respective financial circumstances
receipt of assistance by way of legal aid by either party
conduct of the parties in relation to the proceedings
whether the proceedings were necessitated by a party’s failure to comply with previous orders
whether any party has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings
whether an offer has been made in writing to settle the proceedings
such other matters as the court considers relevant
litigation is sufficiently stressful and expensive for all concerned without the unnecessary aggravations of additional cost, stress, distraction and delay occasioned by inefficiency, incompetence or sheer disregard of the rules. to the extent that the contention advanced on behalf of [the appellant] reflects an assumption that inefficiently or incompetently conducted litigation, and the waste in terms of time and money inflicted upon the other party or parties, is nevertheless consistent with the promotion of access to justice because the end may ultimately justify the means, that assumption must be rejected. inefficient or incompetent conduct of litigation may cause injustice even if it is not intended to do so. litigation that is conducted inefficiently, incompetently or in disregard of the rules by one party is no less oppressive to the other party because it is not intended to be oppressive... (footnote omitted)
should costs be ordered on an indemnity basis?
in limousin & limousin (costs) [2007] famca 1178, [2007] 38 famlr 478, the court reviewed the authorities in relation to indemnity costs. reference was there made to the judgment of the full court in kohan and kohan [1992] famca 116, (1993) flc 92-340. it was recorded at 79,614 (citations omitted) in which it was said that:
“the intent of s 117(1) and 117(2) is that in this jurisdiction costs should not follow the event as a matter of course. however, where the justice of the matter so requires, the court may make such order as the court considers just. as we have pointed out, the court may depart from the scale of costs prescribed under the rules. however, the purpose of fixing a scale of costs must be understood to signify that they contain the normal rates of charges. by o 38 r 2, the provisions of o 38 apply to costs ordered to be paid or taxed, and costs payable or to be taxed between solicitor and client. o 38 r 7 makes provision for the allowance of additional amounts for complexity, difficulty or novelty and special skill, knowledge or responsibility. consequently, the court should not depart lightly from the ordinary rules relating to costs between party and party and the circumstances justifying the departure should be of an exceptional kind. see degmam v wright (no 2) [1983] 2 nswlr 354], wentworth v rogers (no 5) (1986) 6 nswlr 534, hobartville stud v union insurance co (1991) 25 nswlr 358 at 368–70. indemnity costs orders are still an exception in this and other jurisdictions.
the court in limousin (supra) also referred to the judgment of shephard j in colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 118 alr 248 upon which learned counsel for the wife relies in support of the present application. shephard j said in colgate-palmolive (supra) (at 256):
“2. the ordinary rule is that, where the court orders the costs of one party to litigation to be paid by another party, the order is for payment of those costs on the party and party basis ... 3. this has been the settled practice for centuries in england. it is a practice which is entrenched in australia. either legislation (perhaps in the form of an amendment to rules of court) or a decision of an intermediate court of appeal or of the high court would be required to alter it ... 4. in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course ...”
reference was made to the later decision of the full court of yunghanns v yunghanns [2000] famca 681, (2000) flc 93-029 in which is [sic] was said (at 87,471, par 31):
“it will suffice to say that the categories of circumstances which enliven the discretion to award indemnity costs are not closed, and that it is not a condition precedent to the exercise of the discretion that some collateral purpose or species of fraud be established against the party against whom such an order is sought.”   where it appears that an action has been commenced or continued in circumstances where a party properly advised should have known that he had no chance of success. in such cases the action must be presumed to have been commenced or continued for some ulterior motive or because of some wilful disregard of the known facts (see fountain selected meats (sales) pty. ltd. v. international produce merchants pty. ltd. [1988] fca 202, [1988] 81 alr 397.) (b) making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (see fountain selected meats (sales) pty. ltd. (supra). (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty. ltd. v keeprite australia pty. ltd (unreported, federal court, 3 may 1991)). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragatta developments pty. ltd. v westpac banking corporation (unreported federal court, 5 march 1993)).   making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (see fountain selected meats (sales) pty. ltd. (supra). (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty. ltd. v keeprite australia pty. ltd (unreported, federal court, 3 may 1991)). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragatta developments pty. ltd. v westpac banking corporation (unreported federal court, 5 march 1993)).   evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty. ltd. v keeprite australia pty. ltd (unreported, federal court, 3 may 1991)). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragatta developments pty. ltd. v westpac banking corporation (unreported federal court, 5 march 1993)).   the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragatta developments pty. ltd. v westpac banking corporation (unreported federal court, 5 march 1993)).   an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise [medlon no. 6 (supra)].
applicant father ordered to pay costs
no basis established for awarding costs in a fixed sum amount tations omitted)
associate: dated: 16 august 2022
dated: 16 august 2022
[1] fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158; (2005) 33 fam lr 123 at [41].