last updated: 25 july 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
watton & watton [2022] fedcfamc2f 1095
orders
the court orders that:  discussing these proceedings with x and y or either of them, or within their hearing, (b) denigrating the other parent or member of their family to x and y or either of them, or within their hearing, and (c) exposing x and y or either of them to any form of violence, threats or intimidation.   denigrating the other parent or member of their family to x and y or either of them, or within their hearing, and (c) exposing x and y or either of them to any form of violence, threats or intimidation.   exposing x and y or either of them to any form of violence, threats or intimidation.   for between 15 – 30 minutes, each tuesday between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, (b) on each of x and y’s birthdays between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, (c) on each of the paternal grandparent’s birthdays between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, and (d) on easter sunday and on christmas day.   on each of x and y’s birthdays between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, (c) on each of the paternal grandparent’s birthdays between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, and (d) on easter sunday and on christmas day.   on each of the paternal grandparent’s birthdays between 7:00pm and 7:30pm, and (d) on easter sunday and on christmas day.   on easter sunday and on christmas day.
reasons for judgment
judge bender:
introduction  the father undertake dialectical behaviour therapy (‘dbt’) for 12 months, (b) the father produce a report to the mother from his treating dbt psychologist that the father has satisfactorily undertaken dbt for six months (‘the dbt report’) and a clean hair follicle test that shows no illicit substance use for six months, (c) upon providing the dbt report and clean hair follicle test, x and y spend supervised time with the father for two hours each fortnight at d contact centre and for three hours each month supervised by the paternal aunt ms e, and (d) upon completing 12 professional supervised visits, the father obtain an observational report and if such report is positive and he has a further report from his treater that he is continuing to engage in dbt, the parties attend mediation to review x and y’s arrangements.   the father produce a report to the mother from his treating dbt psychologist that the father has satisfactorily undertaken dbt for six months (‘the dbt report’) and a clean hair follicle test that shows no illicit substance use for six months, (c) upon providing the dbt report and clean hair follicle test, x and y spend supervised time with the father for two hours each fortnight at d contact centre and for three hours each month supervised by the paternal aunt ms e, and (d) upon completing 12 professional supervised visits, the father obtain an observational report and if such report is positive and he has a further report from his treater that he is continuing to engage in dbt, the parties attend mediation to review x and y’s arrangements.   upon providing the dbt report and clean hair follicle test, x and y spend supervised time with the father for two hours each fortnight at d contact centre and for three hours each month supervised by the paternal aunt ms e, and (d) upon completing 12 professional supervised visits, the father obtain an observational report and if such report is positive and he has a further report from his treater that he is continuing to engage in dbt, the parties attend mediation to review x and y’s arrangements.   upon completing 12 professional supervised visits, the father obtain an observational report and if such report is positive and he has a further report from his treater that he is continuing to engage in dbt, the parties attend mediation to review x and y’s arrangements.
background
“[mr watton] reports recent intense relationship with a woman he met a few months ago at a party and ‘put her on a pedestal’. he reports she ended things abruptly accusing him of being ‘too much and too intense’. [mr watton] feels rejected and reports this is a pattern he has noticed throughout his life, describing low self esteem, poor self worth and feeling the need to be validated by others. he feels he has never been able to hold down a ‘proper job’ and have a normal relationship due to his past issues and now feels he needs to address the issues from his past in order to work on himself and move forward. today he disclosed past childhood sexual abuse perpetrated by an older [relative] when he was around 10 years old and only told his parents recently. feels he has struggled with guilt, shame and inadequacy feelings all of his life down to this past trauma. past frequent use of ‘party drugs’ over the years as works in [hospitality]. denies recent use for many many years however used [an illicit drug] twice last week - thursday - denies will use again and stated ‘it was horrible’. states he used as was desperate to feel better but didn’t help. impression – [multiple mental health conditions].”
“the historical accounts given by [mr watton] includes long term struggles with emotional liability, interpersonal sensitivities, fear of abandonment and making desperate attempts not to be alone, chronic emptiness, anger outbursts, and impulsivity that affects his social and occupational functioning. he did not provide a history consistent with past hypomanic or manic episodes. hence, he was given the diagnosis of [a mental health condition]). psychoeducation was provided around [his mental health condition] including the primary treatment with dbt (and other relevant therapies). the limited role of medication was discussed.”
“a report was received due to information that the children had been exposed to family violence perpetrated by their father towards their mother. an incident of family violence [in early] 2020 was reported involving the father attending the mother’s home and giving the mother an ultimatum “to take him back”, which resulted in the father physically and verbally assaulting the mother, causing property damage and pushing [x] which hurt her, no resulting injuries. the report further alleged [illicit drug] misuse by the father, threats to kill both himself and the mother and the alleged organised sexual assault of the mother by a third party. ... [in mid] 2020, child protection interviewed the mother and the children, and the mother disclosed ongoing verbal and mental abuse by the father. [x] disclosed to child protection that her father had pushed her and hurt her and that he was often angry and fighting with people. [x] stated that she did not wish to see her father until this changed. child protection did not identify any concerns for the mother’s presentation or relationship with the children. [in mid] 2020, the father was assessed as responsible for emotional harm and the concerns were substantiated. during child protection involvement, the father obtained an intervention order against the mother and made allegations about her mental health and substance misuse. child protection investigated these concerns and found no evidence to corroborate these allegations. child protection applied for the father’s health records which stated that the father had been referred for a psychiatric review due to [self-harm] ideations in [early] 2020. during this assessment, the father disclosed current [illicit drug] use and ongoing fleeting thoughts of [self-harm] throughout his life. the father was diagnosed with [a mental health condition] and referred for dialectical behavioural therapy which he did not engage in. child protection interviewed the father who appeared to be engaging in gas-lighting behaviours, creating a narrative of mental health concerns and substance misuse by the mother which was likely to have an emotional impact on the children by constant use of derogatory language regarding the mother who was their primary carer. the father denied all allegations and showed no insight into the impacts of his actions on his children. both the mother and father completed urine drug screens as directed by the department throughout involvement with all screens completed, clear of illicit substances. ... child protection assessed the mother to be a protective parent and that if a full exclusion order remained in place, there would be sufficient safety for [x] and [y]. child protection provided a letter to the court recommending the full order remain in place. it was assessed that the father’s contact with the children needed to be supervised by an approved supervisor. the father requested the paternal grandparents and two paternal aunts be assessed to supervise. child protection assessed the paternal grandparents and paternal aunt [ms n] were not suitable to supervise contact. the paternal aunt, [ms e] was assessed as a suitable contact supervisor... [in mid] 2020 the case plan articulated that the children were to remain in the care of their mother and have supervised contact with the father, that the children were to engage in local schooling and day care and that as appropriate the mother and children were to remain engaged in counselling as recommended during child protection involvement.”
evidence
the father’s police records
2003 offence – bond/undertaking. mid-2011 offence – conviction/fine.
mid-2011 offence – conviction/fine.
“when the defendant has checked the afm mobile phone messages. the defendant has become irrational and verbally abusive to the afm in relation to a text message found on the telephone. the defendant has called the afm a fucking slut and accused her of having an affair. the defendant has then struck the afm [multiple times]. there are no visible injuries to the afm.”
“upon arrival police found [ms watton] outside front door of premises trying to get in and could see [mr watton] inside the door holding it closed. keys were in the lock... police found a [weapon] on the front driver’s seat of vehicle underneath a [piece of clothing]. police confiscated the [weapon]. police spoke to each party separately and were told completely conflicting stories with regard to who initially held the [weapon] at who, ownership of property, etc. [ms watton] states [mr watton] came at her with [weapon] and has punched her. states he then threw the [weapon] and she picked it up. [mr watton] states [ms watton] kicked her from a seating position in the vehicle and picked up the [weapon] which is why he locked her out of the house... found parties had an interim intervention order in [mid] 2005, never proceeded with. police have attended on numerous occasions for verbal disputes.”
the 15-page document given to dr q by the father
“[late] 2020 my name is [mr watton] , i’m 51 years old, dob [...] 1969. i am writing this as i feel my children [x] dob [...] 2011 and [y] dob [...] 2016, are in grave danger of sexual abuse and emotional abuse by the mother [ms watton] dob [...] 1978... [ms watton] is breastfeeding my son, on 2 occasions, i walked into the bedroom where i found my 3 yo son naked with his mother, i uncovered the sheets, and found the mother naked with a vibrator sex toy, inside her vagina, and masturbating watching [disturbing] porn with my son on her boobs onlooking... she is a deeply traumatised individual under that skin, with a sinister side, her childhood trauma and sexual abuse since a very young age has raised her to be a hater of men, she has stated many times, “she hates men” she has no empathy or morals. in the years i knew her, not once did i see her cry or show emotion or laughter. she never held my hand or gave me love or said i love you... she spent many years in foster care, and in orphanages with her siblings. at a young age she was constantly sexually molested by [family members]. [one family member] ended up in jail on charges of [serious sex offences] in which [ms watton] was forced to watch. [ms watton] stated she was also made to [commit a disturbing sex act] when she was young. [another of ms watton’s relatives] had molested all the children when they were young 4 – 6 years of age. [he] is homeless and is now in a mental institution [...], he [has a mental illness] and needs constant treatment... [ms watton] is always drunk and drugged, [an illicit drug] was her addition at the time, as she stated on many occasions to me. i did know her ex-partners and girlfriends that did confirm this with me, as they did [drugs] with her in hotels, clubs and house parties, swingers, and fetish events. [ms watton] stated that when on drugs she would do anything sexually, all her boundaries were open, and she was sexually aroused that she lost all her inhibitions. during these times when she was high her truths came out about her past promiscuous encounters... [ms watton] was well known for a very open and promiscuous reputation... now given her history of events i feel [ms watton] could have easily tampered with the swabs. i have high anxiety now that the child i raised all these years and have bonded with may possibly not be mine? but i love [x] in either way, even if she is not my child, i raised her, she is mine... drugs were no longer part of the lifestyle, neither was sex... she was a megalomaniac, or psychopath i am not sure, but she needs assessment. i have attached many images files, text messages, videos, and supporting evidence.”
the mother
the father
“anxiety is very high... i think of things or imagine, then i think it is real. i am left feeling it really happened... i get annoyed or agitated very easily. at times i am angry & lose temper... i am sad most of the time. i have one good day out of 6. or 80% depressed... i have no sex drive. i feel lazy and unmotivated... at times i feel worthless lately, i am not good enough and all i do is failing... i do not feel like a good father – i want to give my child but i cant and this is killing me. i am very depressed at this time.”
“she is a very strong person. her father has [a mental health condition] and she grew up around it and she is very strong so it didn’t impact her.”
ms e
“the mother: i seen it at the table when he snapped [...], losing [...] has triggered something. the grief. [ms e]: i know what he’s like, he is [mentally ill], i don’t trust his mood swings at all.”
“the mother: he nearly beat up other mothers at [x]’s school today. just angry. [ms e]: omg he definitely needs to see a psychiatrist & start taking his meds. ... that’s what he did to me that time, scared the shit out of me.”
the paternal grandparents
dr q
“whilst in his material [mr watton] provides copious and detailed claims and allegations against [ms watton], her presentation occurred in contrast to those allegations of sexual acting out, substance abuse and perverted sexual practices under the influence of [illicit drugs]. whilst she did acknowledge a poor background, describing herself as a helper when young, as such has been predisposed to her tendencies to help others in those circumstances. nonetheless there is no suggestion of trauma or abuse during her childhood in contrast to the allegations raised by [mr watton] in his unsworn lengthy documents which he composed himself, with some brief material being provided by his legal representative. throughout her account, [ms watton] spoke lovingly of her children and is currently attempting to reconstruct her life with them.”
“[mr watton] confirmed a longstanding psychiatric history centred on an assault in 2006 when he was attacked by [several] men who were acting in an extortionate manner. he saw [dr t], psychiatrist and comments “that’s when my life changed’. when he became a witness he received death threats and received a victims of crime payout [...]. he was no longer safe. a victims impact report (2006) was undertaken by [a doctor] who diagnosed him with posttraumatic stress disorder. prior to this he’d first seen [dr t] in 2002, describing himself as having fallen into a hole in the context of a breakup of his relationship with a partner. his relationship with his father at the time was described as “not strong”. his mother was described as suffering from depression and there was a family history of depression on her side of the family. he denied that his mother suffered from depression or at least alleged that she’d never been diagnosed with that condition despite [dr t]’s clear history he had obtained from [mr watton] to that effect. again he attempted to minimise certain facts which appeared to show him or his family in a negative light. the history obtained by [dr t] noted that [mr watton] felt apart from his school peers, was critical of others, always wanted to be popular, but got into trouble and engaged in vandalism. at the time he left school he was described as easily confused and wouldn’t take orders, attempted various apprenticeships and his work history was poor. a twelve year marriage ended because of his difficulties with jealousy. examination revealed him to be talkative with an obsessive ruminative style and was managed with high doses of [an antidepressant] with some improvement over time. he was also managed with a variety of heavy powerful psychotic preparations [...] and was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder which was intractable and resistant to treatment. when seen again [in] 2009 he’d been subject to extortion by criminals, had attended [dr u], psychiatrist whose treatment was ineffective and from then on, he has attended [dr s] since 2009 and was managed with [antidepressant medication]. when seen [in early] 2020 by the cat team he reported his childhood as difficult, describing his parents as cold and not affectionate towards him, stated he was sexually abused by an older [relative] when he was aged around 10 at high school which was difficult due to intense feelings of shame, guilt and embarrassment, feeling that he was a loner. [mr watton] again adamantly denied that history and said those details were provided by his wife and not him, and again attempted to deny historical aspects which could place him in a negative light. the history notes that [mr watton] had tried several apprenticeships which never lasted and always lost interest, was involved in numerous odd jobs which he did on and off for many years. he described his relationship with [ms watton] as loveless and stated that he didn’t know why he got married, spoke of much love for his children, was unemployed and on a disability support pension currently, had recently met a new woman but she ended that relationship abruptly which left him feeling heartbroken. when assessed at [j hospital in mid] 2020 mental status examination noted [mr watton] to be broken and depressed because he couldn’t see his children, preoccupied with his ex-wife preventing him from seeing them, claimed “[ms watton] beat the shit out of me”, and reported that he wanted to see the children and had lost hope. he confirmed that following initial assessment by the cat team, he underwent a ‘tick the box’ assessment by “young psychiatrist” which diagnosed him with [a mental condition] which he adamantly denied he had. he confirmed his mental health did deteriorate, having been prescribed [medication] which he said caused him to become erratic and delusional and was prescribed [...] a sedating antipsychotic preparation, having been assessed by a psychiatrist. subsequently his medication regime was changed to an antipsychotic preparation at a low dose and an ssri antidepressant which he said a stabilising effect upon him. despite that treatment however he attended [v hospital], having been brought in by police with [self-harm] ideation, social issues with his ex-wife and breakdown of the relationship due to seeing unfaithful messages on her phone, was involved in a family court hearing the day before and did not get the outcome he was hoping for, made [self-harm] statements to a female friend who contacted police, [mr watton] wanting to [harm] himself with a [weapon] in a hotel room, ‘nil actual harm and denies current [self-harm] intent’. whilst there were no frank delusions, some mild persecutory ideation surrounding his reality-based situation was noted with accompanying hopeless and helpless thoughts. no other psychotic phenomena were elicited. he was considered to be of low [self‑harm] risk or harm to others, and noted that this was one of three presentations through 2020 in the context of current legal issues and separation from his children. the impression was that of an acute stress reaction. he was not presenting with endogenous depression and was agreeable with a plan for ongoing liaison as required.”
“he was highly anxious and mildly depressed. his affect was preoccupied and tense. his account was accompanied by considerable emotional display and various pleading statements.”
“there was a conveyed sense of pre-existing vulnerability, an early difficult childhood, indications of instability and personal vulnerability with a sporadic work history and a variety of ongoing dysfunctional partnerships and relationships on a background of a family history of psychiatric illness (depression) complicated by a vicious assault with resultant ptsd, and emotional decompensation in the context of the breakdown of his relationship with [ms watton] with resultant erratic behaviours and a brief psychotic episode. his personality functioning was assessed as [...] complicated by significant [illicit drug] abuse. there were depressed and anxious themes.”
“[mr watton] described himself as the victim of [ms watton] who was physically and emotionally abusive of him. whilst acknowledging his [illicit drugs] abuse, he was inclined to downplay this and the general tenor of his account was to obviate any responsibility in regard to the issues involved between himself and [ms watton] and blamed her for his substance abuse.”
vive voce evidence
“insight and wanting to get better and having some... psychological awareness are all important positive factors in a positive prognosis outcome. i think what we’re dealing with, however, is a combination of a psychiatric conditions in the form of a depressed mood and agitation on a background of ptsd together with a significant contribution from personality and his psychiatrist indicates that he has features of [a mental health condition] and i feel that’s a large and contributing aspect of his current presentation and condition.”
“well, it’s aimed at symptomatic relief of his symptoms, if you like, to modulate his mood, his intensity and also his tendencies to be aggravated so that’s the end of the treatment spectrum. the other end if to look at psychological treatment involving his self-awareness, some reality testing with him as to the decisions that he makes and his general tendencies... to be emotionally tense and easily aggravated.”
“i believe that in regard to aspects of his functioning he really does lack insight and he’s inclined to see the problems lying outside of himself. so that... his psychiatrist treatment notes do not refer to him being challenged in any way in regard to his behaviours and beliefs. so that’s the big if and i would have to say he’s a fifty-fifty bet at this stage.”
“i felt that there was in some ways a genuine affection for the children. the degree to which he could parent them, however, was another question. and because of his instability and his dishonesty... i felt that to the extent that the children had a relationship with their dad and as he also had some kind of bond with them that any contact should occur for all those reasons and in supervised circumstances.”
when asked to expand on that he explained:-
“he had a serious psychiatric condition. at the highest, it’s a severe [mental health condition]. nonetheless, it appears that he has a bond with the children. however, i felt that the degree to which the court was wishing to support the relationship between him and the children to the degree that that was the case that any contact should... be supervised because of his disturbed personality functioning, his impulsivity and his inability to... manage himself emotionally.”
“well, i’m aware that whilst children have a right to see the other parent and so on that in some cases it’s just considered too much of a risk. based on what i’ve heard today and given that there has been time that has lapsed in the interim there appears to be little change in the more concerning elements of his conduct and psychological functioning and insight. the question given his dishonesty, when you throw that into the ring, means that he continues to be a risk to the children, in my view, because of his disturbed mental health and ongoing drug addiction, and hence, my view is that it may well be at the point where at least a period of no contact is best.”
“one of the problems here is there’s no score on the board for the father where upon he has actually done something to demonstrate to the court that he ought to be seen in a better light and to have earned some points and i think that’s a big problem. that speaks to not only a lack of insight but also a certain lack of decency when it comes to being aware that obviously he’s going to have to prove himself to the court in order to be the father that he requests to be. so i consider the fact that he hasn’t engaged in any such treatment is a big black mark really.”
“well, it has to be balanced against the harm... he has already done to the mother and to the children. so... the idea... that he is suffering due to not having contact with the children, well, unfortunately, that where he has brought himself... until such time as he can really demonstrate that he has changed, then... he understands that if he does that, that there’s an opportunity for him to have some contact with the children, then surely that might add to his motivation to do so, because he has sure demonstrated little motivation to engage in any treatment up to this point.”
“well, it depends. it depends on who the father is and what he is and so on. but it’s generally understood and it’s written in family law that that’s one of the considerations. but... it needs to be measured against risk. and there’s a high risk here.”
“well, the risk there at this point in time is that... which relates to the impact on the mother especially. the other risk is that such treatment – such contact in the absence of him really being able to undertake some form of change, it doesn’t necessarily lead anywhere.”
the father’s counsel then put to dr q given that evidence does it not follow that if orders were crafted to the effect the father have two hours once a fortnight professionally supervised in conjunction with an obligation to engage in some sort of treatment that dr q say he needs, this would satisfy the safety concerns raised. dr q responded:-
“well, motivation is a huge issue in all of this. i’m often asked this question about, “well after the court, you know, if i have treatment will things be better?” and so on... in cases such as this, i think that it is incumbent upon the father to demonstrate that he engages in such treatment for a period of, let’s say, six months and then, if he can do so – then the question of his having time with the children may be more appropriately looked at.”
“if what has just been said to me (sic by the father’s counsel) about the importance of the relationship between the father and the children is a serious consideration in all of this – because i don’t know what exactly the relationship exists between them and their dad... six months is a fair period... if he can get a score on the board, then i think the court is in a much better position to actually weigh matters of risk in those circumstances... and the positive in it is that he may actually for the first time in his life have some treatment that actually leads him to actually understand himself and to manage himself better.”
“she would definitely feel safer and her emotional state settled... if there was to be no contact... whilst the father in isolation says “i love the kids and i want to see them” it inevitably involves... the wife in knowing that... she has to take the kids to contact... so it’s just another element that has to be considered in this matter in terms of the wellbeing of the children and the mum.”
ms w
the family report
adults
children
evaluation
family violence: [ms watton] is reporting significant fear in relation to [mr watton], and she was diagnosed by [dr q] with ptsd, albeit [dr q] did not express opinion about the source of the ptsd. however, if there is time for the children with their father either unsupervised or without a sufficient period of time whereby it has been supervised, while the risks of substance use, mental health and violence have been systematically addressed by [mr watton], there may be ongoing negative impacts on [ms watton]’s mental health. if that occurs even if she were to overtly suppress indicators of her trauma response to the children, they are likely to be attuned to her and may be negatively impacted too. [ms watton]’s failure to take responsibility for the family violence is indicative of a lack of reflective capacity. reflective capacity is important in changing behaviours and learning new behaviours. [mr watton] showed no insight about the reports of his involvement in several incidents of family violence since 2002. it appears these incidents occurred prior to the assaults on [mr watton] in 2006 which reportedly caused his ptsd and possibly the [mental health condition]. substance use: the risks of the use of illicit substances and especially [illicit drugs] to parenting of children are well known. not the least is that a parent becomes more focussed on their drug use than the needs of the children. it will be important that there is a determination about the current substance use status of the parties... there are some concerns that given [mr watton]’s long history of substances use and his current age, that unless he develops alternative strategies to cope relapse is probable. mental health: ... if, as [mr watton] alleged, [ms watton] was sexually abused as a child within her family and the information was not disclosed to [dr q], it may or may not have altered the diagnosis of ptsd, but that would be a question for [dr q] ... [dr q]’s report about [mr watton]’s history of mental illness and his accounts to previous mental health clinicians was concerning in so far as there was a pattern by [mr watton] of minimisation of the information [dr q] referred to during the psychiatric assessment and this pattern was consistent with [mr watton]’s minimisation of illicit drug use and family violence. [mr watton]’s apparent tendency to minimise his behaviours and to blame others for the many inaccurate accounts of his responses to their questions, suggests caution is needed in considering what, if any time the children should spend with their father. there is low confidence that [mr watton] would engage with professionals and work at overcoming his substances use and violence to create a healthy environment for the children... there are concerns about the possible impacts on the children of [mr watton]’s diagnosed [mental health condition] and depression. it can be challenging for parents with this diagnosis and support around parenting is indicated. young children can have difficulty understanding why a parent’s behaviour changes suddenly as can occur with both [a mental health condition] and ptsd and they sometimes blame themselves because that is what children will do when they cannot manage things that they have no power over. caution should be exercised about assuming that [mr watton]’s family violence is related to his mental health as it appears there were violent incidents with others before 2006. the children: ... [x]’s presentation was somewhat inconsistent with her mother’s representation about her, that she is terrified of the father. [x] seemed to be a confident child and she also appeared to have mixed feeling about her father recalling some positives about him. this can occur over time in so far as a child who has been hurt by a parent can also wish for a positive experience with the parent... [x] expressed the hope that her father would change... [x]’s information tended to support that the children had previously sometimes had a positive bond with their father... she did express a wish to have contact with her father if he had made changes to his mean behaviours... it is known that there can be negative psychological and developmental impacts on children who experience trauma. both the trauma from family violence and also what is referred to as developmental trauma which can result from suddenly being separated from a primary carer have been flagged by the parties as traumas to these children. both traumas can have negative lifelong impacts. the question is whether there have been trauma impacts from family violence and/or whether there have also been trauma impacts from separation of the children from their father. if both traumas have occurred, which poses the greatest risk to the children’s wellbeing both physical and mental as they develop... ... it is known that children’s positive sense of themselves can be assisted by appropriate explanations of a parent’s mental health condition and is very much supported when that parent acts appropriately to ensure their mental health is well managed and their children have safety plans around any possible relapses. however, confidence is low that [mr watton] would commit to learning new strategies to keep the children safe. the collateral information suggested that [mr watton] is less than engaged in therapies that will assist him to manage when he is under increased stress... the focus did not appear to be on learning more about his mental health and addressing that so his children would be safe with him.
recommendations
90. the children live with their mother. the children spend time with their father professionally supervised for up to 2 hours each fortnight at a service such as [d contact centre] or another suitable professional service roughly half-way between the parties residences. until the service above becomes available the children spend time professionally supervised by [d contact centre] or another reputable private professional service identified by the icl, for up to 2 hours per fortnight... that the children also be able to spend time supervised with their father once per month for up to 3 hours with the paternal aunt ([ms e]) supervising provided she is willing to do so on an undertaking... [mr watton] produce a second hair follicle test negative for 3 months or more time so that together with the current hair follicle test it will provide an indicator of his status in relation to substances for a 6 month consecutive period. [mr watton] undertake a full men’s behaviour change program of at least 20 weeks such as offered by [z centre] and obtain a certificate of completion to provide to the icl. [mr watton] continue to attend his psychiatrist and follow medical treatments as prescribed. [mr watton] either undertake a dialectical behaviour therapy program (“dbt”) by private appointments with a suitably qualified psychologist trained in this therapy, or undertake a 6 week group program such as [aa program], or at another service who offers the same program. that until the recommendations at 96, 97, and 99 have been undertaken time with the children should remain supervised, if not professionally for all the time until they are complete, then at least by the paternal aunt or another agreed suitable supervisor.
“on reflection, and especially on hearing [dr q]’s evidence, as you’ve summarised it, i would suggest that there be no time until... i don’t know what her honour will do with that, but that there be no time. it’s not sounding good, in terms of [mr watton]’s commitment to his wellbeing... it was difficult from my perspective to determine – and i think i might have mentioned in the report – whether there was previous violence that was unrelated to a mental health condition, because it looked as if the mental health condition had started after the assault in 2006. so that was confusing as to which came first and whether they were related or not, the violence and the mental health condition. but it’s clear from what [dr q] has said that the mental health condition is the primary issue.”
“sometimes i think people reject it (the [mental health condition] diagnosis) because they don’t understand the connection with other psychological conditions. and sometimes if they have that psychoeducation about how it’s connected – because it’s a [mental health disorder], it sounds like... something you were born with, a defect. but it can come from other events in your life, like trauma, for example, is a big on. and when that’s understood, people can engage. so i’m not sure whether that’s the situation... i take [dr q]’s point that he has had ample opportunity over the years, it looks like, to engage around this and to understand and it doesn’t appear he has done that.”
“i think whatever relationship they had has obviously dissipated since i saw them. but my impression was that [x] had some positive memories of him. and i guess the way i would put it is that – as children do if they don’t have a parent in their life, that she might wish – and i think she even said that – that she would like to have a relationship with him if he was well. so that’s more of a dream than a relationship, i think. i did say some things about her views about [y] as well and that he misses his father. i guess at that time when i saw him... that he still had some memory of his father if he was... commenting that he missed him to them. but... it’s over a year now i think since i saw them. so it would be a bit of a distant memory even for [y] now.”
“that’s correct. and when someone does genuinely engage – so people who genuinely engage around [a mental health condition] actually understand the mechanics of it... they understand how it works, how their brain works and they understand why they need to do and learn to do the things that they would learn to help them negotiate with the world differently. so when they really understand that, they’re usually quite happy to have the diagnosis because it makes sense to them and it makes sense about why they’ve had the difficulties they’ve had and there’s a way out of it too, there’s a way to operate differently. so if you’re the therapist and you’re doing the therapy, you can usually tell when somebody is really engaged and learning, as opposed to the ticking the box and attending and they don’t actually do the things that you need to do, they just want to tell the story about what’s happening in their life basically”
“i would at this stage because, given the evidence... if the children were to commence some kind of time at this point and the father doesn’t engage, as he hasn’t – so he has been offered dbt in the past and didn’t engage, if that was to happen again, that could create more of a problem for the children than less of a problem. it would set them up in some ways to experience a level of grief they don’t need to they’re not going to have some sort of contact with their father eventually that’s more substantial than even telephone.”
“that’s the reason that i would agree, because any pre-emptive time, so time that might occur when he hasn’t done the required therapy and made significant changes, would be a definite trigger for her and would then impact the children negatively, not because she deliberately does anything, but because they’re likely to experience, at least because they’re attuned to her, her level of anxiety.”
the law
best interests of the child  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
“in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.”
section 60cc(2)
section 60cc(2)(a) – the benefit of the child having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
section 60cc(2)(b) – the need to protect the child from physical and psychological harm, from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
section 60cc(3)
section 60cc(3)(a) – any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
“i’ve already said that when children have a parent who’s missing they often have a wish, and it can be an idealised sort of wish, to have a relationship with that parent. and i certainly thought that when i spoke to [x] that was her wish because she said that... she wanted him to stop being mean... my understanding was... she would like to have a relationship with him provided he didn’t do those things anymore.”
section 60cc(3)(b) – the nature of the relationship of the child with:(i) each of the child’s parents, and(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
section 60cc(3)(c) – the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:(i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and(ii) to spend time with the child, and(iii) to communicate with the child
section 60cc(3)(ca) – the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
section 60cc(3)(d) – the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:(i) either of his or her parents, or(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been livingsection 60cc(3)(e) – the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
section 60cc(3)(f) – the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
section 60cc(3)(g) – the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
section 60cc(3)(h) – if the child is an aboriginal child or torres strait islander child:(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
section 60cc(3)(i) – the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
section 60cc(3)(j) – any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s familysection 60cc(3)(k) – if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family - any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:(i) the nature of the order,(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made,(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order,(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,(v) any other relevant matter
section 60cc(3)(l) – whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
section 60cc(3)(m) – any other factor or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
consideration of equal time or substantial and significant time
conclusion
x and y’s time with the father
x and y’s time with the paternal grandparents
associate: dated: 18 august 2022
dated: 18 august 2022