last updated: 15 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
holder & adams [2022] fedcfamc2f 1104
orders
the court orders that:
pending further order the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction  x born in 2010, currently 11 years and 10 months of age (“x”), and (b) y born in 2012, currently 10 years and 1 month of age (“y”).   y born in 2012, currently 10 years and 1 month of age (“y”).
the competing proposals
a. a cdt test to be analysed using the hplc analysis method, and a liver function test specifically measuring cgt, mcv levels as well as ast and alt levels.
5. for the purpose of complying with blood testing pursuant to the previous order: within seven (7) days of these orders, the mother is to attend a medical practitioner to obtain a referral to a pathology centre to undertake blood tests as provided for in the previous order, the mother is to instruct her medical practitioner that the referral for blood testing is to include a request that a copy of the results be sent to her medical practitioner. the mother is to instruct his/her medical practitioner that the referral provided by the medical practitioner for such blood testing is to include a request that a copy of the results be sent to the independent children’s lawyer and to the other parent or their legal representative (if represented).   during school term, the children spend time with the father from friday afternoon to 5:00 pm. sunday each alternate weekend and each tuesday from the conclusion of school to 6:30 pm, (b) during the new south wales short school holiday periods for five consecutive nights, (c) during the new south wales long school holiday period for two separate periods of seven consecutive nights, (d) that changeovers between the parties occur at either the children’s school or at the mother’s residence, and (e) that the orders made on 22 march 2022 with respect to cdt testing be discharged.   during the new south wales short school holiday periods for five consecutive nights, (c) during the new south wales long school holiday period for two separate periods of seven consecutive nights, (d) that changeovers between the parties occur at either the children’s school or at the mother’s residence, and (e) that the orders made on 22 march 2022 with respect to cdt testing be discharged.   during the new south wales long school holiday period for two separate periods of seven consecutive nights, (d) that changeovers between the parties occur at either the children’s school or at the mother’s residence, and (e) that the orders made on 22 march 2022 with respect to cdt testing be discharged.   that changeovers between the parties occur at either the children’s school or at the mother’s residence, and (e) that the orders made on 22 march 2022 with respect to cdt testing be discharged.   that the orders made on 22 march 2022 with respect to cdt testing be discharged.
evidence
background
issues before the court
the law  the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  0] ...apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
section 60cc considerations
meaningful relationship 8] ...should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...
risk of harm
family violence
alcohol use  holder] is doing the wrong thing and i’m sorting this out. hope she’s now stopped drinking at least... drinking a lot still?[3]
the children’s travel
my proposal for the children's time with [mr adams] is a reduction in the children's time with him. in january 2022 [mr adams] moved from [suburb r] to [suburb k] to live with his partner and i believe that the additional travel before and/or after school on school days, particularly with the children's health issues, makes that problematic for the children. i believe that the children should return to my care at 5.00pm sunday, particularly with [x] autism and [y]’s adhd and odd, will allow them to transition to school each monday more rested and without having had a lengthy journey in peak hour traffic, which will benefit them both being able to engage with their school teacher, schoolwork and classmates and friends at school. the same applies to any midweek times and is why i do not think overnight midweek time is best for the children.
the father’s care of the children
needs of the children
changeover issues
psychological harm
the additional considerations: section 60cc(3)
35. ... he gets so tired of this sort of point scoring and wishes they would both just stop doing it. [x] said that his advice to his parents would be to stop fighting over their children and to start enjoying them instead.
parental responsibility
discussion
alcohol testing
time with the father during school terms
as stated by ms c: the children have shared their experiences and voiced their concerns about being exposed to the parental conflict and have made it quite clear that they do not wish this situation to continue. it is suggested that the arrangement that will work best for the children is one where they are able to move easily between the two homes without being exposed to further conflict, to enable them to get what they need in terms of a relationship with each parent.
school holiday time
ancillary orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 22 august 2022
dated: 22 august 2022
[1] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 30. [2] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 46. [3] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, annexure 8.[4] exhibit m2.[5] father’s affidavit filed 5 august 2022, annexure a.[6] father’s affidavit filed 5 august 2022, annexure a.[7] father’s affidavit filed 5 august 2022, annexure e.[8] child impact report of ms c dated 15 april 2022, paragraph 39. [9] child impact report of ms c dated 15 april 2022, paragraph 39. [10] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 134.[11] child impact report of ms c dated 15 april 2022, paragraph 34.[12] child impact report of ms c dated 15 april 2022, paragraph 29.[13] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 51.[14] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 75.[15] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 89.[16] mother’s affidavit filed 3 august 2022, paragraph 90.