last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hammat & hammat [2022] fedcfamc2f 1111
orders
the court orders that:
spend time  for 3 months from the date of these orders, each alternate week from after school friday until start of school monday. if in any week the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, then the times shall be 3pm friday to 8am monday, (b) thereafter, each alternate week from after school on thursday until start of school on monday. if in any week the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, then the times shall be 3pm thursday to 8am monday, (c) after the period of 3 months from the commencement of the children’s time with the father in order 3 (b) above, in the week when the children are not spending time with the father, they shall spend time with him from wednesday after school to 7 pm and, if the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, from 3pm to 7 pm.   thereafter, each alternate week from after school on thursday until start of school on monday. if in any week the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, then the times shall be 3pm thursday to 8am monday, (c) after the period of 3 months from the commencement of the children’s time with the father in order 3 (b) above, in the week when the children are not spending time with the father, they shall spend time with him from wednesday after school to 7 pm and, if the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, from 3pm to 7 pm.   after the period of 3 months from the commencement of the children’s time with the father in order 3 (b) above, in the week when the children are not spending time with the father, they shall spend time with him from wednesday after school to 7 pm and, if the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, from 3pm to 7 pm.   the parent who would ordinarily have the children in their care at 3:30pm on the friday of the last day of school attendance in accordance with these orders shall have the first week and each alternate week thereafter, (b) the other parent’s time shall commence at 3.30pm on the following friday and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) changeover shall occur at 3.30pm on fridays unless otherwise agreed to between the parents in writing.   the other parent’s time shall commence at 3.30pm on the following friday and each alternate week thereafter, and (c) changeover shall occur at 3.30pm on fridays unless otherwise agreed to between the parents in writing.   changeover shall occur at 3.30pm on fridays unless otherwise agreed to between the parents in writing.   in even-numbered years- with the father for the first half and the mother for the second half, (b) in odd-numbered years- with the mother for the first half and the father for the second half, and (c) for the purpose of these orders, term 4 school holidays are deemed to commence at 3:30pm on the friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 3:30pm on the sunday immediately prior to the commencement of the following term and reach the midway point at 3:30pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   in odd-numbered years- with the mother for the first half and the father for the second half, and (c) for the purpose of these orders, term 4 school holidays are deemed to commence at 3:30pm on the friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 3:30pm on the sunday immediately prior to the commencement of the following term and reach the midway point at 3:30pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   for the purpose of these orders, term 4 school holidays are deemed to commence at 3:30pm on the friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 3:30pm on the sunday immediately prior to the commencement of the following term and reach the midway point at 3:30pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   with the mother from 5pm on christmas eve until 7pm boxing day each year, (b) with the mother from 10am on good friday to 7pm on easter monday each year, (c) with the father from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 7pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent with whom they are not spending time with on that day as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (e) with the father on his birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (f) with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the mother from 10am on good friday to 7pm on easter monday each year, (c) with the father from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 7pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent with whom they are not spending time with on that day as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (e) with the father on his birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (f) with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the father from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 7pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent with whom they are not spending time with on that day as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (e) with the father on his birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (f) with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   on each of the children's birthdays, with the parent with whom they are not spending time with on that day as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (e) with the father on his birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (f) with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the father on his birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (f) with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the mother on her birthday, for 2 hours at such times as agreed to between the parents and failing agreement from 5pm to 7pm, (g) with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the father form 5pm on friday immediately prior to father’s day to 7pm on father’s day, (h) with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   with the mother from after school on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7pm on mother’s day.   at the children's school if it is a school day, (b) if it is not a school day, at a neutral midpoint location at the commencement and conclusion of the fathers time pursuant to these orders.   if it is not a school day, at a neutral midpoint location at the commencement and conclusion of the fathers time pursuant to these orders.
and it is noted that the parent or their nominee may facilitate changeover of the children.   notify the other parent of the emergency and keep the parent updated in relation to the state of health of the child, (b) notify the other parent of the whereabouts of the child to facilitate the other parent attending that location, (c) provide to the other parent all details in relation to the medical facility attended upon and treating medical practitioner, and (d) authorize both parents to attend upon the child and receive all information and documents that parents of children would ordinarily be entitled from the medical practitioner/facility to receive, regardless of which parent presented the child.   notify the other parent of the whereabouts of the child to facilitate the other parent attending that location, (c) provide to the other parent all details in relation to the medical facility attended upon and treating medical practitioner, and (d) authorize both parents to attend upon the child and receive all information and documents that parents of children would ordinarily be entitled from the medical practitioner/facility to receive, regardless of which parent presented the child.   provide to the other parent all details in relation to the medical facility attended upon and treating medical practitioner, and (d) authorize both parents to attend upon the child and receive all information and documents that parents of children would ordinarily be entitled from the medical practitioner/facility to receive, regardless of which parent presented the child.   authorize both parents to attend upon the child and receive all information and documents that parents of children would ordinarily be entitled from the medical practitioner/facility to receive, regardless of which parent presented the child.
restraints
courses   the mother’s history as an escort/sex-worker, (b) the father’s criminal history, and (c) the father’s drug use history.   the father’s criminal history, and (c) the father’s drug use history.   the father’s drug use history.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
independent children’s lawyer  each alternate week from after school on a thursday until start of school on monday. if in any week the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, then the times shall be 3pm thursday to 8am monday, (b) in the week when the children are not spending time with the father as above, they shall spend time with him from wednesday after school to 7 pm and if the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, from 3pm to 7 pm.   in the week when the children are not spending time with the father as above, they shall spend time with him from wednesday after school to 7 pm and if the children are not at school and the school holiday provisions of these orders do not apply, from 3pm to 7 pm.   the parent who would ordinarily have the children in their care at 3:30pm on the friday of the last day of school attendance in accordance with these orders shall have the first week and each alternate week thereafter, (b) the other parent’s time shall commence at 3.30pm on the following friday and each alternate week thereafter , and (c) changeover shall occur at 3.30pm on fridays unless otherwise agreed to between the parents in writing.   the other parent’s time shall commence at 3.30pm on the following friday and each alternate week thereafter , and (c) changeover shall occur at 3.30pm on fridays unless otherwise agreed to between the parents in writing.   at the children's school if it is a school day, (b) if it is not a school day, at a neutral midpoint location at the commencement and conclusion of the fathers time pursuant to these orders. (c) and it is noted that the parent or their nominee may facilitate changeover of the children.   if it is not a school day, at a neutral midpoint location at the commencement and conclusion of the fathers time pursuant to these orders. (c) and it is noted that the parent or their nominee may facilitate changeover of the children.   and it is noted that the parent or their nominee may facilitate changeover of the children.
the mother  during school terms, each alternate weekend from after school or 3pm friday to 9am or commencement of school monday, commencing on the first week of each school term and each alternate week thereafter, (b) during school holidays, for the first half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period, (c) from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 5pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on father’s day, from 9:00am until 5:00pm.   during school holidays, for the first half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period, (c) from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 5pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on father’s day, from 9:00am until 5:00pm.   from 5pm on the day immediately prior to each eid until 5pm on the day immediately after the conclusion of each eid, (d) on father’s day, from 9:00am until 5:00pm.   on father’s day, from 9:00am until 5:00pm.   changeover is to occur at the children’s school on school days, and at the entrance of location d, e road, suburb f, on non-school days, (b) the parties’ shall communicate in relation to parenting arrangements concerning the children via text message, (c) the parties’ shall keep one another informed of their telephone number and shall advise the other within 48 hours of any change thereto,   the parties’ shall communicate in relation to parenting arrangements concerning the children via text message, (c) the parties’ shall keep one another informed of their telephone number and shall advise the other within 48 hours of any change thereto,   the parties’ shall keep one another informed of their telephone number and shall advise the other within 48 hours of any change thereto,   from 9:00am on christmas eve until 7:00pm on boxing day, (b) from 9:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter monday, (c) from 3:00pm on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7:00pm on mother’s day, (d) during school holidays, for the second half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 5pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   from 9:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter monday, (c) from 3:00pm on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7:00pm on mother’s day, (d) during school holidays, for the second half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 5pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   from 3:00pm on the friday immediately prior to mother’s day to 7:00pm on mother’s day, (d) during school holidays, for the second half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 5pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period.   during school holidays, for the second half of each school holiday period, and for this purpose, school holidays are deemed to commence from after school or 3pm on friday of the last day of school attendance, conclude at 5pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance and reach the midway point at 5pm on the middle day of the holiday period.
the father
material relied upon  case outline filed 31 may 2022, (b) amended response filed 18 november 2021, (c) trial affidavit filed 18 november 2021, (d) notice of risk filed 17 november 2020, (e) family report dated 11 january 2021.   amended response filed 18 november 2021, (c) trial affidavit filed 18 november 2021, (d) notice of risk filed 17 november 2020, (e) family report dated 11 january 2021.   trial affidavit filed 18 november 2021, (d) notice of risk filed 17 november 2020, (e) family report dated 11 january 2021.   notice of risk filed 17 november 2020, (e) family report dated 11 january 2021.   family report dated 11 january 2021.   case outline filed 2 june 2022, (b) amended initiating application filed 18 may 2021, (c) trial affidavit filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit filed 1 june 2022, (e) agreed statement of issues filed 6 august 2021, (f) child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   amended initiating application filed 18 may 2021, (c) trial affidavit filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit filed 1 june 2022, (e) agreed statement of issues filed 6 august 2021, (f) child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   trial affidavit filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit filed 1 june 2022, (e) agreed statement of issues filed 6 august 2021, (f) child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   updating affidavit filed 1 june 2022, (e) agreed statement of issues filed 6 august 2021, (f) child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   agreed statement of issues filed 6 august 2021, (f) child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   child inclusive conference dated 25 november 2020, (g) family report dated 20 july 2021.   family report dated 20 july 2021.   tender bundle of documents, (b) amended initiating application of mr hammat filed 18 may 2021, (c) trial affidavit of mr hammat filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit of mr hammat filed 1 june 2022, (e) amended response of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (f) trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   amended initiating application of mr hammat filed 18 may 2021, (c) trial affidavit of mr hammat filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit of mr hammat filed 1 june 2022, (e) amended response of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (f) trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   trial affidavit of mr hammat filed 19 november 2021, (d) updating affidavit of mr hammat filed 1 june 2022, (e) amended response of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (f) trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   updating affidavit of mr hammat filed 1 june 2022, (e) amended response of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (f) trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   amended response of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (f) trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   trial affidavit of ms hammat filed 18 november 2021, (g) notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   notice of child abuse filed 17 november 2020, (h) family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   family report dated 20 july 2021, (i) child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020.   exhibit a: income tax returns of 2014 – 2015 , (b) exhibit b: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020 and family report dated 20 july 2021, (c) exhibit c: psychologist report of ms g dated 12 april 2021, (d) exhibit d: icl tender bundle (but absent pp 30, 79-81, 84, 94-99, 102-103), (e) exhibit e: series of screenshots displaying text message exchanges between the mother and father, (f) exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit b: child inclusive conference memorandum dated 25 november 2020 and family report dated 20 july 2021, (c) exhibit c: psychologist report of ms g dated 12 april 2021, (d) exhibit d: icl tender bundle (but absent pp 30, 79-81, 84, 94-99, 102-103), (e) exhibit e: series of screenshots displaying text message exchanges between the mother and father, (f) exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit c: psychologist report of ms g dated 12 april 2021, (d) exhibit d: icl tender bundle (but absent pp 30, 79-81, 84, 94-99, 102-103), (e) exhibit e: series of screenshots displaying text message exchanges between the mother and father, (f) exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit d: icl tender bundle (but absent pp 30, 79-81, 84, 94-99, 102-103), (e) exhibit e: series of screenshots displaying text message exchanges between the mother and father, (f) exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit e: series of screenshots displaying text message exchanges between the mother and father, (f) exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit f: hair follicle test of father dated 9 june 2022. (g) exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.   exhibit g: pages 22-24 in the father’s tender bundle.
evidence
the father’s affidavits
the mother’s affidavit
oral evidence
exhibits
child inclusive conference held on 24 november 2020
family report
right. so there’s been some evidence about him not sending the kids to school during that six weeks. there was a few weeks left before term. he had employment issues. he said that this was all explained and they had school holidays. perhaps i might just ask you this evaluatively. do you think that therein lies a justification for a unilateral suspension of time with the children, which you’ve outlined in paragraph 18, a reasonable justification to suspend time completely, including telephone time? i – i would probably not recommend, based on those factors, that the children be retained.
and additionally, it would, in my submission, make it more damaging for the children when mum just pulls the pin. if they’re used to so much time with their father and they like it, if mum just suddenly pulls the rug out from that time, that is potentially extremely emotionally damaging to the children, isn’t it? it would have been distressing for the children.
and certainly, from [mr hammat’s] perceptions – which have to be taken into account, don’t they? we certainly hear a lot about mum’s perceptions, but [mr hammat’s] perceptions ? yes. ...are that when i sought to put the child support arrangements into a fair context, she declared war on me, she withheld the children, she wouldn’t let me talk to the children on the phone, and she’s tried to change a long-running arrangement by visiting all of her life’s traumas on me. do you understand that’s where he’s coming from? i understand that’s his perception.
we’ve got to balance this. so the actions – the objective actions of the mother in sending her daughter from a previous, these children for – giving them to dad while she sails to melbourne for the melbourne cup. i mean, all the time that’s gone on for all these years, those actions do not accord with the abuse case she started in 2020, do they? victims of serious family violence, victims of serious trauma can at times compartmentalise that trauma. they can sometimes put those things aside for a time and appear to i guess appear to function normally for a period of time. they can also behave in a way that – that appears – that acquiesces, i guess, to the perpetrator’s – to the perpetrator’s control in order to keep themselves and keep their children safe. so it is possible that during that time that [ms hammat] could be experiencing such trauma and could still continue to function i guess in an apparently normal and calm way. right. and it’s also possible that she’s exaggerating, lying about the stuff that she says [mr hammat] did because of the war she declared on him about child support? it’s – it’s possible.
i see. now, in the father’s affidavit, did you read evidence that he says that the parties’ have been able to communicate, vary arrangements, provide each other with information, photographs and the like in relation to the children? yes. okay. and you’re not going to suggest, i presume, that that is the mother under some grip of the father that she’s able to freely text him from her own home and sometimes initiate texts with him about the children? well, once again, if someone’s a victim of trauma, that doesn’t necessarily preclude them from having normal conversations right? about normal things. are you concerned that you might be visiting the woman’s lifetime trauma upon [mr hammat] in some of your assumptions? i – i – it’s not my job to find fact. it’s not your job to find fact? yes. so you don’t know whether the arrangements that went on for five years, from 2015, 16 through to 2020 where the children spent some years – perhaps more than half the time with their father – were the mother’s free will or whether she was operating under traumatic control of the father? i – i don’t know. you don’t know? i can only tell you what the behaviour might be consistent with in terms of trauma. well, behaviour of someone who is not under the grip of the trauma might also agree to get in touch with dad and say, “i’m going to the melbourne cup on a boat, will you mind the children”? obviously, yes. and it might also say, “i work and i work with [animals] and it suits me for you to have the children three weekends a month”? yes. and “it suits me for you to have the children half the school holidays”? yes. and she agreed to all of that when – i think [y] was as young as two was when she signed up for the – all of that time? yes. so do you still have an open mind, is that right, as to whether the mother was making arrangements in the best interests of the children or whether she was being controlled by the father? yes. as i said, i’m not in a position to find fact. sure. and what other indicia do you think might have emerged – the mother’s been legally represented throughout these proceedings – to support her contentions that this extreme abuse was visited upon herself and her – her children, given that – i think you’ve recommended a subpoena be issued to schools, police, community services and the like. is that the sort of areas you thought that some indicia might have emerged? sometimes, there might be some evidence in those. and you haven’t made any determination yourself about veracity of my client or [ms hammat], is that right? correct.
so did you find that a matter of concern that [x] appeared to have been influenced by his mother in relation to what he could or couldn’t say to you? i – i found it a matter of concern that he was considering his words. i wasn’t clear about what he was concerned about. i was certainly concerned that i thought it was likely that they had had conversations with their mother about some things that perhaps they – they didn’t need to be privy to. example, paragraph 50. the little boy at page 9 said [mr hammat] is lying to the court about the amount of time the children are spending with him, and that this prevents his mother from getting paid? yes. okay. now, that sort of goes to the heart of [mr hammat’s] complaint about this matter, doesn’t it? yes. and is supportive or corroborative, i want to suggest, of his theory that he lost touch with his kids and has been forced to bring these proceedings because the mother got put out with him going to child support and her being at risk of repaying money? it’s – it’s certainly supportive of the view that that was a concern for the mother. thank you. and it would be entirely inappropriate for the mother to be saying those things to [x] aged nine, wouldn’t it? yes. it’s inappropriate to have those discussions in front of a nine year old. it was put to the family report writer that the children need the father and this evidence was given: thank you. these children having spent the amount of time with their father that they have, expressing to you that they love him and want to see more of him and given the mother’s deeply traumatic past with all her other children and her work and the childhood abuse and all the rest, they need their father, don’t they, even if – sorry, they need their father, don’t they? if – if they are able to have a close, supportive relationship with their father and if it’s not going to further exacerbate trauma to their mother, then certainly having a relationship with their father would be beneficial. right. so do you think they should have a relationship with their father or not? i think that i have serious concerns about that relationship if – if the account of family violence is accurate, because i am concerned that the relationship with the children will be used to continue that – that dynamic of control, which ultimately would not be beneficial to the children. the attention of the family report writer was drawn to the mother’s previous allegations of family violence against [mr j] and this evidence was given: mr kenny: okay. so at page 25 of your honour, the annexures to my client’s tender bundle which the witness has given evidence that she’s read, says that the father of her elder four children, she decided to deny him access because his behaviour to his children was abusive. she said he hacked off [ms n’s] hair, he called [mr m] and [ms n] fat, he’d fed them inappropriately, all the things that she’s visited upon [mr hammat], correct? i don’t know that that’s identical. calling the children fat? that was an issue that she raised. not feeding them properly? i think she was concerned about [y]’s weight, but no, no. she said when they came back from the fire, that he hadn’t been feeding them, looking after them, showering them, cleaning their teeth ? yes. yes. ...all the rest. same playbook, i want to suggest to you, [ms h]. were you cautious about that, that the mother had cut off her previous children from their father or the court had at the mother’s request, that you might have been dealing with someone who was an experienced litigant who knew the pathway to achieving an outcome in these proceedings? that wasn’t something that i considered as part of my assessment.
it would be extremely risky for these children if they are left in the care of the mother if in fact she has exaggerated and distorted the personality and character of [mr hammat], correct? it would be detrimental to them, yes. not extremely? you won’t agree with that word? if the children are withheld needlessly from their father, it would be extremely bad for them, yes.
his honour: can i just ask you a question regarding ? yes. those series of questions mr kenny asked about the impact – the impact upon the mother of all these other possible traumatic experiences that she’s had in her past life? yes. did you at all – did you consider at all whether whilst those other matters – past matters in the mother’s life might have contributed to her presentation when you saw her, that what this father had allegedly done to the mother as outlined to you by the mother might have nevertheless contributed to her presentation? yes, i have because it may not have been the sole cause of her presentation to you. what the father had allegedly done to the mother. but it might have contributed to her presentation? yes. absolutely. she – i believe she said that she had been diagnosed with complex post-traumatic stress disorder, which indicates that there has not been one single trauma, but a series of traumas over the course of her lifetime, and – and it has a cumulative effect. so if – if she had experienced those past traumas, and then found herself again in an abusive relationship, that would – that would mean that the trauma from that subsequent relationship was, in fact, compounded by the past traumas.
now, you understand that the father’s application is for a week-about arrangement? yes. in your opinion, what level of cooperation would be required for such an arrangement? so for such an arrangement i guess you need very regular communication between the parents, both parents need to feel comfortable with the arrangement, both parents need to have the ability to be flexible and – and be able to accommodate different needs for the children.
his honour: just a moment. ma’am, if you assume for the moment that the court does find that the mother’s version of alleged family violence perpetrated by the father upon her is correct ? yes. i think your ultimate recommendation was that in those circumstances no time should occur? yes. right. is there – if the father – again, assume that to be the finding of the court – is there a halfway house in – at all in this respect. if the father was ordered, for example, to attend and do a men’s behaviour change program, and let’s assume further that the court orders the father to do that, he does the intake process for the program, he admits that he has been violent towards the mother, and he does that program, which, as i understand it, takes about 18 weeks ? yes. would that ameliorate your concerns or change your recommendation for no time, or not? if there was – if the violence has happened, and if there was some acknowledgment that the violence had happened, and some demonstration of an understanding of that coercive controlling dynamic, and a demonstration of, i guess, different – understanding of different ways of relating, then it – it may be that the children would be in a position to maintain a relationship with their father in some limited capacity without – without great detriment.
but i’m reading your report in this way – and tell me if that’s right – you’re saying if the court finds family violence of a kind and a degree as asserted by the mother, such that there’s a risk to the children, then there should be no time? yes, and by risk to the children, i would also include the risk that the children will be drawn into a coercive and controlling dynamic. right. but you’re not suggesting that any finding of family violence, such as a wayward comment in a text or a heated exchange between the parties’ where words are said, would be the bar to a no-time case. it would have to be of a serious degree? yes. is that how one reads the report? yes.
right. and given the – and i heard your evidence about it’s not necessarily incongruous that the kids had enjoyed a lot of time with the father with the fact that he perpetrated abuse, but assuming that the abuse didn’t occur, or certainly didn’t occur anywhere near the level she asserts, the withdrawing of time after such a prolonged period of time with the father could have been quite damaging? yes. and, in a sense, wouldn’t have been a child-focused approach from the mother? no.
now, what are the consequences of making a no-time order if, in fact, there isn’t that level of family violence in this particular case? if – if there isn’t a level of family violence that creates an ongoing risk to the children and you withdraw them from that relationship, i mean, that would – that would cause grief to them, obviously. it would also cause distress and confusion. i – i think it would be difficult for the children to understand, and it could have longer term consequences in terms of their – their sense of identity. it could also have longer term consequences in terms of their relationship with their mother if they believed that she had caused them to be withdrawn from a supportive relationship with – without good reason.
now, the father, in his evidence, did concede that there were occasions where he had – primarily the older – well, the older children write out lines as a punishment, and he also conceded that there were occasions where they were effectively given a timeout by being made to stand against a wall for up to an hour, but he conceded that he now knows and appreciates that that wasn’t an appropriate way of disciplining the children. does that give you any sense that the father has had some insight into appropriate ways of disciplining children, assuming he’s genuine in what he says? it – it – it would – it’s helpful if he’s able to acknowledge the – that some of his methods were – were not helpful. i would be interested also to know if he’s able to understand the level of impact that some of those behaviours might have had on the older children.
and her evidence was also to the effect that she really just wanted the court to make a decision in relation to appropriate orders for time. do you think, based on that, that she may, in fact, simply comply with whatever orders the court might make? i sorry, let me rephrase that for you. i said – when i say comply, i’m not suggesting she wouldn’t otherwise comply ? yes. ... but do you think she would be satisfied, i guess, after having been heard that these are the orders the court made and i will go along with them? i think there was a willingness to work with what she was – what she was presented with. i think if there were orders made, she would work with them. that was my impression of her.
his honour: okay. just a couple of questions i have, [ms h]? yes, your honour. i want you to – i would like you to assume that the mother expressed a concern that as the children grow older, and if they’re spending time with the father, and they exhibit challenging behaviours, that the father might inappropriately discipline them? yes ... or possibly abuse them. so that’s the concern the mother allegedly has. just assume that for the moment? yes. could you assume these facts, and for the sake of these questions i’m now asking you, could you just put aside – ignore – the mother’s allegations made you of family violence perpetrated by the father? yes. so if you assume (1) the parties’ had a toxic relationship which included the father, in retaliation, on occasion slapping the mother? yes. assume that both parties’ during the relationship participated in mutual verbal abuse of each other? yes. assume that in about october 2015 the father, in anger, kicked the mother’s car? yes. assume that the father has acknowledged in this court that he inappropriately disciplined two of the mother’s other children by making them write lines and, secondly, making them stand up against a wall for about an hour? yes. assume the father has never done a formal parenting course regarding parenting teenagers exhibiting difficult behaviours. assume the father has never done a formal anger management course? yes. but assume that in 2015 he had some counselling with a psychologist to deal with previously exhibited angry outbursts that he had displayed? yes. assume the father hasn’t abused these children to date? yes. ... including since the court’s interim orders of november 2020, when the father began to spend two nights a fortnight with the children, plus block time, i think, with the children – half the school holidays with them. in light of those assumptions i’ve asked you to make, do you have any concern that this particular father might exhibit inappropriate discipline to these children as they grow older and possibly exhibit difficult behaviours? and could i just ask you to assume one more matter. assume that the eldest child, [x] – i think he’s now in year 6? yes. that he has got some problem – had some problems with his schoolwork, focusing? yes. and that he’s spending time on playstation? yes. and assume the mother herself has had experiences of conflict with [x] in getting him to come off that playstation? yes. including [x] throwing pillows at the mother and having some emotional reaction? yes. so, in light of those matters, do you have any concern going forward, if the father was to be spending time with the children on a regular basis, that he might inappropriately discipline one or both of the children if they’re exhibiting difficult behaviours, and if so, what measures, through court orders or otherwise, could be taken? so if the father has acknowledged that some of his methods of discipline were previously inappropriate, that – that is a positive step. to feel confident that he wasn’t going to repeat those behaviours, i guess i would want to be sure that he had some other strategies which he could use. in terms of anger management counselling, i guess the – the strategies – the strategies that were discussed, of standing against the wall and writing out excessive lines, are not – are not necessarily strategies that are done in anger. they – they sound more like strategies that are done to, sort of, enforce power over a child. so if they’re not reactive strategies, then i wouldn’t expect that anger management counselling would have much impact on that. i – i would hope that anger management counselling might have some impact on more reactive strategies such as, you know, violence and aggression. so i would – to have more confidence that those things would be approached appropriately, i – i would recommend, as you say, some – some parenting courses. possibly there – probably an appropriate course would be tuning into teens, which is about, i guess, understanding and responding to children’s – or to teenagers’ – feelings and behaviours, understanding where they’re coming from and responding to them in a constructive way rather than getting into power struggles. that would probably quite – be quite a helpful one to do. any other possible strategies, apart from them doing the tuning into teens parenting course? i mean, certainly, if there are – there are services that deal specifically – c counsellors i know have services that deal specifically with dealing with teenagers with challenging behaviours. and it might even be something that x may benefit from now if he’s currently beginning to be in that stage. and i – i believe that they are able to provide, sort of, one-on-one counselling, more tailored sort of support around how to manage challenging behaviours.
do you want to say anything about, going forward for this family and these children, the children doing – in fact, doing this anchor course? i and wrapped up in that question, if you could indicate briefly what the nature of that course is? yes. so the anchor course is something that’s specifically aimed at children from separated families, helping them to adjust to, i guess, changes in their family and helping them to understand – understand what’s happening and to – to be able to express themselves around those things. i – i do still think that’s probably going to be beneficial for [x] and [y], given that they are still clearly being exposed to conflict, and they’re, no doubt, still aware that court proceedings are ongoing, and given concerns for [x’s] behaviour, i certainly think that he could – he could probably use some support around that. if the anchor program was not available or not appropriate, then it might be appropriate if they accessed some – some counselling with a clinician who is experienced in working with separated families just to, i guess, help them provide an independent – independent support and point of view around their family situation.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views  the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child  the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living  the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of:(i) each of the child’s parents, and(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs  the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents  any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
associate: dated: 24 august 2022
dated: 24 august 2022