last updated: 15 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ming & leong [2022] fedcfamc2f 973
orders
the court orders that:  within seven (7) days of the date of this order the adult child will nominate in writing addressed to the respondent, to include by text or email, a bank account into which the adult child maintenance is to be paid (“the nominated account”), (b) the respondent cause to be paid the sum of $2,945 into the nominated account, on or before 30 september 2022, to consist of the first 19 weeks payment, (c) as of 7 october 2022 the respondent pay to the adult child by way of direct debit the sum of $155 per week, and (d) within fourteen (14) days of the date of this order the respondent provide to the adult child written confirmation of the direct debit arrangement from his banking provider.   the respondent cause to be paid the sum of $2,945 into the nominated account, on or before 30 september 2022, to consist of the first 19 weeks payment, (c) as of 7 october 2022 the respondent pay to the adult child by way of direct debit the sum of $155 per week, and (d) within fourteen (14) days of the date of this order the respondent provide to the adult child written confirmation of the direct debit arrangement from his banking provider.   as of 7 october 2022 the respondent pay to the adult child by way of direct debit the sum of $155 per week, and (d) within fourteen (14) days of the date of this order the respondent provide to the adult child written confirmation of the direct debit arrangement from his banking provider.   within fourteen (14) days of the date of this order the respondent provide to the adult child written confirmation of the direct debit arrangement from his banking provider.   the adult child commencing full time employment, or (b) the adult child submitting his final assessment for his current degree at d university, or (c) the adult child ceasing to be enrolled in his current bachelor of business degree at d university, or (d) as of the first university semester in 2023, the adult child ceasing to be enrolled full time in his current bachelor of business degree, or (e) the adult child failing to pass two or more subjects in one semester forming part of his tertiary study course requirement, or (f) 31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   the adult child submitting his final assessment for his current degree at d university, or (c) the adult child ceasing to be enrolled in his current bachelor of business degree at d university, or (d) as of the first university semester in 2023, the adult child ceasing to be enrolled full time in his current bachelor of business degree, or (e) the adult child failing to pass two or more subjects in one semester forming part of his tertiary study course requirement, or (f) 31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   the adult child ceasing to be enrolled in his current bachelor of business degree at d university, or (d) as of the first university semester in 2023, the adult child ceasing to be enrolled full time in his current bachelor of business degree, or (e) the adult child failing to pass two or more subjects in one semester forming part of his tertiary study course requirement, or (f) 31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   as of the first university semester in 2023, the adult child ceasing to be enrolled full time in his current bachelor of business degree, or (e) the adult child failing to pass two or more subjects in one semester forming part of his tertiary study course requirement, or (f) 31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   the adult child failing to pass two or more subjects in one semester forming part of his tertiary study course requirement, or (f) 31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   31 august 2024, or (g) the adult child or the respondent dying,   the adult child or the respondent dying,
whichever is the earliest.
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
introduction
the applicants’ proposal  the respondent pay 50% of the adult child’s university education, specified as $32,000, into a bank account for the first applicant. (b) that a real property be transferred to her name so that she may collect the rental income from the tenants. (c) interlocutory orders to freeze the sale, transfer or gift of three named real properties in the respondent’s name until 30 december 2022 and rental income from the suburb r property, tasmania.   that a real property be transferred to her name so that she may collect the rental income from the tenants. (c) interlocutory orders to freeze the sale, transfer or gift of three named real properties in the respondent’s name until 30 december 2022 and rental income from the suburb r property, tasmania.   interlocutory orders to freeze the sale, transfer or gift of three named real properties in the respondent’s name until 30 december 2022 and rental income from the suburb r property, tasmania.
the respondent’s proposal  the first applicant ‘stop controlling’ the adult child and let him control his own bank account, (b) the first applicant ‘stop intervening’ between the adult child and the respondent and the adult child directly contact and discuss his needs with the respondent and accept practical support from the respondent, specified to include teaching him to drive, casual job-hunting, pick and drop off for work and buying him a used car.   the first applicant ‘stop intervening’ between the adult child and the respondent and the adult child directly contact and discuss his needs with the respondent and accept practical support from the respondent, specified to include teaching him to drive, casual job-hunting, pick and drop off for work and buying him a used car.
background
the court today has advised the parties that this is not a property settlement trial and that the court will not be re-visiting the previous property matters noting that the parties have had two separate property trials by two different judges. the first judgment was overturned on appeal about one issue only (overlooking a liability). the wife appealed after the second trial, and did so unsuccessfully. the full court decision makes reference to the behaviour and conduct of each of the parties. the court has advised the parties that the adult child who is the applicant will need to attend court for the trial, prepare documents as set out in these orders and be ready to be cross examined. it is noted for the record that the court spend considerable time today mentioning this matter. the interpreter had significant difficulty getting the mother to answer questions and to stop talking about irrelevant issues with lengthy replies. each of the parties have been encouraged to obtain legal advice as it has been explained to them that the judge is not their respective lawyer.
agreed facts and uncontroversial facts
facts in dispute
does the adult child have the capacity to work?
what is the value of the respondent’s business?
what is the value of the respondent’s real estate?
has the respondent transferred cash overseas?
what has the first applicant contributed to living expenses?
what if any amount should the respondent pay towards the support of the adult child and how should that be calculated?
the evidence
the law
a court must not make a child maintenance order in relation to a child who is 18 or over unless the court is satisfied that the provision of the maintenance is necessary: (a) to enable the child to complete his or her education, or (b) because of a mental or physical disability of the child. the court may make such a child maintenance order, in relation to a child who is 17, to take effect when or after the child turns 18.   the matters mentioned in section 66b, and (b) the proper needs of the child (subsection (2)), and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child (subsection (3)).   the proper needs of the child (subsection (2)), and (c) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child (subsection (3)).   the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the child (subsection (3)).   must have regard to: (i) the age of the child, (ii) the manner in which the child is being, and in which the parents expected the child to be, educated or trained, and (iii) any special needs of the child, and (b) may have regard, to the extent to which the court considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to any relevant findings of published research in relation to maintenance of children.  phasis added)   have regard to the capacity of the child to earn or derive income, including any assets of, under the control of or held for the benefit of the child that do not produce, but are capable of producing, income, and   disregard: (i) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any other person unless, in the special circumstances of the case, the court considers it appropriate to have regard to them, and (ii) any entitlement of the child or any other person to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   the matters mentioned in sections 66b, 66c and 66d, and   the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the party or each of the parties (subsection (2)), and (c) the commitments of the party or each of the parties that are necessary to enable that party to support:   the commitments of the party or each of the parties that are necessary to enable that party to support:   himself or herself, or (ii) any other child or another person that the person has a duty to maintain, and   the direct and indirect costs incurred by the parent or other person with whom the child lives in providing care for the child (subsection (3)), and (e) any special circumstances which if not taken into account in the particular case would result in injustice or undue hardship to any person.   any special circumstances which if not taken into account in the particular case would result in injustice or undue hardship to any person.   any entitlement of the child or the person with whom the child lives to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit, and (b) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any person who does not have a duty to maintain the child or has such a duty but is not a party to the proceedings unless in the special circumstances of the case the court considers it appropriate to have regard to them.   the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any person who does not have a duty to maintain the child or has such a duty but is not a party to the proceedings unless in the special circumstances of the case the court considers it appropriate to have regard to them.   by way of a lump sum payment, or (b) by way of transfer or settlement of property, or (c) in any other way.   by way of transfer or settlement of property, or (c) in any other way.   in any other way.  ]... s 66l prohibits the making of an order for adult child maintenance unless the court is satisfied that such maintenance is necessary to enable the child to complete his or her education. thus, the central focus of the inquiry is the question of whether the maintenance is necessary for that purpose. [77] the construction of the word “necessary” has been well settled in this court for many years. in tuck at 76, 227 evatt cj and murray j said: to define “necessary” as meaning “absolutely essential” is to give the adjective a most stringent definition. that stringency, in our view, is not warranted by the concept expressed very strongly by the act that the court shall regard the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration. “necessary” in this context means that the maintenance is needed by the child and that it is reasonable to require the parent to contribute, having regard to the parties’ financial circumstances and other relevant factors.
discussion
the form that any financial contribution should take
the financial support necessary for the maintenance of the adult child
the proper needs of the adult child
the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the adult child
employment
education expenses 5] i accept that it may have been financially advantageous to the girls [or in this case, the applicant] for their hecs fees to have been paid, and i accept that it would be a relief for them not to have a large liability when they complete their course. but the question is whether it is necessary that their hecs fees be paid. clearly, it is not.
taxi fares
council fees/rates
the internet fees
the airline tickets
medical, dental and optical
education fees
loans
conclusion
the contributions that are currently made by the first applicant and the contributions that should be made by her in future
the contributions that should be made by the respondent
the orders sought by the applicants  i find that it was the expectation of both parents that their child would proceed to university. (b) i find that at the crux of this matter is their personal dispute with each other and their disagreement about what level of independence and responsibility their adult child should assume for the cost of his own education and other expenses. (c) i accept the evidence of the adult child that without some support he will be unable to complete his education, (d) whilst i am of the view that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own support and education, i am not satisfied that he could or should do that unassisted, (e) i find that the first applicant has been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the adult child’s education and general support to date, (f) i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   i find that at the crux of this matter is their personal dispute with each other and their disagreement about what level of independence and responsibility their adult child should assume for the cost of his own education and other expenses. (c) i accept the evidence of the adult child that without some support he will be unable to complete his education, (d) whilst i am of the view that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own support and education, i am not satisfied that he could or should do that unassisted, (e) i find that the first applicant has been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the adult child’s education and general support to date, (f) i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   i accept the evidence of the adult child that without some support he will be unable to complete his education, (d) whilst i am of the view that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own support and education, i am not satisfied that he could or should do that unassisted, (e) i find that the first applicant has been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the adult child’s education and general support to date, (f) i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   whilst i am of the view that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own support and education, i am not satisfied that he could or should do that unassisted, (e) i find that the first applicant has been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the adult child’s education and general support to date, (f) i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   i find that the first applicant has been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the adult child’s education and general support to date, (f) i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   i am of the view that whilst he has not financially contributed to his own support and education, i accept the evidence of the adult child that he has worked hard on his academic studies and i support him being able to complete those studies, (g) i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   i have found that the respondent has the capacity to make periodic payments.   the legislation requires me firstly to consider periodic payments, (b) based on the calculations above i am satisfied that the respondent has sufficient earning capacity to contribute on a periodic basis, (c) i am satisfied that there is no evidence of any physical or mental incapacity which would prevent the adult child engaging in paying work of some sort, (d) i am satisfied that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own financial support and he has to date failed to do so, (e) i am of the view that an order for lump sum retrospective adult child maintenance would arguably be to re-visit the final property orders, (f) i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.   based on the calculations above i am satisfied that the respondent has sufficient earning capacity to contribute on a periodic basis, (c) i am satisfied that there is no evidence of any physical or mental incapacity which would prevent the adult child engaging in paying work of some sort, (d) i am satisfied that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own financial support and he has to date failed to do so, (e) i am of the view that an order for lump sum retrospective adult child maintenance would arguably be to re-visit the final property orders, (f) i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.   i am satisfied that there is no evidence of any physical or mental incapacity which would prevent the adult child engaging in paying work of some sort, (d) i am satisfied that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own financial support and he has to date failed to do so, (e) i am of the view that an order for lump sum retrospective adult child maintenance would arguably be to re-visit the final property orders, (f) i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.   i am satisfied that the adult child has the capacity to contribute to his own financial support and he has to date failed to do so, (e) i am of the view that an order for lump sum retrospective adult child maintenance would arguably be to re-visit the final property orders, (f) i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.   i am of the view that an order for lump sum retrospective adult child maintenance would arguably be to re-visit the final property orders, (f) i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.   i am not satisfied that the legislation empowers me to order retrospective adult child maintenance. in the event that i am wrong about that, i am of the view that such an order is not appropriate for the reasons outlined above.
conclusion
associate: dated: 30 august 2022
dated: 30 august 2022
[1] affidavit of the first applicant filed 13 may 2022, page 32 of 36[2] filed 6 may 2022[3] affidavit of the first applicant filed 13 may 2022, annexure c[4] affidavit of the first applicant filed 13 may 2022, page 25 of the annexures[5] the affidavit of the first applicant filed 13 may 2022, page 25 of the annexures[6] section 66b (1) and (2)[7] section 66g[8]affidavit of the first applicant filed 9 march 2022, annexure d[9]affidavit of the adult child filed 9 may 2022, annexure m at page 73[10] exhibit w7[11]affidavit of the adult child filed 9 may 2022, annexure g[12] affidavit of the adult child filed 9 may 2022, annexure d at page 18 and 19[13] 2016 and 2019[14]affidavit of the first applicant filed 20 april 2022, page 16 of the annexures[15] cosgrove & cosgrove (1995) flc 92-700