last updated: 23 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
orav & keskula [2022] fedcfamc2f 1114
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with
changeover upon the making of the final orders
spend time with  on one occasion each year for a two (2) week period, such time to occur during the school holidays, with the holiday period to be confirmed in writing by the first respondent at least four (4) weeks prior to the time occurring, (b) in the event the first respondent travels to brisbane, that upon the giving of at least four (4) weeks written notice, for a period of no more than seven days to occur on days and times as agreed, and (c) during the times the mother travels to city b with the child, for periods up to one day each week that she is in city b to occur on days and times as agreed.   in the event the first respondent travels to brisbane, that upon the giving of at least four (4) weeks written notice, for a period of no more than seven days to occur on days and times as agreed, and (c) during the times the mother travels to city b with the child, for periods up to one day each week that she is in city b to occur on days and times as agreed.   during the times the mother travels to city b with the child, for periods up to one day each week that she is in city b to occur on days and times as agreed.
communication  following the two week moratorium, for a period of eight (8) weeks (the immediate transition phase), video calls to be held twice weekly every monday and wednesday at 5.30pm – 6.00pm, (b) during the second transition phase, for a period of eight (8) weeks, video calls to be weekly every wednesday at 5.30pm-6.00pm, (c) during the third transition phase, for a period of eight (8) weeks, video calls to be held fortnightly on wednesday at 5.30pm – 6.00pm, (d) following completion of the third transition period, video calls to occur at all reasonable times as may be requested by the child.   during the second transition phase, for a period of eight (8) weeks, video calls to be weekly every wednesday at 5.30pm-6.00pm, (c) during the third transition phase, for a period of eight (8) weeks, video calls to be held fortnightly on wednesday at 5.30pm – 6.00pm, (d) following completion of the third transition period, video calls to occur at all reasonable times as may be requested by the child.   during the third transition phase, for a period of eight (8) weeks, video calls to be held fortnightly on wednesday at 5.30pm – 6.00pm, (d) following completion of the third transition period, video calls to occur at all reasonable times as may be requested by the child.   following completion of the third transition period, video calls to occur at all reasonable times as may be requested by the child.
child counsellor
physical discipline
non denigration
independent children’s lawyer
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge cope
part 1: introduction
issues in dispute and issues for determination  whether i have the power to make a finding that a traditional adoption did or did not take place, (b) if the child was traditionally adopted, whether there was any coercion involved, (c) the appropriate legislative pathway noting that the first respondent is a non-parent, (d) whether the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, (e) whether either the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d, (f) how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   if the child was traditionally adopted, whether there was any coercion involved, (c) the appropriate legislative pathway noting that the first respondent is a non-parent, (d) whether the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, (e) whether either the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d, (f) how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   the appropriate legislative pathway noting that the first respondent is a non-parent, (d) whether the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, (e) whether either the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d, (f) how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   whether the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, (e) whether either the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d, (f) how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   whether either the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d, (f) how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   how and why the birth mother came to deliver x to the first respondent in october 2019, noting the first respondent’s failure to properly comply with order 8 of the orders made by judge willis on 19 april 2021 requiring an affidavit be filed explaining what occurred, (g) the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents, (h) the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships, and (i) the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections.   with whom the child should live, (b) how much time the child should spend with the other parties, (c) how much time the child should spend with her siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   how much time the child should spend with the other parties, (c) how much time the child should spend with her siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   how much time the child should spend with her siblings, whether biological or traditionally adopted or simply viewed by the child as siblings, (d) parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   parental responsibility, and (e) related child focused issues.   related child focused issues.
current living arrangements
cultural identity of the parties
traditional adoption (also referred to as cultural adoption or customary adoption)
if any party is relying on a cultural practice as part of their case, they are to nominate a single expert or elder to give evidence about that cultural practice. the single expert must be prepared to be interviewed by the family report writer and be available to give evidence and be cross examined at the trial if necessary. each party must provide the contact details for the nominated single expert or elder to the family report writer without delay.
how the child came into the first respondent’s care e first respondent] claimed that in 2018 [the birth mother] called her upset. [the birth mother] was reportedly at a park because she and her aunt had argued and she had been kicked out. [the first respondent] alleged [the birth mother] then video called her and asked her if she wanted [x]. she claimed [the birth mother] told her she could not take care of [x] because she cried a lot and she allegedly offered that [the first respondent] take [x] to be [g’s] sister. [the first respondent] indicated she was shocked and she did not want to get hurt however [the birth mother] said she was serious.
family violence allegations  the first respondent punching her in the face, “going off”, shouting at her, and putting her forearm on her neck and holding her down on the kitchen bench while ms e jabbed her ribs and stomach,[16] (b) ms e getting angry at her and yelling “no that’s my sister”, running at her, pushing her into the couch and trying to punch her in the face. this is said to occur in the presence of the children and the first respondent,[17] (c) the first respondent yelling at her that she had connections with the local police, standing over and pushing her down onto the couch and saying “i have a big family and you’ve got no one on your side”, and[18] (d) when she was leaving with the children, being called names such as “slut”, “bitch” and “whore”, f using a knife to destroy a canvas photo of d, and f breaking a table by slamming it on the ground multiple times.[19]   ms e getting angry at her and yelling “no that’s my sister”, running at her, pushing her into the couch and trying to punch her in the face. this is said to occur in the presence of the children and the first respondent,[17] (c) the first respondent yelling at her that she had connections with the local police, standing over and pushing her down onto the couch and saying “i have a big family and you’ve got no one on your side”, and[18] (d) when she was leaving with the children, being called names such as “slut”, “bitch” and “whore”, f using a knife to destroy a canvas photo of d, and f breaking a table by slamming it on the ground multiple times.[19]   the first respondent yelling at her that she had connections with the local police, standing over and pushing her down onto the couch and saying “i have a big family and you’ve got no one on your side”, and[18] (d) when she was leaving with the children, being called names such as “slut”, “bitch” and “whore”, f using a knife to destroy a canvas photo of d, and f breaking a table by slamming it on the ground multiple times.[19]   when she was leaving with the children, being called names such as “slut”, “bitch” and “whore”, f using a knife to destroy a canvas photo of d, and f breaking a table by slamming it on the ground multiple times.[19]
child safety and wellbeing
financial arrangements
the centrelink document
i’ve given my daughter to my mother as tradail adobing [sic]. [x] will be live with my mother [ms keskula] and will not be returning back into my care.[25]
part two: material relied on
the birth mother’s material  the amended initiating application filed on 21 february 2022, (b) the affidavit of the birth mother filed on 31 january 2022, (c) the affidavit of the birth mother filed by leave on 28 february 2022, (d) the affidavit of ms y filed on 7 february 2022, and (e) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the affidavit of the birth mother filed on 31 january 2022, (c) the affidavit of the birth mother filed by leave on 28 february 2022, (d) the affidavit of ms y filed on 7 february 2022, and (e) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the affidavit of the birth mother filed by leave on 28 february 2022, (d) the affidavit of ms y filed on 7 february 2022, and (e) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the affidavit of ms y filed on 7 february 2022, and (e) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.
the first respondent’s material  the amended response filed on 23 february 2021, (b) the affidavit of the first respondent filed on 7 february 2022, (c) the affidavit of mr ab filed on 17 february 2022, (d) the outline of case document filed on 23 february 2022, and (e) financial statement filed on 30 march 2022.   the affidavit of the first respondent filed on 7 february 2022, (c) the affidavit of mr ab filed on 17 february 2022, (d) the outline of case document filed on 23 february 2022, and (e) financial statement filed on 30 march 2022.   the affidavit of mr ab filed on 17 february 2022, (d) the outline of case document filed on 23 february 2022, and (e) financial statement filed on 30 march 2022.   the outline of case document filed on 23 february 2022, and (e) financial statement filed on 30 march 2022.   financial statement filed on 30 march 2022.
the second respondent’s material
independent children’s lawyer’s material  the child inclusive conference memorandum dated 22 january 2021, (b) the family report released on 22 november 2021, and (c) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the family report released on 22 november 2021, and (c) the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.   the outline of case document filed on 21 february 2022.
other material and submissions  exhibit m1 - medical report from registrar ac dated 1 march 2022 regarding mother’s condition, (b) exhibit 1 - transcripts of proceedings dated 1 march 2022, and (c) exhibit m2 – application in a proceeding.   exhibit 1 - transcripts of proceedings dated 1 march 2022, and (c) exhibit m2 – application in a proceeding.   exhibit m2 – application in a proceeding.
part three: the proposals
the birth mother’s proposal  final orders that the birth mother have sole parental responsibility for the child, and that the child live with her, (b) the transition occur immediately and with the support of a court child expert. a request is made via notation that security be present for the transition, and (c) the child spend time and communicate with the biological father as agreed between the birth mother and the father.   the transition occur immediately and with the support of a court child expert. a request is made via notation that security be present for the transition, and (c) the child spend time and communicate with the biological father as agreed between the birth mother and the father.   the child spend time and communicate with the biological father as agreed between the birth mother and the father.
the first respondent’s proposal  the child live with the first respondent, (b) that the first respondent have sole parental responsibility, on the provision that she consult with the birth mother prior to making any decision, and (c) the child spend time with the birth mother as agreed between the parties.   that the first respondent have sole parental responsibility, on the provision that she consult with the birth mother prior to making any decision, and (c) the child spend time with the birth mother as agreed between the parties.   the child spend time with the birth mother as agreed between the parties.
the independent children’s lawyer’s proposal
part four: the evidence and witnesses
the birth mother
the first respondent
ms y or aunty y (the birth mother’s cultural expert)
mr ab (the first respondent’s witness)
the family report writer – dr aj
reflecting on the information provided by the cultural expert, and acknowledging that [ms y] prefaced what she was saying by noting it only pertained to traditional adoptions in the [island n] region, the maternal and paternal families are generally involved in the process of traditional adoption and this was not the case in the current matter.  e parties] value their culture and the importance of the child having knowledge of and being involved in her culture including having and maintaining connections with kin...the parties’ ability to support [x]’s knowledge of and involvement in her culture is essential for the healthy development of her identity, her sense of self and well-being and her sense of belonging and connection to her community.[29]   the evaluation at paragraph 217 that “x has a bond with ms orav and ms keskula as well as with ms e, f and g”. (b) at paragraph 220 “x now identifies ms keskula as her mother and ms e, f and g as her sisters and brother. she identifies ms keskula as her mother and ms orav as “sissy ad” and d as her cousin brother.”   at paragraph 220 “x now identifies ms keskula as her mother and ms e, f and g as her sisters and brother. she identifies ms keskula as her mother and ms orav as “sissy ad” and d as her cousin brother.”
part five: findings
findings about the parties  the family violence perpetrated against her in the first respondent’s home, (b) that she allowed the first respondent to assume the care of x out of fear and also out of respect for an elder, (c) that she did not sign the centrelink document and if i am wrong about that, then she did so under coercion, and (d) that she received a call from a person believed to be in authority, telling her she must return x to the first respondent’s care or lose both children.   that she allowed the first respondent to assume the care of x out of fear and also out of respect for an elder, (c) that she did not sign the centrelink document and if i am wrong about that, then she did so under coercion, and (d) that she received a call from a person believed to be in authority, telling her she must return x to the first respondent’s care or lose both children.   that she did not sign the centrelink document and if i am wrong about that, then she did so under coercion, and (d) that she received a call from a person believed to be in authority, telling her she must return x to the first respondent’s care or lose both children.   that she received a call from a person believed to be in authority, telling her she must return x to the first respondent’s care or lose both children.
whether the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother
whether the birth mother or the first respondent physically abused d  noting that she holds a blue card, has worked with children and is the owner of the home in which these events occurred, i do not accept that the first respondent would not take some action if she witnessed this behaviour, and (b) i accept the birth mother’s evidence that she felt unable to act against the authority of the first respondent.   i accept the birth mother’s evidence that she felt unable to act against the authority of the first respondent.
how and why the birth mother came to return or deliver the child to the first respondent in october 2019,
the first respondent’s capacity to facilitate the child’s relationship with the birth parents,  the first respondent failed to make the child available for time with the birth mother in breach of court orders, (b) the first respondent conceded not informing the birth mother about the child’s travel to the torres strait or serious injury to her foot until well after the events, (c) the first respondent’s surprise under cross examination at the suggestion that the birth mother could have cared for the injured child, (d) the birth mother spent block make up time with the child in 2021 only under threat (or so the first respondent says she believed) of going to jail, (e) the first respondent did not offer the birth mother time with child when the matter was listed for trial until it was requested.   the first respondent conceded not informing the birth mother about the child’s travel to the torres strait or serious injury to her foot until well after the events, (c) the first respondent’s surprise under cross examination at the suggestion that the birth mother could have cared for the injured child, (d) the birth mother spent block make up time with the child in 2021 only under threat (or so the first respondent says she believed) of going to jail, (e) the first respondent did not offer the birth mother time with child when the matter was listed for trial until it was requested.   the first respondent’s surprise under cross examination at the suggestion that the birth mother could have cared for the injured child, (d) the birth mother spent block make up time with the child in 2021 only under threat (or so the first respondent says she believed) of going to jail, (e) the first respondent did not offer the birth mother time with child when the matter was listed for trial until it was requested.   the birth mother spent block make up time with the child in 2021 only under threat (or so the first respondent says she believed) of going to jail, (e) the first respondent did not offer the birth mother time with child when the matter was listed for trial until it was requested.   the first respondent did not offer the birth mother time with child when the matter was listed for trial until it was requested.
the child’s sibling relationships and the need to facilitate those relationships
the capacity of the parties to maintain the child’s family and cultural connections  the first respondent’s insistence that this is a traditional adoption, despite her concessions under cross examination, and (b) based on the first respondent’s past behaviours in failing to do so.   based on the first respondent’s past behaviours in failing to do so.
whether i have the power to make a finding that a traditional adoption did or did not take place  there is an absence of consent from both the giving and receiving parents. the birth father was not involved in the process at all and the birth mother denies consenting, (b) the process did not involve the family of both sets of parents and the clan groups. even on the first respondent’s best evidence the birth mother’s family were not involved, (c) when any issues arose, the parties did not go back to the family/clan group who witnessed the process in order to settle the dispute, (d) the giving parents were not involved in the child’s life after the child went into the first respondent’s care. limited contact occurred though there is evidence conceded that some time with the child was offered when the birth mother was in city b, (e) the practice did not occur with love, rather there was dispute and heightened emotions, and there is a disconnection between the giving and receiving parents, such that the child is not raised surrounded by birth family as well as the first respondent’s family.   the process did not involve the family of both sets of parents and the clan groups. even on the first respondent’s best evidence the birth mother’s family were not involved, (c) when any issues arose, the parties did not go back to the family/clan group who witnessed the process in order to settle the dispute, (d) the giving parents were not involved in the child’s life after the child went into the first respondent’s care. limited contact occurred though there is evidence conceded that some time with the child was offered when the birth mother was in city b, (e) the practice did not occur with love, rather there was dispute and heightened emotions, and there is a disconnection between the giving and receiving parents, such that the child is not raised surrounded by birth family as well as the first respondent’s family.   when any issues arose, the parties did not go back to the family/clan group who witnessed the process in order to settle the dispute, (d) the giving parents were not involved in the child’s life after the child went into the first respondent’s care. limited contact occurred though there is evidence conceded that some time with the child was offered when the birth mother was in city b, (e) the practice did not occur with love, rather there was dispute and heightened emotions, and there is a disconnection between the giving and receiving parents, such that the child is not raised surrounded by birth family as well as the first respondent’s family.   the giving parents were not involved in the child’s life after the child went into the first respondent’s care. limited contact occurred though there is evidence conceded that some time with the child was offered when the birth mother was in city b, (e) the practice did not occur with love, rather there was dispute and heightened emotions, and there is a disconnection between the giving and receiving parents, such that the child is not raised surrounded by birth family as well as the first respondent’s family.   the practice did not occur with love, rather there was dispute and heightened emotions, and there is a disconnection between the giving and receiving parents, such that the child is not raised surrounded by birth family as well as the first respondent’s family.   wherever this child lives, she will be brought up in the torres strait islander community with strong connection to kin and to country, (b) section 61f means that i consider those arrangements but findings are not necessary where i have the legislative pathway to follow, and (c) following the legislative pathway means that a decision will be made where the best interests of the child are paramount and the torres strait islander customs, connection and culture remain central to the decision.   section 61f means that i consider those arrangements but findings are not necessary where i have the legislative pathway to follow, and (c) following the legislative pathway means that a decision will be made where the best interests of the child are paramount and the torres strait islander customs, connection and culture remain central to the decision.   following the legislative pathway means that a decision will be made where the best interests of the child are paramount and the torres strait islander customs, connection and culture remain central to the decision.
if the child was traditionally adopted whether there was any coercion involved  the birth mother had left city b with the child. so determined was she to do so that she involved the police in that process, (b) the process of removing the child on or about 1 october 2019 was violent and distressing. the first respondent’s children in particular were angry, abusive and terrifying. evidence was conceded of name calling, slashing a photo of d with a knife and g chasing after them, (c) the first respondent appears to have only called the children to account when advised by the police that if she did not restrain g he would be placed in a paddy wagon, (d) the birth mother then left city b with both her children, and (e) she only returned x to the first respondent after receiving a phone call. i have accepted her evidence that the person who called was viewed by her as an authority and told her she would lose both children if she did not return x.   the process of removing the child on or about 1 october 2019 was violent and distressing. the first respondent’s children in particular were angry, abusive and terrifying. evidence was conceded of name calling, slashing a photo of d with a knife and g chasing after them, (c) the first respondent appears to have only called the children to account when advised by the police that if she did not restrain g he would be placed in a paddy wagon, (d) the birth mother then left city b with both her children, and (e) she only returned x to the first respondent after receiving a phone call. i have accepted her evidence that the person who called was viewed by her as an authority and told her she would lose both children if she did not return x.   the first respondent appears to have only called the children to account when advised by the police that if she did not restrain g he would be placed in a paddy wagon, (d) the birth mother then left city b with both her children, and (e) she only returned x to the first respondent after receiving a phone call. i have accepted her evidence that the person who called was viewed by her as an authority and told her she would lose both children if she did not return x.   the birth mother then left city b with both her children, and (e) she only returned x to the first respondent after receiving a phone call. i have accepted her evidence that the person who called was viewed by her as an authority and told her she would lose both children if she did not return x.   she only returned x to the first respondent after receiving a phone call. i have accepted her evidence that the person who called was viewed by her as an authority and told her she would lose both children if she did not return x.
the appropriate legislative pathway noting that the first respondent is a non-parent
the centrelink document
part six: the law
the real question was not one about the father’s tendency, but rather whether or not there was an unacceptable risk of harm to the children, which entails a forecast. it is not a fact capable of empirical proof. any evidence which is relevant to and influential in that predictive inquiry is admissible and should be taken into account (presuming it survives any other applicable rules of evidence), regardless of whether it meets the definition of and the threshold requirements for admissibility under the tendency rule.[34]
section 61f was inserted in the legislation by the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) act 2006 (cth). the relevant explanatory memorandum noted that: ... the purpose of this provision is to ensure that the unique kinship obligations and child-rearing practices (such as the involvement of extended family) of aboriginal and torres strait islander culture are recognised by the court when making decisions about the parenting of an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. this provision is consistent with other amendments to facilitate greater involvement of extended family members in the lives of children. (our emphasis added) the explanatory memorandum recorded that s 61f implemented the first recommendation made in the family law council report, “recognition of traditional aboriginal and torres strait islander child-rearing practices: response to recommendation 22: pathways report, out of the maze” (december 2004). the pathways report had recommended that s 61c (which deals with allocation of parental responsibility) should acknowledge the “unique kinship obligations and child-rearing practices of indigenous culture”. the family law council opposed this recommendation and explained its view in these terms: council does not agree with the proposed amendment to s 61c given: (i) the difficulty with deciding just who has parental responsibility under the proposed amendment, and (ii) that it is not clear, even if it were possible to determine fairly easily who, other than the biological parent, had parental responsibility, whether that parental responsibility would include the whole bundle of parental responsibilities envisaged under the common law and reflected in the family law act and other acts. this conclusion was reached notwithstanding that council was sympathetic to, and agreed in principle with the intention of the proposed amendment. in the end, council simply could not satisfy itself that there was a practicable way of amending s 61c so as to avoid uncertainty and preclude unintended consequences. however, council suggests that a new s 61f along similar lines to that envisaged by the out of the maze recommendation, might be inserted at the end of div 2 of pt vii of the family law act, without attracting the adverse consequences attaching to the proposal as it stands. while of undoubted symbolic importance, council concluded that such an amendment would not of itself provide the functional recognition in the many spheres of government with which aboriginal and torres strait islander families must deal. further investigation is required into how this functional recognition of kinship arrangements can be provided by the various arms and tiers of government. it will be seen that s 61f, in the form ultimately enacted, applies to all cases involving an aboriginal or torres strait islander child. in proceedings under part vii relating to such a child, the court must have regard to the child-rearing practices of the relevant aboriginal or torres strait islander culture. failure to take account of that provision would, in our view, ordinarily amount to appealable error. (for an illustration of a case in which s 61f was properly treated as an “integral” part of the decision making process see the judgment of young j in davis v davis [2007] famca 1149, (2008) 38 fam lr 671.) section 61f does not say that the outcome will be determined by application of the relevant kinship obligations and child-rearing practices, but the court must have regard to them. in our view, this can only be seen to be done if findings are made regarding those obligations/practices and adequate reasons are given to explain why a decision has been made that either follows or departs from them. we accept this can be done without the court making express reference to s 61f, but we consider it would be desirable that the section is at least mentioned, if not discussed. (my emphasis)
importantly it is not the court, but the parties and the community that determine that a traditional adoption has taken place. as i see it, the court’s role is simply to recognise that fact to make orders accordingly in the best interests of the child or the children concerned.
as i indicated a number of occasions during the course of the trial, in my view it would be entirely inappropriate for a judge in the particular circumstances of this case to make a finding as to whether or not a traditional adoption has taken place. the issue is an extremely complex one and the varying practices and nuances that apply are such that it would more appropriately be a matter for the relevant elders to determine.
part seven: application of the law
s 60cc(2) the primary considerations are: the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and he need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
s 60cc(3) the additional considerations are:
s 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to weight
s 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons (including grandparents or other relative of the child)
s 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child.
s 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child.
s 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living.
s 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
s 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
s 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
s 60cc(3)(h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture) and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right.
s 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents.
s 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family and s 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order.
s 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
s 60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
part eight: determination  the father filed material but ceased to be actively engaged in these proceedings and did not engage in the final hearing, (b) the father is not actively engaged in the child’s life, (c) the father has not fulfilled any kinship obligations or been involved in any traditional islander child rearing practices in relation to this child, (d) the father has no co-parenting relationship with the birth mother, (e) the birth mother and her legal representative sought to engage him in the trial however the father did not respond to those requests, and (f) the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.   the father is not actively engaged in the child’s life, (c) the father has not fulfilled any kinship obligations or been involved in any traditional islander child rearing practices in relation to this child, (d) the father has no co-parenting relationship with the birth mother, (e) the birth mother and her legal representative sought to engage him in the trial however the father did not respond to those requests, and (f) the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.   the father has not fulfilled any kinship obligations or been involved in any traditional islander child rearing practices in relation to this child, (d) the father has no co-parenting relationship with the birth mother, (e) the birth mother and her legal representative sought to engage him in the trial however the father did not respond to those requests, and (f) the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.   the father has no co-parenting relationship with the birth mother, (e) the birth mother and her legal representative sought to engage him in the trial however the father did not respond to those requests, and (f) the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.   the birth mother and her legal representative sought to engage him in the trial however the father did not respond to those requests, and (f) the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.   the father resides geographically distant from the birth mother.
...parenting orders, defined by s 64b, including orders for “parental responsibility” may be made in favour of non-parents as well as parents. (ss 64b(2) and 65(c)). an order can be made for a non-parent to have parental responsibility or to share that responsibility with another person who may or may not be a parent.   despite interlocutory orders for equal shared parental responsibility, the first respondent has no history of consulting and making decisions with the birth mother, (b) the first respondent conceded that shortly prior to the trial she had enrolled the child in kindergarten and that she had not included the birth mother’s details on that form or consulted with the birth mother prior to enrolling the child, (c) she also conceded that she had not advised the day care or provided them with a copy of the interlocutory orders reflecting that the birth mother had equal shared parental responsibility at that time, (d) she did not keep the birth mother informed about travel to the torres strait or the serious injury incurred by the child in 2021, (e) i have made findings that the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, and (f) again there are issues of geographic distance.   the first respondent conceded that shortly prior to the trial she had enrolled the child in kindergarten and that she had not included the birth mother’s details on that form or consulted with the birth mother prior to enrolling the child, (c) she also conceded that she had not advised the day care or provided them with a copy of the interlocutory orders reflecting that the birth mother had equal shared parental responsibility at that time, (d) she did not keep the birth mother informed about travel to the torres strait or the serious injury incurred by the child in 2021, (e) i have made findings that the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, and (f) again there are issues of geographic distance.   she also conceded that she had not advised the day care or provided them with a copy of the interlocutory orders reflecting that the birth mother had equal shared parental responsibility at that time, (d) she did not keep the birth mother informed about travel to the torres strait or the serious injury incurred by the child in 2021, (e) i have made findings that the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, and (f) again there are issues of geographic distance.   she did not keep the birth mother informed about travel to the torres strait or the serious injury incurred by the child in 2021, (e) i have made findings that the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, and (f) again there are issues of geographic distance.   i have made findings that the first respondent perpetrated family violence against the birth mother, and (f) again there are issues of geographic distance.   again there are issues of geographic distance.
arrangements for the child to spend time
irrespective of the decision made by the court, it is important that the number of changes in [x]’s living arrangements is curtailed and that she has the opportunity to feel safe and secure and thrive in whatever living arrangement is ordered as well as the opportunity to be loved and cared for by kin from both her maternal and paternal families.   she has a history of complying with court orders, (b) she has a history of complying with those in authority – based in part at least on her delivering the child to the first respondent when directed by an authority figure to do so in october 2019, and (c) i accept her evidence that she is respectful of elders in her community, as being one of the reasons why she did not stand up to the first respondent earlier.   she has a history of complying with those in authority – based in part at least on her delivering the child to the first respondent when directed by an authority figure to do so in october 2019, and (c) i accept her evidence that she is respectful of elders in her community, as being one of the reasons why she did not stand up to the first respondent earlier.   i accept her evidence that she is respectful of elders in her community, as being one of the reasons why she did not stand up to the first respondent earlier.
counselling
physical discipline
non-denigration
other orders
in conclusion
associate: dated: 30 august 2022
dated: 30 august 2022
[1] birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 12-13[2] first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, paragraph 40[3] first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, paragraph 4[4] family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 180
[5]meriba omasker kaziw kazipa (torres strait islander traditional child rearing practice) act 2020 (qld)
[6] birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraphs 11-20 and 141-149[7]first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, paragraphs 40-45[8] family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 172[9] birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 84[10]first respondent’s affidavit filed 23 february 2021, paragraphs 33–44 and affidavit filed 7 february 2022 paragraphs 46–58[11]first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, paragraph 47[12]family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 85–87[13]family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 185-187[14]family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 199[15]family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 209-210[16]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 71[17]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 72[18]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 73[19]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph79 - 81[20] family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 60[21] family report dated 8 november 2021, particularly in the evaluation which commences at paragraph 217[22]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 59[23]birth mother’s affidavit filed 31 january 2022, paragraph 61 and 194 and family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 115[24]first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, paragraph 114 and family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 131[25] first respondent’s affidavit filed 7 february 2022, annexure b[26] child inclusive conference memorandum dated 22 january 2021, paragraph 14[27]family report dated 8 november 2021, paragraph 98 page 17 of 46[28] family report dated 22 november 2021, pages 11–17[29] family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 218[30] order dated 19 april 2021[31] lara & lara and marley & sharp [2003] famca 1393; (2004) flc 93-186 at [42]- [44] (“lara & and marley & sharp”)[32]first respondent’s affidavit filed on 7 february 2022, paragraphs 64-67[33] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97 at [7][34] ibid at [104] and [105][35] kent j in blaze and anor & grady & anor [2015] fam lr 172, particularly at [122][36] in particular at [220][37] in particular [69] to [73] and [122][38] family report dated 22 november 2021, paragraph 217