last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hiron & tourle [2022] fedcfamc2f 1283
orders
the court orders that:
final parenting orders:
final property orders:  the first payment in the sum of $10,000 on or before 4.00pm on tuesday 13 september 2022 (‘the first payment date’), and (b) the second payment in the sum of $61,700 on or before 4.00pm on 4 october 2022 (‘the second payment date’) but provided that, (i) the respondent has vacated the property known as a street, suburb b and being the whole of the property described in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (‘the property’), (ii) and in the event the respondent has not vacated the property by the second payment date, then the second payment be paid to the respondent 14 days after she has vacated the property.   the second payment in the sum of $61,700 on or before 4.00pm on 4 october 2022 (‘the second payment date’) but provided that, (i) the respondent has vacated the property known as a street, suburb b and being the whole of the property described in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (‘the property’), (ii) and in the event the respondent has not vacated the property by the second payment date, then the second payment be paid to the respondent 14 days after she has vacated the property.   the respondent has vacated the property known as a street, suburb b and being the whole of the property described in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (‘the property’), (ii) and in the event the respondent has not vacated the property by the second payment date, then the second payment be paid to the respondent 14 days after she has vacated the property.  ) and in the event the respondent has not vacated the property by the second payment date, then the second payment be paid to the respondent 14 days after she has vacated the property.   approach victoria police and provide a copy of these orders and reasons for judgment to assist in the respondent’s removal from the property, (b) enter and take possession of the property, and (i) change the locks, (ii) replace the doors with security doors or install security screens, (iii) repair any broken windows, (iv) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.   enter and take possession of the property, and (i) change the locks, (ii) replace the doors with security doors or install security screens, (iii) repair any broken windows, (iv) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.   change the locks, (ii) replace the doors with security doors or install security screens, (iii) repair any broken windows, (iv) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.  ) replace the doors with security doors or install security screens, (iii) repair any broken windows, (iv) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.  i) repair any broken windows, (iv) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.  ) install window grilles, (v) install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.   install a security system including alarms and/or cctv cameras, (vi) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.  ) remove all chattels in the possession of the respondent and advise the respondent of that removal by email or text message, and if not claimed and collected by the respondent within a further 14 days, deliver same to a waste and recycling centre, and (vii) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.  i) replace, adjust, or install a fence at the maximum height in accordance with victorian fencing standards.   the applicant be entitled to sole use, occupation and legal and equitable ownership of the property but subject to the mortgage and the charge of mr & mrs g dated 18 february 2011, and (b) the applicant discharge the respondent from any liability for, and indemnify the respondent against, all payments and liability pursuant to the registered mortgage number (insert from title search) to the national australia bank (‘the mortgage’) and all taxes including income taxes, capital gains tax and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings of or with respect to the property of whatsoever nature and kind but save and except and excluding any electricity and gas supply charges incurred during the respondent’s occupation after 8 december 2019 and the date the respondent vacates the property.   the applicant discharge the respondent from any liability for, and indemnify the respondent against, all payments and liability pursuant to the registered mortgage number (insert from title search) to the national australia bank (‘the mortgage’) and all taxes including income taxes, capital gains tax and all apportionable rates, taxes and outgoings of or with respect to the property of whatsoever nature and kind but save and except and excluding any electricity and gas supply charges incurred during the respondent’s occupation after 8 december 2019 and the date the respondent vacates the property.   the respondent do all acts and things and sign all such documents as maybe required to withdraw any caveat lodged by her or on her behalf over the title to the property (‘the caveat’) at her expense. (b) in the event that the respondent fails to withdraw the caveat as provided herein then, pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) the applicant’s solicitor for the time being, is hereby appointed and authorised to do all acts and things and execute all documents or authorities in the name of the respondent, ms tourle, as may be required to cause and effect the withdrawal of any caveat or caveats lodged by the respondent or on her behalf over the title to the property and to deduct any necessary titles office fee paid (but not legal fees) from the second payment.   in the event that the respondent fails to withdraw the caveat as provided herein then, pursuant to section 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) the applicant’s solicitor for the time being, is hereby appointed and authorised to do all acts and things and execute all documents or authorities in the name of the respondent, ms tourle, as may be required to cause and effect the withdrawal of any caveat or caveats lodged by the respondent or on her behalf over the title to the property and to deduct any necessary titles office fee paid (but not legal fees) from the second payment.   within 7 days of these orders the respondent provide the applicant’s lawyers by email, text or ordinary post bank account details of the respondent’s bank account, and (b) in the event that the respondent fails to provide her bank account details to the applicant’s lawyers by the time the first payment or the second payment is to be paid, then the first payment and/or the second payment be placed into a trust account on behalf of the respondent until she provides her bank account details so as to permit the payment/s to her.   in the event that the respondent fails to provide her bank account details to the applicant’s lawyers by the time the first payment or the second payment is to be paid, then the first payment and/or the second payment be placed into a trust account on behalf of the respondent until she provides her bank account details so as to permit the payment/s to her.   first, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, so much of the first payment and second payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the penalty rate applicable to sums due under orders pursuant to the act adjusted monthly from the second payment date to the respondent, (d) fourthly, the balance to the applicant,   secondly, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance affecting the real property, (c) thirdly, so much of the first payment and second payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the penalty rate applicable to sums due under orders pursuant to the act adjusted monthly from the second payment date to the respondent, (d) fourthly, the balance to the applicant,   thirdly, so much of the first payment and second payment as is then outstanding together with interest thereon at the penalty rate applicable to sums due under orders pursuant to the act adjusted monthly from the second payment date to the respondent, (d) fourthly, the balance to the applicant,   fourthly, the balance to the applicant,   the parties hold their respective interests in the real property upon trust pursuant to these orders, and (b) neither party encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party save to the extent necessary to comply with these orders.   neither party encumber the real property without the consent in writing of the other party save to the extent necessary to comply with these orders.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders (the furniture, personal possessions, and like chattels in the property (but not fixtures) being deemed to be in the possession of the respondent). (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any join bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered. (c) each party retain any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned that party. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any join bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered. (c) each party retain any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned that party. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party retain any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned that party. (d) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named thereon. (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. (f) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
and the court notes that:
ex temporereasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
troubling events
... (d) on or about the evening of [early] 2018 [ms tourle] attempted suicide. the children were present in the home when this occurred. i called an ambulance who took [ms tourle] to the [h hospital] where i was advised that she had attempted suicide by overdosing on a mixture of cocaine, panadol and alcohol. (e) on or about 6 december 2018, on the day of separation, we had a big argument about a series of issues we had experienced throughout our relationship. ... on this day, during our argument about the above issues, i threatened to leave her and she in response punched me, spit on me, and she threw a broom which missed and smashed a nearby window. i proceeded to leave, however, she again became physically aggressive. i held her arm and put her to the floor reasonably and without excessive force. i knew this pattern could not continue and i left the matrimonial home with the children for good. that was the day we separated. (f) in or about january 2019 whilst attending a barbecue at [ms tourle's] sister's home, [ms tourle] hit me to the side of my head with her closed fist. she hit me again and the family members rushed to intervene, however, [ms tourle] in response hit two others as well. this whole event occurred in front of the children. ... (g) in or around january 2019, the children and i were walking home from school with [ms tourle] on the telephone. [x] did not want to speak to [ms tourle] on the phone but after i encouraged him to speak with his mother, [ms tourle] told [x] that she was going to go to his house and drag him out by his fractured arm. [x] was visibly upset and afraid that [ms tourle] would attend our home to hurt him and he told me so.   on or about the evening of [early] 2018 [ms tourle] attempted suicide. the children were present in the home when this occurred. i called an ambulance who took [ms tourle] to the [h hospital] where i was advised that she had attempted suicide by overdosing on a mixture of cocaine, panadol and alcohol. (e) on or about 6 december 2018, on the day of separation, we had a big argument about a series of issues we had experienced throughout our relationship. ... on this day, during our argument about the above issues, i threatened to leave her and she in response punched me, spit on me, and she threw a broom which missed and smashed a nearby window. i proceeded to leave, however, she again became physically aggressive. i held her arm and put her to the floor reasonably and without excessive force. i knew this pattern could not continue and i left the matrimonial home with the children for good. that was the day we separated. (f) in or about january 2019 whilst attending a barbecue at [ms tourle's] sister's home, [ms tourle] hit me to the side of my head with her closed fist. she hit me again and the family members rushed to intervene, however, [ms tourle] in response hit two others as well. this whole event occurred in front of the children. ... (g) in or around january 2019, the children and i were walking home from school with [ms tourle] on the telephone. [x] did not want to speak to [ms tourle] on the phone but after i encouraged him to speak with his mother, [ms tourle] told [x] that she was going to go to his house and drag him out by his fractured arm. [x] was visibly upset and afraid that [ms tourle] would attend our home to hurt him and he told me so.   on or about 6 december 2018, on the day of separation, we had a big argument about a series of issues we had experienced throughout our relationship. ... on this day, during our argument about the above issues, i threatened to leave her and she in response punched me, spit on me, and she threw a broom which missed and smashed a nearby window. i proceeded to leave, however, she again became physically aggressive. i held her arm and put her to the floor reasonably and without excessive force. i knew this pattern could not continue and i left the matrimonial home with the children for good. that was the day we separated. (f) in or about january 2019 whilst attending a barbecue at [ms tourle's] sister's home, [ms tourle] hit me to the side of my head with her closed fist. she hit me again and the family members rushed to intervene, however, [ms tourle] in response hit two others as well. this whole event occurred in front of the children. ... (g) in or around january 2019, the children and i were walking home from school with [ms tourle] on the telephone. [x] did not want to speak to [ms tourle] on the phone but after i encouraged him to speak with his mother, [ms tourle] told [x] that she was going to go to his house and drag him out by his fractured arm. [x] was visibly upset and afraid that [ms tourle] would attend our home to hurt him and he told me so.   in or about january 2019 whilst attending a barbecue at [ms tourle's] sister's home, [ms tourle] hit me to the side of my head with her closed fist. she hit me again and the family members rushed to intervene, however, [ms tourle] in response hit two others as well. this whole event occurred in front of the children. ... (g) in or around january 2019, the children and i were walking home from school with [ms tourle] on the telephone. [x] did not want to speak to [ms tourle] on the phone but after i encouraged him to speak with his mother, [ms tourle] told [x] that she was going to go to his house and drag him out by his fractured arm. [x] was visibly upset and afraid that [ms tourle] would attend our home to hurt him and he told me so.   in or around january 2019, the children and i were walking home from school with [ms tourle] on the telephone. [x] did not want to speak to [ms tourle] on the phone but after i encouraged him to speak with his mother, [ms tourle] told [x] that she was going to go to his house and drag him out by his fractured arm. [x] was visibly upset and afraid that [ms tourle] would attend our home to hurt him and he told me so.
... (j) on or about 14 april 2019, the children informed me that during their time with [ms tourle], they had played with an unloaded handgun. the children also informed me that [ms tourle] said that she wanted to use that gun on me. the children were both deeply upset and afraid that their mother would shoot me. both [x] and [y] would regularly awake at night having nightmares that i had been shot by their mother. (k) on or about 28 march 2019, i received flurry of text messages from [ms tourle] stating the effect that she does no longer wanted to spend time with the children. these text messages stated, "i don't want the children anymore!!", "you 're all haters!!", "i have nothing left for any of you!!", "i'm empty!!", "i have been left alone to many times in my life!!", “left to fight my own battles, battles that are always started by others!!", "so goodbye!!", "i have no love, no care, no consideration, no thought for any of you ever again!!" (l) on or about march 2019, i sent a text message to [ms tourle] stating, "hey there hurting a lot put yourself in their shoes, they have nothing but room in their heart for you ...". in response, i received a text message which stated, "no they don't! i already explained everything to them and what would happen if they did! i told them they would never see me again and it's time they learnt there are consequences to their actions!! and what actions could do to their lives & to other people's!!" (m) in or about may 2019, i took the children to [ms tourle's] house for a visit. [ms tourle] started arguing with me and said that i am to blame for her drug use. i told her that i would not make an effort to see her again and after she picked up a kitchen knife, put it to her throat, screamed out to the children and said words to the effect, "come and see me kill myself because dad is leaving me!" the children screamed and hid in their bedrooms. after, when [ms tourle] went to that bathroom, i gathered the children and fled. the children have not seen [ms tourle] since. (n) in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder." (emphasis added)   on or about 14 april 2019, the children informed me that during their time with [ms tourle], they had played with an unloaded handgun. the children also informed me that [ms tourle] said that she wanted to use that gun on me. the children were both deeply upset and afraid that their mother would shoot me. both [x] and [y] would regularly awake at night having nightmares that i had been shot by their mother. (k) on or about 28 march 2019, i received flurry of text messages from [ms tourle] stating the effect that she does no longer wanted to spend time with the children. these text messages stated, "i don't want the children anymore!!", "you 're all haters!!", "i have nothing left for any of you!!", "i'm empty!!", "i have been left alone to many times in my life!!", “left to fight my own battles, battles that are always started by others!!", "so goodbye!!", "i have no love, no care, no consideration, no thought for any of you ever again!!" (l) on or about march 2019, i sent a text message to [ms tourle] stating, "hey there hurting a lot put yourself in their shoes, they have nothing but room in their heart for you ...". in response, i received a text message which stated, "no they don't! i already explained everything to them and what would happen if they did! i told them they would never see me again and it's time they learnt there are consequences to their actions!! and what actions could do to their lives & to other people's!!" (m) in or about may 2019, i took the children to [ms tourle's] house for a visit. [ms tourle] started arguing with me and said that i am to blame for her drug use. i told her that i would not make an effort to see her again and after she picked up a kitchen knife, put it to her throat, screamed out to the children and said words to the effect, "come and see me kill myself because dad is leaving me!" the children screamed and hid in their bedrooms. after, when [ms tourle] went to that bathroom, i gathered the children and fled. the children have not seen [ms tourle] since. (n) in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   on or about 28 march 2019, i received flurry of text messages from [ms tourle] stating the effect that she does no longer wanted to spend time with the children. these text messages stated, "i don't want the children anymore!!", "you 're all haters!!", "i have nothing left for any of you!!", "i'm empty!!", "i have been left alone to many times in my life!!", “left to fight my own battles, battles that are always started by others!!", "so goodbye!!", "i have no love, no care, no consideration, no thought for any of you ever again!!" (l) on or about march 2019, i sent a text message to [ms tourle] stating, "hey there hurting a lot put yourself in their shoes, they have nothing but room in their heart for you ...". in response, i received a text message which stated, "no they don't! i already explained everything to them and what would happen if they did! i told them they would never see me again and it's time they learnt there are consequences to their actions!! and what actions could do to their lives & to other people's!!" (m) in or about may 2019, i took the children to [ms tourle's] house for a visit. [ms tourle] started arguing with me and said that i am to blame for her drug use. i told her that i would not make an effort to see her again and after she picked up a kitchen knife, put it to her throat, screamed out to the children and said words to the effect, "come and see me kill myself because dad is leaving me!" the children screamed and hid in their bedrooms. after, when [ms tourle] went to that bathroom, i gathered the children and fled. the children have not seen [ms tourle] since. (n) in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   on or about march 2019, i sent a text message to [ms tourle] stating, "hey there hurting a lot put yourself in their shoes, they have nothing but room in their heart for you ...". in response, i received a text message which stated, "no they don't! i already explained everything to them and what would happen if they did! i told them they would never see me again and it's time they learnt there are consequences to their actions!! and what actions could do to their lives & to other people's!!" (m) in or about may 2019, i took the children to [ms tourle's] house for a visit. [ms tourle] started arguing with me and said that i am to blame for her drug use. i told her that i would not make an effort to see her again and after she picked up a kitchen knife, put it to her throat, screamed out to the children and said words to the effect, "come and see me kill myself because dad is leaving me!" the children screamed and hid in their bedrooms. after, when [ms tourle] went to that bathroom, i gathered the children and fled. the children have not seen [ms tourle] since. (n) in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   in or about may 2019, i took the children to [ms tourle's] house for a visit. [ms tourle] started arguing with me and said that i am to blame for her drug use. i told her that i would not make an effort to see her again and after she picked up a kitchen knife, put it to her throat, screamed out to the children and said words to the effect, "come and see me kill myself because dad is leaving me!" the children screamed and hid in their bedrooms. after, when [ms tourle] went to that bathroom, i gathered the children and fled. the children have not seen [ms tourle] since. (n) in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   in or about june 2019, [ms tourle] sent text messages to my family members and the children directly stating to the effect that she would kill herself in the drive way at my house for all of us to witness. (o) on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   on or about 23 june 2019, [ms tourle] sent a chain of text messages to [y's] mobile phone: "please! please! please!, "so you want mommy to die?", "i'm going home to kill myself", "goodbye", "i love you very much", "i hope you find a better mommy", and i will miss you so much", "i have some bonds clothes for you at home". [y] showed me these messages and i called the police. the police arrived and i was subsequently informed that the police had found knives and the drug 'ice' in her car. i believe she received criminal charges as a result. (p) on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   on or about 20 january 2020, [ms tourle] sent to me a text message containing a photo of herself holding a large machete to her own throat. (q) on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."   on or about 1 october 2019, [ms tourle] called [y] by phone and during the conversation, she asked why she and [x] did not answer the phone when she called. she abused [y] called her names for not answering the phone. [ms tourle] later threatened [y] by stating words to the effect that [ms tourle] would send one of her associates to my house in order to attack me. [y] and [x] cried uncontrollably and begged for her not to actually do it. ... she later sent me text message which stated to the effect that i should "look over my shoulder."
first question: proceed without one party?
... i cannot say anymore. your honour, given the information before you. i am excusing myself from anymore torment of the court process. i will only damage myself further without a lawyer. this week was the first chance i had given everything to seek out a lawyer, but sadly the case had been scheduled also. ...
proceeding on a final basis
material relied upon
exhibits
parenting proceedings
... i will do a urine test, but it will not be supervised!! force a supervised test & my life will end as i do not know how much more i can take as i have never ever used the word "no," let alone smacked them! ...
the family report
recommendations 143. that [x] and [y] live with [mr hiron]. 144. that [x] and [y] spend time with [ms tourle] at their discretion. that should [x] spend time with [ms tourle] that this be supervised, and that [ms tourle] be clear of all illicit drugs. that [x] have access to a therapist should time commence with [ms tourle]. that [ms tourle] be assessed by a psychiatrist. that [ms tourle] complete hair follicle drug testing. that [ms tourle] attends and completes a change behaviour program and engages with a therapist. that [mr hiron] and [ms tourle] avail themselves of an electronic means of communication as noted.
the applicable law
... 60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. ... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests determining child's best interests   subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
property proceedings
applicable law
section 90sm alteration of property interests   in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or (b) in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,   in the case of proceedings with respect to the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship--altering the interests of the bankruptcy trustee in the vested bankruptcy property,
including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and   an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and   an order requiring:  either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),
to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. ...   if a party to the de facto relationship dies after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, an order made under subsection (1) in property settlement proceedings may be enforced on behalf of, or against, as the case may be, the estate of the deceased party. (3) the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property,
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or
whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.
...
section 90sf matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance   in exercising jurisdiction under section 90se (after being satisfied of the matters in subsections 44(5) and (6) and sections 90sb and 90sd), the court must apply the principle that a party to a de facto relationship must maintain the other party to the de facto relationship: (a) only to the extent that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, and (b) only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   only to the extent that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able to do so, and (b) only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   only if the second-mentioned party is unable to support himself or herself adequately whether: (i) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or   by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, or (ii) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or  ) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment, or  ) for any other adequate reason.
note: for child of a de facto relationship , see section 90rb.   in applying this principle, the court must take into account only the matters referred to in subsection (3).   the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia, and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and (g) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:  the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and   the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.   in exercising its jurisdiction under section 90se, a court must disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.
just and equitable and the preferred approach ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the "preferred approach" to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that "the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties". the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) - the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) - ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) - the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) ("the other factors") including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
step one: identify the property pool
description
$
the home to be retained by the father:
800,00
liabilities to be borne by the father including mortgage, loans and rate arrears:  8,000)
net assets of the father:
292,000
mother motor car:
15,000
liabilities to be borne by the mother: electricity about $4,000, and gas about $4,000:
electricity about $4,000, and gas about $4,000:  000)
net assets of the mother:
7,000
total assets and liabilities:
299,000
father’s superannuation:
$53,000
mother’s superannuation:
not known.
step two: contributions – section 90sm(4)(a)(b) and (c)
step three: section 90sf matters.
conclusion and nuts & bolts
date/ description
schedule 1 reference
cost
3 february 2021
item 5
$1,964
15 april 2021
item 4
3 october 2021
29 august 2022
counsel’s fee
$3,300
general allowance for further work required by mother’s low compliance and non-attendance:
$9,192
total:
$10,992
total rounded to:
$11,000
associate: dated: 30 august 2022
dated: 30 august 2022