last updated: 26 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
eason & hallins [2022] fedcfamc2f 1187
orders
the court orders that:  d street, suburb e, western australia, (b) f street, suburb g, victoria, and (c) h pty ltd.   f street, suburb g, victoria, and (c) h pty ltd.   h pty ltd.   an updated single consolidated trial affidavit, (b) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely, and (c) an updated financial statement.   other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely, and (c) an updated financial statement.   an updated financial statement.   the applicant file and serve any affidavit(s) in reply addressing only the evidence presented in the respondent(s)’ affidavits, and   a minute of precise orders sought, (b) a list of the material relied upon, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be relevant to the dispute, with the values contended for by each party and the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) the assets and liabilities available for division, (ii) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   a list of the material relied upon, (c) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be relevant to the dispute, with the values contended for by each party and the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) the assets and liabilities available for division, (ii) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (d) a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be relevant to the dispute, with the values contended for by each party and the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) the assets and liabilities available for division, (ii) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be relevant to the dispute, with the values contended for by each party and the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) the assets and liabilities available for division, (ii) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   the assets and liabilities available for division, (ii) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.  ) the value of items where the value is in dispute, (iii) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.  i) contributions claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions contended for, (iv) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.  ) relevant section 75(2) / 90sf(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for, and (v) any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   any further factors relevant to determining a ‘just and equitable’ division of property.   be in portable document format (pdf), (b) be capable of being searchable for specified text, (c) be paginated and have an index, (d) have each entry in the index electronically bookmarked, and, (e) include:- (i) an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.   be capable of being searchable for specified text, (c) be paginated and have an index, (d) have each entry in the index electronically bookmarked, and, (e) include:- (i) an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.   be paginated and have an index, (d) have each entry in the index electronically bookmarked, and, (e) include:- (i) an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.   have each entry in the index electronically bookmarked, and, (e) include:- (i) an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.   include:- (i) an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.   an outline of case document, and, (ii) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.  ) all documents previously filed in the proceedings upon which that party seeks to rely at final hearing, noting that any expert evidence is to be included in the court book of the applicant.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge boymal
introduction  whether the parties’ de facto relationship ended in november 2018 or early october 2019, and (b) if the relationship ended in november 2018, whether leave should be granted to the wife to proceed with her initiating application out of time pursuant to section 44(6)(a) of the act.   if the relationship ended in november 2018, whether leave should be granted to the wife to proceed with her initiating application out of time pursuant to section 44(6)(a) of the act.
legal principles
... [e]ach element of a relationship draws its colour and its significance from the other elements, some of which may point at one direction and some in the other. what must be looked at is the composite picture. any attempt to isolate individual factors and to attribute to them relative degrees of materiality or importance involves a denial of common experience and will almost inevitably be productive of error. the endless scope for differences in human attitudes and activities means that there will be an almost infinite variety of combinations of circumstances which may fall for consideration. in any particular case, it will be a question of fact and degree, a jury question, whether a relationship between two unrelated persons of the opposite sex meets the statutory test.   ... (a) the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,
section 4aa(1)(c) identifies the relationship which is the concern of the act: "a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis". the existence of such a relationship is determined having regard to "all the circumstances" of a relationship, significantly, those "circumstances" include any or all of the circumstances listed in s 4aa(2), and, by reason of s 4aa(3), no particular finding about any circumstance is necessary for there to be a de facto relationship. consistently with the reality that human relationships are infinitely mutable, in determining whether a de facto relationship exists a court is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate.
indeed, it seems to us that the full court in clarence & crisp [2016] famcafc 157, (2016) flc 93-728 correctly identified the test to determine whether a de facto relationship has come to an end. the full court said:
the evidence of the husband outlines the change in events following separation as identified by him including the wife being removed from the home, taking on responsibility for payment of her car debt and other similar matters. the conduct of the wife changed after the date of separation identified by the husband. there was limited change after her alleged date of separation.
background
prior to november 2018
after 20 november 2018
the hearing  her amended initiating application filed on 14 january 2022, (b) her financial statement filed on 30 june 2021, (c) her affidavits filed on 10 january 2022 and 25 january 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her daughter, ms k, filed on 13 january 2022. for ease of reference i refer to her as ms k in these reasons. no disrespect is intended. ms k was not required for cross-examination.   her financial statement filed on 30 june 2021, (c) her affidavits filed on 10 january 2022 and 25 january 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her daughter, ms k, filed on 13 january 2022. for ease of reference i refer to her as ms k in these reasons. no disrespect is intended. ms k was not required for cross-examination.   her affidavits filed on 10 january 2022 and 25 january 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her daughter, ms k, filed on 13 january 2022. for ease of reference i refer to her as ms k in these reasons. no disrespect is intended. ms k was not required for cross-examination.   the affidavit of her daughter, ms k, filed on 13 january 2022. for ease of reference i refer to her as ms k in these reasons. no disrespect is intended. ms k was not required for cross-examination.   a1 being a letter dated 25 june 2021 from the s authority to the wife’s solicitors advising that at that time the official trustee had decided that it would not seek to join a property settlement claim brought by the wife, and (b) a2 being a letter dated 8 february 2022 from the wife’s solicitors to the s authority enclosing court documents in these proceedings and advising of the final hearing date.   a2 being a letter dated 8 february 2022 from the wife’s solicitors to the s authority enclosing court documents in these proceedings and advising of the final hearing date.   his response and financial statement both filed on 29 september 2021, and (b) his affidavit filed on 20 january 2022.   his affidavit filed on 20 january 2022.
the parties
the statement of affairs   that the wife does not have a spouse or partner, (b) that the wife is not involved or is likely to become involved in any family law property or spousal maintenance proceedings, (c) that she did not receive or expect to receive any benefit from any other person including payment of her expenses, (d) that she does not have any interest in land, a house or a unit, (e) that she does not use a vehicle owned by anyone else, (f) that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that the wife is not involved or is likely to become involved in any family law property or spousal maintenance proceedings, (c) that she did not receive or expect to receive any benefit from any other person including payment of her expenses, (d) that she does not have any interest in land, a house or a unit, (e) that she does not use a vehicle owned by anyone else, (f) that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that she did not receive or expect to receive any benefit from any other person including payment of her expenses, (d) that she does not have any interest in land, a house or a unit, (e) that she does not use a vehicle owned by anyone else, (f) that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that she does not have any interest in land, a house or a unit, (e) that she does not use a vehicle owned by anyone else, (f) that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that she does not use a vehicle owned by anyone else, (f) that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that she has not contributed or otherwise assisted in the purchase or improvement of any asset valued over $1000.00 which is held by someone else, (g) the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   the wife’s current address as her parents’ address and her previous addresses as m street, suburb n and l street, suburb g. she does not list f street, suburb g, and (h) that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.   that one of the main causes of her financial difficulties was “domestic discord or relationships breakdown”.
i based my whole life on having a future with this man, so when [mr hallins] broke up with me in october 2019 he left me with literally nothing[19]
well, [the husband] said to me in november of ’18 and way before that you need to go bankrupt because we need to move forward in this relationship and put all your debts behind us so we can move forward and into retirement.[20] ... [the husband] put pressure on me to file the application to start with. this was going to be our future, but you need to put all of those debts behind you. i didn’t want to go bankrupt at all.[21] ... [the husband] didn’t want to have any of my debts. he wanted to move on into retirement, but i needed to put all of this behind me.[22]   in august 2018 the wife dated and appears to have signed the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q on in august 2018, (b) in september 2018 the wife again dated the statement of affairs. she was in victoria in september 2018, (c) in october 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in october 2018, (d) in november 2018 the wife again signs and dates the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in november 2018, (e) in november 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. in november 2018 the wife was on an aeroplane travelling from city q to victoria, and (f) the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.   in september 2018 the wife again dated the statement of affairs. she was in victoria in september 2018, (c) in october 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in october 2018, (d) in november 2018 the wife again signs and dates the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in november 2018, (e) in november 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. in november 2018 the wife was on an aeroplane travelling from city q to victoria, and (f) the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.   in october 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in october 2018, (d) in november 2018 the wife again signs and dates the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in november 2018, (e) in november 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. in november 2018 the wife was on an aeroplane travelling from city q to victoria, and (f) the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.   in november 2018 the wife again signs and dates the statement of affairs. the wife was in city q in november 2018, (e) in november 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. in november 2018 the wife was on an aeroplane travelling from city q to victoria, and (f) the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.   in november 2018 the s authority date stamps receipt of the statement of affairs. in november 2018 the wife was on an aeroplane travelling from city q to victoria, and (f) the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.   the wife’s notification of bankruptcy records that the statement of affairs was filed in november 2018 and the date of bankruptcy is november 2021.
i don’t know why that’s there. i don’t know – because i – actually my bankruptcy came through late november, so i don’t know why that september date is there because i didn’t sign anything in september. i don’t know.[24] ... i remember signing bankruptcy paperwork at [d street] when i was over there early november[25] ... i remember filling that form out in [city q] so i’ve obviously brought the form back to victoria with me. i remember sitting at that table signing that form, not signing it, but filling out that form.[26] ... i did fill that form out over there. i had that form with me for quite a while, so maybe i did actually fill out september, but then when i actually did it properly and filled the whole thing out it was [11.18] when i actually did send it.[27] ..... i might have put that date (september 2018) there, but not an actual signature. i probably left that open, that signature door open , so when i actually did put that right date in that i was going to send it away, i actually had signed it on that date.[28]
statements to a government authority apparently inconsistent with a party’s case may complicate the resolution of the issue of the nature of the relationship, but they are not determinative. they are taken into account as part of all the circumstances ...
documents the wife relies upon
husband: can you please call your mother and ask her to come home, she should not have come here we are over and she needs to leave,you are the only person she will listen to [ms k]: she wants to fight for your relationship. she loves you and i think she is willing to do whatever it takes. husband: [ms k] please convince her to go home immediately, i love your mother as a friend and will help her start her new life but i don’t love her anymore as a girl friend please call her and tell her to come home she is going about this the wrong way please call her and ask her to go home (emphasis added) your the only person she listens to please ask her to come home [ms k]: i’ve already tried speaking to her about this whether it was such a good idea. she loves you so much [mr hallins], and she won’t listen to me. she really is willing to do whatever it’s going to take. husband: i’m sorry for me it is over she left me to many times please talk to her, she won’t listen to me anymore (emphasis added) [ms k]: i will talk to her. but she is living with so much regret now and she just wants to be with you. i know she has left you before. but i’ve never seen her this way. and she would never go to this length if she wasn’t serious. i really hope you can find it in your heart to forgive her. we are all family, i really hope you can find that in your heart. husband: i’m sorry no i begged her and begged her, i don’t feel part of your family anymore i suffered so much over the past year and i wish you all all the best but i cannot keep trying anymore, i really hope i was a good role model but i am just so burnt out and i will try and help her but i cannot love her the same anymore (emphasis added) [ms k]: i know you did. and she is feeling so much pain now as well. you’re the best thing that has ever happened to her and i’ve seen how broken is. i understand how exhausted you would be after everything and all of this time. maybe just see her and talk to her. you have been apart for so long. maybe you guys just need to reconnect. i know she would be willing to do absolutely anything to have you back. and you may not feel apart of our family anymore, but our family sees you as apart of ours. they are always asking about you and poppy knows you as grandpa [mr hallins]. we show her photos of you and everything. you are apart of our family. and we all love you even if you don’t feel it.[37]
in and out of [city q], clearly. like, i was over there and then i tried to get a job and then that didn’t work and then i had to come back[38] .... i’ve never left [the husband] in the relationship. i’ve never left him.[39]   the husband refused to allow the wife to live in f street, (b) the husband removed authorisation for the leasing agents to liaise with the wife. he did not do so after november 2018, (c) the husband removed all forms of financial assistance to the wife, namely the payment of the motor vehicle 1 loan. he gave the wife an ultimatum in relation to the loan, and he kept the car. this did not occur after november 2018, (d) the husband messaged the wife in early october 2019 that the relationship was over, (e) the husband denied the wife any physical contact or communication with him when she came to suburb e on 30 october 2019. there had been no such denials in either may 2019 or august 2019, and (f) the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.   the husband removed authorisation for the leasing agents to liaise with the wife. he did not do so after november 2018, (c) the husband removed all forms of financial assistance to the wife, namely the payment of the motor vehicle 1 loan. he gave the wife an ultimatum in relation to the loan, and he kept the car. this did not occur after november 2018, (d) the husband messaged the wife in early october 2019 that the relationship was over, (e) the husband denied the wife any physical contact or communication with him when she came to suburb e on 30 october 2019. there had been no such denials in either may 2019 or august 2019, and (f) the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.   the husband removed all forms of financial assistance to the wife, namely the payment of the motor vehicle 1 loan. he gave the wife an ultimatum in relation to the loan, and he kept the car. this did not occur after november 2018, (d) the husband messaged the wife in early october 2019 that the relationship was over, (e) the husband denied the wife any physical contact or communication with him when she came to suburb e on 30 october 2019. there had been no such denials in either may 2019 or august 2019, and (f) the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.   the husband messaged the wife in early october 2019 that the relationship was over, (e) the husband denied the wife any physical contact or communication with him when she came to suburb e on 30 october 2019. there had been no such denials in either may 2019 or august 2019, and (f) the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.   the husband denied the wife any physical contact or communication with him when she came to suburb e on 30 october 2019. there had been no such denials in either may 2019 or august 2019, and (f) the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.   the husband includes a “goodbye” to ms k in the text exchange between them and makes some confessions.
section 4aa(2)(c) the duration of the relationship, the nature and extent of their common residence, whether a sexual relationship exists the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, the care and support of children, the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.
conclusion
associate: dated: 1 september 2022
dated: 1 september 2022
[1] clarence & crisp [2016] famcafc 157 at [33]. [2] sinclair and whittaker [2013] famcafc 129; (2013) flc 93-551 at [65]. [3] mayson & wellard (2021) famcafc 115 at [41]. [4] herford & berke (no. 2) (2019) flc 93-919 at [23]. [5] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 24-25. [6] transcript 9 february 2022, p.12. [7] ms k affidavit filed 13 january 2022, paragraph 6. [8] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 75.8. [9] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 31. [10] ms k affidavit filed 13 january 2022, paragraph 7. [11] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 75.10. [12] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 32.[13] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 64.[14] wife’s affidavit filed 10 january 2022, paragraph 15. [15] transcript 9 february 2022, p.13. [16] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 38.[17] wife’s court book, page 153. [18] annexure "h-4" of the husband's affidavit filed 20 january 2022.[19] transcript 9 february 2022, p.22. [20] transcript 9 february 2022, p.15. [21] transcript 9 february 2022, p.14.[22] transcript 9 february 2022, p.21.[23] transcript 9 february 2022, p.15.[24] transcript 9 february 2022, p.19. [25] transcript 9 february 2022, p.19. [26] transcript 9 february 2022, p.20. [27] transcript 9 february 2022, p.21. [28] transcript 9 february 2022, p.20. [29] transcript 9 february 2022, p.21.[30] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 40. [31] wife’s court book, page 142. [32] wife’s court book, page 144.[33] wife’s court book, page 147.[34] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 44. [35] annexure "e-9" of the wife’s affidavit filed 10 january 2022. [36] annexure "e-8" of the wife’s affidavit filed 10 january 2022. [37] annexure “k-1” to ms k affidavit filed 13 january 2022. [38] transcript 9 february 2022, p.28.[39] transcript 9 february 2022, p.29. [40] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 75.12-75.13. [41] annexure “k-1” of ms k affidavit filed 13 january 2022. [42] annexures "c" & “d” of the wife’s affidavit filed 25 january 2022. [43] husband’s affidavit filed 20 january 2022, paragraph 59.