last updated: 23 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
colless & lovell [2022] fedcfamc2f 1449
orders
the court orders that:
and the court orders by consent that:
5.1 these orders, 5.2 the settled reasons from the hearing this day (when they are published), 5.3 the section 67z report dated 21 february 2022, 5.4 the family report of mr c dated 3 august 2022, 5.5 the mother’s affidavit filed 24 august 2022, and 5.6 the father’s affidavit filed 31 august 2022.
7.1 these orders, 7.2 the settled reasons from the hearing this day (when they are published), 7.3 the section 67z report dated 21 february 2022, and 7.4 the family report of mr c dated 3 august 2022, to any psychologist, counsellor or medical practitioner attending upon any one or more of the mother or the father.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy ] in interview [the father] reported, ‘if [the child] goes back he will be murdered.’ [88] he provided the writer with a narrative about [the mother] lacking capacity as a parent and of his concerns about her other children. he provided house photos of [the mother] property and identified asbestos, poor workmanship, unfinished repairs and general deterioration of the property. he provided photos indicating what he saw as evidence of filth’ such as photos of the inside of her fridge. ... [93] the writer gathered a clear impression that [the father] was intent on remaining [the child’s primary carer and needed to protect [the child from [the mother] and his half siblings. it also appeared that he was fixated on this to a significant degree and may be reactive to change being imposed upon him should the court determine that change is required. ... [110] [the mother] provided the writer with a narrative about [the father] being controlling and being coercive and strategic in his desire to have [the child] in his primary care. when asked directly, she could not guarantee that [the father] would not be reactive if the court determined that [the child] should return to her care and was not sure about his safety in such a situation. this view concerned the writer. ... [114] the writer recognised [the mother] preference that [the child] return to her primary care. the writer also questioned what might occur should [the child] remain in [the father]’s primary care and observed [the mother] indication that she considered that she would be limited in her relationship with [the child] and his relationship with his half siblings would also be limited. [the mother] gave every indication that she wants [the father] to be part of [the child]’s life but she was unclear as to how he would react and what risk this may pose her or [the child]. [115] the writer gathered a clear impression that [the mother] was intent on remaining [the child]’s primary carer and needed to protect [the child] from [the father]. it also appeared that she was significantly concerned as to how [the father] would react to change being forced upon him should the court determine that such change is required. ... [125] the writer noted that early warning signs where, during arguments, [the child] was withheld by [the father] and there was a sense of ‘ownership’ of [the child]. it is theorised that [the father] was anxious/fearful that he would be ‘separated’ from [the child] if the parents separated and information supplied suggests he was reactive to the point of refusing [the child] being taken or withholding him by [the father]. alarmingly, there is evidence provided that this occurred when [the child] was as young as four weeks old. withholding a child of this age when he is being breastfed suggests to the writer that there was more focus on the adult need than the need of the child at such time. ... [128] the writer noted the rather strange situation of a child of [the child]’s age being removed by his then primary carer. the writer also grew concerned that [the child] would be unlikely to have a meaningful relationship with his mother if left in the care of the father. it appeared that, the evidence provided shows that [the mother] on the other hand was open to [the father] having a meaningful relationship with [the child] and did so by dropping [the child] to [the father] for weekends at a very young age. [129] discussions with [the father] left the writer anxious about [the child]’s lived experience if he remains with [the father]. the writer was also left most concerned about how [the father] may react to such change being imposed upon him and what this might mean for [the child] and his safety in the immediacy of [the father]’s distress about change which would be seen and being imposed upon himself. [130] [the child] should be returned to [the mother]’s care immediately. the writer had considered a transition which would be kinder on [the child] but does not think that [the father] would manage well. the writer urges the court to view such change as potentially placing [the child] at heightened risk and asks that should such change be determined [the child]’s transfer be well managed by the court. this is, in the writer’s view the primary task at this point in time.
the allegations as identified in the report are not able to be substantiated through the process completed by child protection. child protection have assessed that [the child] is not at risk in the care of [the mother] or [the father]. it is vital for [the child]’s emotional development and his sense of identity that he can see both his parents and build positive relationships with both of them, and his siblings. it would be in [the child]’s best interest to have equal time with both his parents where they both have the opportunity to be primary carers through a shared care arrangement. for this to be successful and focused on what is best for [the child], it will require the parents to communicate, negotiate and share information in an amicable manner. given that the investigation has not identified any ongoing concerns for [the child] in the primary care of either parent there is no further role for child protection at this time.
10(a) [mr [e]] mentions at paragraph 130 that [the child] would be at ‘heightened risk’ if [the child] was ordered to be returned to [the mother]’s care, as [mr [e]] stated he did ‘not think that [the father] would manage this well’. 10(c) the report recommends significant and substantial time between [the child] and i, unless the court found that i needed to be supervised to manage the transition. there was no evidence before the court that i would not manage the transition well.  ] in interview [the father] reported, ‘if [the child] goes back he will be murdered.’
... in making interim decisions the court will still often be faced with conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes between the parents as to what constitutes the best interests of the child. however, the legislative pathway must be followed. 82. in an interim case that would involve the following: (a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts,   considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.  ] in our view, findings made at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how firmly a judge’s intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out after a full testing of the evidence.  0] the intuition involved in decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when a judge is obliged to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time constraints prevent the evidence being tested. apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
associate: dated: 28 october 2022
dated: 28 october 2022