last updated: 6 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
woods & hendry [2022] fedcfamc2f 1205
orders
the court orders that:  exposing the child to violence, including physical or verbal threats or intimidation, whether such threats or intimidation or violence be directed at the child, the mother, the father, or any other member of either party’s household, (b) physically disciplining the child, (c) denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the child and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   physically disciplining the child, (c) denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the child and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the child and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the child or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the child or whilst the child is in his or her care to a point of a blood alcohol level of in excess of 0.05, (g) using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   using, ingesting or administering to himself or herself any illicit or non-prescribed drugs (other than over the counter medication), (h) bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.   bringing the child into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction  exhibit a: court attendance notice for the father, (b) exhibit b: facebook messenger messages from the father to the mother, (c) exhibit c: facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (d) exhibit d: further facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (e) exhibit e: letter from g counsellors, (f) exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   exhibit b: facebook messenger messages from the father to the mother, (c) exhibit c: facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (d) exhibit d: further facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (e) exhibit e: letter from g counsellors, (f) exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   exhibit c: facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (d) exhibit d: further facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (e) exhibit e: letter from g counsellors, (f) exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   exhibit d: further facebook messenger messages between the mother and the father, (e) exhibit e: letter from g counsellors, (f) exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   exhibit e: letter from g counsellors, (f) exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   exhibit f: family report dated 16 november 2020 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 15 november 2019, (g) pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   pages from the father’s tender bundle: (i) supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33, (h) mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   supervised visit report, pages f20-f27, (ii) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33,  ) correspondence from g counsellors, page f29, (iii) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33,  i) urinalysis results for the father, pages f31-f32, (iv) father’s centrelink statement, page f33,  ) father’s centrelink statement, page f33,   mother’s tender bundle, (i) icl’s tender bundle.   icl’s tender bundle.
evidence
the mother’s affidavit
the father’s affidavit  seeing red program, (b) supporting victims of domestic violence, (c) be in control, psychology of self-control impulsivity course, (d) psychology of self-control core impulsivity course, and (e) impulsive, destructive and explosive anger management course.   supporting victims of domestic violence, (c) be in control, psychology of self-control impulsivity course, (d) psychology of self-control core impulsivity course, and (e) impulsive, destructive and explosive anger management course.   be in control, psychology of self-control impulsivity course, (d) psychology of self-control core impulsivity course, and (e) impulsive, destructive and explosive anger management course.   psychology of self-control core impulsivity course, and (e) impulsive, destructive and explosive anger management course.   impulsive, destructive and explosive anger management course.
oral evidence of parties
the mother
the father
exhibits
the child dispute conference
the family report  ms woods have sole parental responsibility for x, (b) x continue to live primarily with ms woods, (c) x continue to spend supervised time with mr hendry until mr hendry has completed a men’s behaviour change program, (d) that consideration then be given to x spending unsupervised time with mr hendry, (e) that ms woods and mr hendry not come into contact with each other on changeover until there has been no significant conflict or family violence for a period of one year.   x continue to live primarily with ms woods, (c) x continue to spend supervised time with mr hendry until mr hendry has completed a men’s behaviour change program, (d) that consideration then be given to x spending unsupervised time with mr hendry, (e) that ms woods and mr hendry not come into contact with each other on changeover until there has been no significant conflict or family violence for a period of one year.   x continue to spend supervised time with mr hendry until mr hendry has completed a men’s behaviour change program, (d) that consideration then be given to x spending unsupervised time with mr hendry, (e) that ms woods and mr hendry not come into contact with each other on changeover until there has been no significant conflict or family violence for a period of one year.   that consideration then be given to x spending unsupervised time with mr hendry, (e) that ms woods and mr hendry not come into contact with each other on changeover until there has been no significant conflict or family violence for a period of one year.   that ms woods and mr hendry not come into contact with each other on changeover until there has been no significant conflict or family violence for a period of one year.
ms stolier: so, ma’am, the father gave – the mother gave oral evidence yesterday or the day before yesterday that [x] is no longer receiving speech therapy, but he has been assessed, and that is ..... behavioural therapy report. she also gave evidence that the father has continued to send her text messages which are abusive in tone. sometimes they’re not as abusive, and sometimes they’re not abusive at all. she also reiterated her concern about the father’s authenticity in relation to being clean of illicit substances. the father, for his part, gave oral evidence that sometimes his text messages were not abusive, that he has done a number of courses, and he did those courses because he was ordered to do so by the court. some of those courses have not been completed, but that’s due to covid situation. he gave evidence that the trigger for his frustration is not being able to see his son unsupervised or as often as he likes. he gave very clear evidence that it was his view that the mother was responsible for him not seeing his son. he blames her. and when the court asked him directly whether he – or reminded him directly that there were orders in place which provided the supervised time for [x] with his father that the mother had to adhere to, the father said he still expected the mother to give him unsupervised time. he said he was the victim. when asked questions about the courses that he attended, he wasn’t able to articulate in any detail what he learnt from them. so, ma’am, given what you’ve read and what i’ve just put to you, are you able to make a comment about the father’s current level of insight into his behaviours towards the mother? [ms o]: look, i – i’m somewhat limited in commenting directly on the father’s insight without having done an assessment myself or heard that evidence, but, certainly, there’s a number of things that you raised that – that we would be looking at in order to make an assessment of his insight. so, obviously, doing courses is a helpful thing in terms of creating insight and helping change problematic behaviour and improve parenting, but a way of assessing if there’s any kind of usefulness gained out of that is obviously someone’s capacity to explain, you know, what the course was about and in what way that can influence their choices and how they can kind of utilise the information gained. so that – the fact that he was unable to articulate in any detail what he had learnt is concerning and suggestive of not any increase in capacity to understand the implications of his behaviours. i guess it would appear that a significant kind of factor which indicates about the father’s insight is the continuation of the abusive text messages. i think the father has probably had fairly clear feedback thus far from the court about the inappropriateness of that, this court and other courts. so i can only presume that – assume that that is a lack of insight as to the understanding of the impact of his behaviour not only on the mother but also on [x] and [x’s] then opportunity to have a relationship with him if he continues to make those choices with his behaviour. ms stoiler: if the court finds that the father does have a lack of insight into his abusive behaviours, how might that lack of insight impact on [x]? [ms o]: well, in terms of the lack of insight, it means that the court can’t have confidence that the behaviour will change i suppose is the key thing with that lack of insight. and then in terms of the behaviour, like, as you’ve correctly referred me to paragraph 90 – look, it raises lots of concerns about the father’s parenting capacity, i guess things like his capacity to regulate his emotions and react in an appropriate and calm and non-threatening or scary manner in front of [x]. it raises concerns about the modelling that he’s going to provide to [x] in terms of how to respond if something goes in a manner that you’re not happy with. it might expose [x] to direct threatening behaviour himself if [x] does something to kind of – to displease the father. it might expose [x] to the father behaving in that way to other people. i mean, it’s – it’s quite risky and concerning behaviour, and it certainly would give the court cause for concern about the father’s parenting capacity. it also raises concerns about the likelihood of, i guess, that ongoing behaviour but kind of constant breaches of court orders and just doing – doing as he sees fit independent of professional advice about what’s best for [x]. ms stolier: and would that include him continuing to apply perhaps pressure on the mother to allow him to have [x] outside of any orders this court might make? [ms o]: yes, that’s a significant issue.
ms stolier: and you’ve identified in your report at paragraph 89 mrs – [ms woods’] history of vulnerability and her own – and the negative impact that such pressure – i’m extrapolating – might put on her mental health. did you want to expand on that in any way in terms of her parenting capacity? the court: i will just stop you there for a minute. no one is seeking orders that [x] live with anyone but [ms woods]? ms stolier: yes. the court: so in light of that...can you say something? [ms o]: certainly. so, yes, that’s what i was just going to say. i mean, it – [ms woods] is – you know, has been [x]’s primary caregiver and, you know, will need to continue to be – be his primary caregiver. and in light of the concerning behaviour exhibited by the father, i guess if the mother didn’t have so many kind of vulnerabilities, she might be more resilient and able to kind of, i guess, withstand the ongoing behaviour of the father, but, you know, it’s well established that the mother has a number of kind of vulnerabilities and has had, you know, difficulties with addiction herself and her mental health and has made some poor decisions in terms of her capacity to protect the – her children from risk of harm. and so given she needs to be [x’s] primary caregiver, one consideration which i think is an important thing for the court to think about is if [x] is spending time with his father and this sort of behaviour continues to occur or other behaviour that might evolve once – you know, if they were to start having a different sort of arrangement, then is it going to destabilise the mother and put [x] at more risk. so i do think that’s a very significant issue. if the mother is constantly, you know, stressed out and anxious and walking on eggshells and, you know, her interactions with the father are very unpredictable, then that can certainly have a significant impact on her wellbeing.
ms stolier: the mother, you will have read, is now seeking an order for sole parental responsibility. what do you say about that proposal from the mother for sole parental responsibility, given what you’ve heard today and read? [ms o]: i guess what – the information that i have is i don’t – i haven’t seen a clear and consistent pattern of [ms woods] and [mr hendry] being able to cooperatively co-parent [x] and share cooperatively kind of in decision-making about [x]. i would be concerned that having shared parental responsibility would create an environment that would put – you know, create more risk in that it would be more potential for disagreements between [ms woods] and [mr hendry], and one could potentially impact on [x] because decisions mightn’t be made in a timely manner, but i would also be concerned, then, about the father’s capacity, based on what he has demonstrated, about his ability to kind of communicate and navigate difficult decisions that he might not agree with. i would be concerned about sort of ongoing behaviour that would be attacking and critical of the mother and experience by the mother as abuse. so it just – in terms of the practicalities, i – it – i really can’t see that that would be something that would be in [x]’s best interest.   o]: well, in terms of the contact notes, yes, he does seem to have a – he – [x] definitely seems to enjoy his time with dad, and i did notice that, you know, there were a number of times [x] wouldn’t want the time to end, and it was difficult for him to separate from dad. i guess those still need to be kept in the context of the sorts of time they’re spending together is – it sounded like they – it was, you know – it’s fairly fun time. kids spending three hours at an amusement park is – at a sort of – in a – what’s the – a games arcade is – most five year olds think that’s pretty fantastic. so i guess we don’t really have a lot of in-depth knowledge of [x]’s relationship with the father other than he has experienced those as quite fun, and he seems to like and enjoy that from what we can, i guess, extrapolate from the notes. so i would assume that a no-contact order – initially, [x] might be quite disappointed by that. you know, he sounds like a pretty active little boy, and maybe kind of hanging out and doing pretty fun stuff with dad is – you know, is a positive experience for him. having said that, the court would need to be – i guess give some consideration to the nature of his – [x’s] relationship with dad from what we can work out from the contact centre notes, but that needs to be, i guess, compared against the long-term implications for him of possible exposure to family violence, possible exposure to problematic parenting by the father, his experience possibly of mum’s parenting capacity being reduced by the need for her to navigate difficulties with the father. so, you know, it needs to be – those things all need to be taken into account. i guess in the longer term, too, you know, we all know, you know, for identity purposes, it’s likely to be helpful for [x] to have the opportunity to know his father and understand more about who he is and where he has come from. sometimes children who have no contact with a parent, obviously, can develop quite idealised ideas about the other parent. sometimes they can become resentful of the parent they live with if they perceive that that parent hasn’t allowed them to have a relationship with the other parent. so, you know, i guess there’s a number of advantages and disadvantages which the court would need to weigh up to make that decision if it would be a no-contact order.   o]: in terms of – if the – depending on what the court orders are, if that’s going to help him in the context of having done the course – i mean, based on the father’s amended set of orders and what he seems to be perceiving as a suitable amount of time with [x], it looks like it’s highly unlikely that the father is ever going to be satisfied by what the court is going to order. and so, you know, orders for some time coupled with completing the men’s behaviour change program, you know, doesn’t look like these problems are necessarily going to go away. i guess i note in – you know, it’s about the father’s expectations and lack of capacity to understand perhaps – you know, someone used the word before about, you know, normal kind of orders, and i noticed in some of the father’s text messages, there’s sort of – there’s a theme of, “why can’t we just be a normal family?” and he goes to his cousin’s parties and does normal stuff and, you know, saying to mum why doesn’t she let him have a normal relationship with [x], which, you know, certainly speaks of that insight, i guess, that you guys were asking about before is the father doesn’t seem to have insight that this isn’t a normal situation because there has been ongoing family violence and court intervention and avos and breaches, and so those circumstances of what might be perceived as normal are probably not going to happen here because it doesn’t appear to be in [x]’s best interests. so i guess from what i can tell, probably, the father’s expectations appear so unrealistic about what’s appropriate. it’s hard to sort of predict that he will be particularly satisfied. i guess the other thing, your honour, which is going to be a matter, having heard all the evidence, to consider – yes, the father’s account is the trigger is solely that he has not got unsupervised time with [x]. i think the court would need to form a view of, really, is this behaviour exhibited by the father in complete isolation and completely incongruent with how he navigates the rest of his life because i guess if the court has concerns that it’s not just the question of the exact order he has got and it’s actually this is how the father communicates/navigates things that he’s displeased with, you know, reacts when he’s feeling perturbed about something, you know, that is quite a different picture because that would suggest, i guess – based on the information i know – and please correct me if i’m wrong, but i understand the father has some historical assault charges as well. and so i guess it’s looking at that bigger picture because, clinically, from what i can see, i couldn’t say to your honour that i feel confident that this issue and the father’s behaviour is solely related to the orders as opposed to just general displeasure and this is how he reacts if he’s not happy with something. so in terms of co-parenting, that’s going to happen again and again and again throughout [x’s] life if both parents are involved in his life, and i would be concerned. you know, then there will be upset and, you know, abuse around the mother’s decisions about other – a myriad of other kind of things in terms of parenting [x].   o]: based on the information about the text messages, it’s my thinking that logistically, if the court could work out some orders that means that mum and dad do not communicate via text, i think that’s preferable, so whether that’s, you know, a family member or it is just a set-in-stone – you know, if the court was going to make an order that it was time once a fortnight or once a month, it might just be a set date, and if dad can’t do it, he can’t do it. do you know what i mean? and the communication is through the – a suitable family member, and there’s no real negotiation because i don’t think – i don’t think negotiation is going to work for this family. so, you know, if, for whatever reason, the time needs to be missed, the time probably needs to be missed so that there’s not – you know, not room for disagreements over make-up time and things like that. but i just – i don’t think they should be communicating via text at all, which does make, you know, logistically, spending time – [x] spending time with the father much more difficult. (court’s italics)
the court: well, arguably, in that circumstance, if there was no text messaging permitted, there would have to be, as you’re inferring, very formal orders...relating to the time...being facilitated? [ms o]: yes...and they would have to be fairly limited because, logistically, to not be communicating, [x] couldn’t be spending significant periods of time with dad because there just wouldn’t be able to (be) sufficient kind of handover that would provide adequate care for [x] if that makes sense. i mean, i’m envisaging if it was that kind of scenario to be fairly, you know, limited daytime where [x] could do something pretty fun with dad and, you know, have a bit of time with dad and go back to mum. it wouldn’t really be providing an opportunity for extensive kind of caregiving and, you know, multiple experiences in dad’s care. the court: so those sort of formal restrictive communication type orders would, of necessity, limit the ability of the parties to significantly co-parent the child? [ms o]: yes.   o]: in order to manage a child who does have difficulty with their own emotion regulation and capacity to follow instructions and – parents need to have a capacity to be very flexible, to manage their own emotions and prioritise the needs of the child over their own, for example, dropping everything and trying to help that child regulate. so there’s a number of things that you need to be particularly good at if you have a child with some behavioural difficulties, which, in light of the father’s apparent difficulties with his emotion regulation and capacity to make suitable decisions, capacity to kind of, i guess, assess other’s needs compared to his needs, there’s certainly some concerns there about how well he will be able to manage those behaviours. i guess the other thing – if you have a child with some additional needs, like behavioural needs, one of the things the court might be looking at is the parents’ capacity to take on feedback by professionals and follow – you know, integrate their advice and suggestions about how you might manage that child’s behaviour. so, for example, if [x] is having some sort of behavioural therapy, the court would also be wanting to think about how good is dad going to be at hearing that feedback and then, you know, using any kind of suggestions and strategies and ideas in how he parents [x]. so based on his ability to kind of receive feedback from the courts thus far about suitable behaviour, i would have some concerns about how he would go with that. the other difficulty is if a child has behavioural difficulties, it’s really important that both parents are on the same page in terms of managing that behaviour in a consistent and predictable manner, and so i guess with the sort of things that the father seems to have said to the mother via text message, i have concerns about his ability to kind of listen to mum’s suggestions about how to manage [x’s] behaviour or what she has found worked or hasn’t worked or what mood he’s in that particular day or, you know, those sorts of things. and, also, because of the limited communication they’re going to have to have, that also creates some logistical difficulties about how that can occur. i guess the other thing just on [x’s] behaviour – i mean, you know, it’s fairly well researched that it’s not uncommon for children who have been exposed to family violence to have difficulties with externalising behaviour and their own emotion regulation. so one of the difficulties which – this is a little bit of a side step here, but one of the difficulties is if, you know, there is this – any ongoing exposure to family violence, then the capacity to kind of assist [x] with his challenging behaviours is – you know, you’re putting him in an environment that helps create the behaviour, and then you’re trying to manage them. do you know what i mean? so i guess that’s another consideration as well.   o]: i guess based on what i have heard, if the court is minded to make orders for time, i do believe – given the difficulties and the concerns we have about the father’s parenting capacity, yes, it would – i believe it would be quite limited time, and the primary focus of that would be on [x] just having the opportunity to know dad and have an understanding of his father and help with his identity, yes.   o]: i still think that there would be benefit. the men’s behaviour change program is much more specialised, and there’s a big difference between inviting – a program that invites people to take responsibility for their violence and ones that just focus on teaching people about anger management. so i do think there would be some value because i still – one of the concerns in my mind going forward for [x] is the threats that the father has made in his text messages about, “just you wait till [x] reads all these messages, and he’s going to hate you.” and, you know, it’s just a direct threat and articulating an intent to provide [x] with a whole lot of negative information about the mother. so i still think even if he’s spending limited time with [x], there’s still the potential for him to engage in behaviour that is damaging to [x]. so i still think that if he’s going to have any contact, it would be beneficial to attend that group.
ms stolier: now, i used the phrase “identity contact”, but, really, what i want to know from you, ma’am, if you are able, how frequent would very prescribed supervised time, daytime, with [x] – how frequently ought that – or would that take place, in your opinion? weekly, monthly, or what would be the best for [x]? [ms o]: look, it’s difficult for me to say without having heard all the evidence about current risk. i wouldn’t – i certainly wouldn’t be thinking about weekly. it would be fortnightly at the most and possibly more like monthly. it would depend on – because i haven’t heard all the evidence about the current risk, it’s difficult for me to – difficult for me to say...so, yes, maybe monthly. i guess part of it is also – and i don’t know – because i haven’t heard the evidence – i haven’t done a current assessment – i don’t know kind of about the mother’s current vulnerabilities. so in weighing all that up, it’s the risk that dad might pose, but it’s also the risks of compromise to the mother’s parenting that would need to be weighed up in order to – in order to make that – i mean, look, just talking – i would be more thinking about monthly, but, you know, as i said, i’m really speculating because i haven’t heard all the information about the current risk.
ms gibbons: it’s the case, isn’t it, that to learn parenting, you need to do it? and it’s fair to say, isn’t it, that that opportunity has not been afforded to the father for the last two years? [ms o]: the father has had limited opportunity – that’s right – in terms of parenting [x].
the court: now, [ms o], is there anything been left unclear by any question you have been asked or answer given by yourself that you want to clarify now or have you – do you think you’ve finished? [ms o]: no, i think – i – i guess just on the identity question, if it is for identity purposes, when i was asked about the frequency of that. i guess i sort of said two weeks as the, you know, most frequent possibility. but, really, i think if it was just for identity purposes, i think it would be more like a minimum of a – like, the most frequent recommended would be a month to a couple of months. i guess it’s weighing up the – yes. what – what we’re – what the purpose of it is. what we think the risks are. what [x] might be exposed to if he spends time with dad, and then just the – the impact on mum. so if it’s really just for identity purposes, yes, it – it – it’s, you know, not that frequent.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the child
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant  if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
associate: dated: 8 september 2022
dated: 8 september 2022