last updated: 27 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dansford & cooper [2022] fedcfamc2f 1332
orders
the court orders that:
mother’s time with child  each saturday from 10:00am until 1:00pm for a period of 8 weeks, and thereafter, (b) each saturday from 10:00am until 4:00pm.   each saturday from 10:00am until 4:00pm.
transfer to division 1  due to the complexity of the matter and the number of potential expert witnesses involved, the final hearing is likely to take longer than 4-5 days.
procedural  upon the parties’ legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer giving a written undertaking to the court, in the form set out in the notation to this order, the parties’ legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer be provided with an electronic copy of the documents produced under subpoenas by c hospital and d hospital (“the subpoenaed documents”). (b) the legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer be restrained from creating, disseminating or otherwise distributing copies of the subpoenaed documents (either electronically, in printed format, or otherwise) to their client or any other person, save for an agent, or such other person directed by the legal representative to complete the inspection on their behalf. (c) upon the completion of the final hearing, they are to be destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system within 29 days (howsoever held by the lawyer including by email, cloud storage or otherwise) of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal.   the legal representatives and the independent children’s lawyer be restrained from creating, disseminating or otherwise distributing copies of the subpoenaed documents (either electronically, in printed format, or otherwise) to their client or any other person, save for an agent, or such other person directed by the legal representative to complete the inspection on their behalf. (c) upon the completion of the final hearing, they are to be destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system within 29 days (howsoever held by the lawyer including by email, cloud storage or otherwise) of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal.   upon the completion of the final hearing, they are to be destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system within 29 days (howsoever held by the lawyer including by email, cloud storage or otherwise) of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal.
and the court notes that:
i, [full name], australian legal practitioner at [name and address of firm], undertake to the court that: (a) i will not provide, disseminate or otherwise distribute electronic copies of the subpoenaed documents produced by [inset subpoena documents] (either electronically, in printed format, or otherwise) to my client or any other person, save for my agent [insert name] or such other person [insert name] directed by me to complete the inspection on my behalf, and (b) upon completion of the final hearing, i will ensure that they are destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system (whether held by email, cloud storage or otherwise) within 29 days of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal. (c) in the event i fail to comply (or reasonably suspect that i have failed to comply) with this undertaking (even as a result of circumstances entirely beyond my control), i will immediately notify the registrar of the court in writing. i acknowledge that this undertaking has the same effect as an order of the court. i acknowledge that if i breach this undertaking i may be guilty of contempt of court and punished by a fine or imprisonment.   i will not provide, disseminate or otherwise distribute electronic copies of the subpoenaed documents produced by [inset subpoena documents] (either electronically, in printed format, or otherwise) to my client or any other person, save for my agent [insert name] or such other person [insert name] directed by me to complete the inspection on my behalf, and (b) upon completion of the final hearing, i will ensure that they are destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system (whether held by email, cloud storage or otherwise) within 29 days of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal. (c) in the event i fail to comply (or reasonably suspect that i have failed to comply) with this undertaking (even as a result of circumstances entirely beyond my control), i will immediately notify the registrar of the court in writing. i acknowledge that this undertaking has the same effect as an order of the court. i acknowledge that if i breach this undertaking i may be guilty of contempt of court and punished by a fine or imprisonment.   upon completion of the final hearing, i will ensure that they are destroyed and permanently deleted from any storage or retrieval system (whether held by email, cloud storage or otherwise) within 29 days of final orders, or in the event of an appeal, the finalisation of the appeal. (c) in the event i fail to comply (or reasonably suspect that i have failed to comply) with this undertaking (even as a result of circumstances entirely beyond my control), i will immediately notify the registrar of the court in writing. i acknowledge that this undertaking has the same effect as an order of the court. i acknowledge that if i breach this undertaking i may be guilty of contempt of court and punished by a fine or imprisonment.   in the event i fail to comply (or reasonably suspect that i have failed to comply) with this undertaking (even as a result of circumstances entirely beyond my control), i will immediately notify the registrar of the court in writing. i acknowledge that this undertaking has the same effect as an order of the court. i acknowledge that if i breach this undertaking i may be guilty of contempt of court and punished by a fine or imprisonment.
i acknowledge that this undertaking has the same effect as an order of the court. i acknowledge that if i breach this undertaking i may be guilty of contempt of court and punished by a fine or imprisonment.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
parents’ relationship
no time until five years old
record of medical care
phone call received from [the father], [the mother’s] partner, he reported that he 'was a little confused to why he was calling, [the mother] just told him to call the number'. author could see through the notes that [the mother] had her baby 2/52 ago and that there had been some relationship issues for some time and had been identified to catt [crisis assessment and treatment team]. [the father] reported that [the mother] seemed ok tonight, not drinking and taking good care of baby [the child], she was going to go for a drive and author asked for her to call me back on her return, as there had been contact, author aware of 10:30am appt tomorrow with catt [the father] described relationship as having difficulty for at least 10 months, and that he's 'had enough', he 'feels trapped', and reports her as' not reasonable' the couple fight quite a lot according to [the father] and mainly about [the mother’s] drinking, [the father] reported that on sunday [the mother] got in the car and drove under the influence with baby on board, having said that, [the father] reports that the baby is clean, well fed and she looks after her. [the father] offered to pay for flight to melbourne so that [the mother] could spend time with her father for a couple of weeks [the father] struggling with stress and his own words, 'his own mental health' and is planning to see a counselor from k counsellors and will organise an appointment for [the mother]. [the father] reported that he resents [the mother], is more of a 'father figure' than an equal and is angry that, in his own words, 'poor financial decisions were made at the beginning of the year. author suggested that: [the father] ask [the mother] to call catt upon return, especially in crisis, and attend tomorrow's appt as [the father] is ambivalent about relationship, author suggested support through this neo nate period is essential, but not to promise, say anything that is misleading to [the mother]
32 years old female. dressed appropriately and casually. neat and clean. presented with baby ([the child], 15m old). baby appears well and happy.
as i got into teenage years, i got worse. started questioning things, being more challenging. i was still a good kid. i wasn’t running round the streets, doing drugs or anything, i was still getting a grades at school, but i had more of my own opinions. on my way home from school, i’d see my dad’s girlfriend, picking up her kids from school, started talking to her, getting to know her. mum never knew. it got [to] a point where i couldn’t take it anymore at mums, her abuse and how she was, so one day i got on my bike and rode to my dads and asked if i could live there. mum wouldn’t let me take many of my things, said my dad could buy them. she did petty things, like ripped up all my posters and stuff. don’t really remember seeing her much after that. she moved to melbourne with my sister, but wouldn’t tell me where or anything. [didn’t] want my dad to know, so phone calls with my sister and things, she’d always listen to make sure my sister didn’t say anything. was sad leaving [the mother’s sister]. i know she still blames me for leaving. she became the focal point for my mum’s abuse. but she was a difficult teenager. she did do drugs, steal cars, all the bad things teenagers do. then she went to live with my dad when she was about 17. i was out of home by then.
reconnection
she stated that [the child] had been asking questions about her father, who he is and why she doesn’t see him. [the mother] said she has become aware of [the younger child’s] relationship with his dad [[mr m]], and that [[mr m]] does not have the same relationship with her (and never has). she is also becoming more aware of other children having “daddy’s” at childcare/kinder and talking about their fathers and being picked up by them. had a conversation about [the child’s] biological father. [the mother] stated that he had no interest in seeing [the child] as a baby or being involved in her upbringing. she was aware that her parents had contacted him the year before with “complaints” about [the child’s] wellbeing, but he had taken no action and not enquired about her so she was sceptical he would be interested in contact. we discussed the merits of his wishes compared with what is important to [the child], and her entitlement to understand who both her parents are, and for [the child] to ideally have relationships with both parents if it is possible. [the mother] said that she would reach out to him to make contact to see if he’d like to develop a relationship with [the child]
hi [the father], i know it’s been a while, but hopefully you at least read this message. firstly, i wanted to say i understand your decision to not see [the child] after i went back to [[mr m]]. i’m sorry i put you in that position. you were right, things did not change, or [get] better. however i did leave eventually and into my own place about a year and a half ago. we have a son together so unfortunately still see him for changeovers. the reason i am getting in contact with you is about [the child]. i need to have a conversation with her about [[mr m]] not being her father in an age appropriate way, as she doesn’t understand why her brother goes but not her. it’s been a while and she still is confused. i need to explain that you’re her father, but i need to know what you want me to tell her about you. i’m not asking you to be in her life if you don’t want to. if you don’t want anything to do with her, then i will explain that. if you do want to see her at some point, then i will explain that. i’m trying to do what is best for her. at least if i know what you want, then i’ll know what to say and how to explain it all. let me know soon please [the mother]
i understand what you’re saying, and we can discuss it further she has a drs apt next week to get a referral to a paed re toileting, and her next optometrist apt is in a few weeks she wears nappies at night and underwear during the day but obviously still has accidents. i put her in a nappy for the car trip to yours so she doesn’t have any accidents in your car. i understand your concerns and we can discuss everything further in person as i agree it’s difficult to discuss over text.
as discussed in our conversation today i will not bring [the child] home [until] there are court orders in place. i have lodged a report to child protection and the police with the advice to not return [the child] [until] appropriate orders in place. we urgently need to attend to the medical needs of [the child] and these are serious. i am happy for you to video call with [the child] and any access to her will need to be supervised through an agency. i will make contact with [n counsellors] to arrange mediation and a family court lawyer. [i’m] sorry but [the child’s] welfare is important.  e child] is a 5 year old girl who presented to me today with her father and stepmother. there is little information regarding her part medical history, as she has been living with her mother until recently. it is my understanding that [the child] was exposed to alcohol antenatally. [the child] is described as being an unsettled little girl with language and social skills delayed for her age. she is not toilet trained, and she has severe constipation. she has difficulties with emotional regulation, as she will lash out at her step-siblings. she is anxious about having her hair washed. initially, [the child] ate very little, but this is now improving. on examination, [the child] presents as a quiet, small girl who is able to follow simple instructions. she relates well to her father and stepmother. she has [several medical conditions]. her gait is characterized by marked intoeing due to inset hips, with apparent leg length discrepancy. abdominal examination reveals faecal loading. [the child’s] clinical presentation is consistent with fetal alcohol disorder. she has a number of significant medical and developmental issues which will require further medical investigation and treatment. she also needs ongoing developmental assessment and monitoring. it is vital that she has a caring, secure, supportive home environment to foster her developmental progress, and to ensure that she receives regular medical care. [emphasis added]
no time with the mother for most of 2021
the court orders that: all extant applications be adjourned to 5 november 2021 at 9.30am for mention. pursuant to section 68l(2) of the family law act 1975 the child..., born [in] 2015 (“[the child]”) be independently represented and it is requested that victoria legal aid arrange such separate representation and such arrangement be as soon as possible and that: (a) forthwith upon appointment by victoria legal aid, the independent children’s lawyer file a notice of address for service, and (b) upon notification of such appointment, the parties (by their solicitors if represented) shall provide to the independent children’s lawyer copies of all relevant documents. pursuant to section 11f of the family law act 1975, the parties and the child..., born [in] 2015 attend upon a family consultant of the federal circuit court of australia (“the family consultant”) for the purposes of a child inclusive conference on 27 october 2021. interviews will be conducted at melbourne registry (level 5) unless advised otherwise by child dispute services. (a) the father and the child will be interviewed at 9.00 am, (b) the mother will be interviewed at 10.00am, and (c) the family consultant shall have leave to inspect any subpoenaed documents. pursuant to section 69zw of the family law act 1975 is it requested the department of families, fairness and housing (“dffh”) provide to the court the following documents and information: (a) any notifications to dffh of suspected abuse of the child ..., born [in] 2015 to whom the proceedings relate or of suspected family violence affecting the child including but not limited to any intake reports, (b) any assessments of dffh of investigations into notifications of that kind or the findings or outcomes of these investigations including but not limited to copies of investigation and assessment outcomes, any grounds of substantiations, case plans and case closure summaries, (c) any reports commissioned by dffh in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that dffh have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings. and the court orders by consent until further order that: 5. [the child] live with the father. 6. [the child] spend time and communicate with the mother: (a) supervised at a supervised contact service not more frequently than twice per week, at such time/s as may be accommodated by the contact service, (b) by facetime each wednesday and sunday at 4.30pm for up to half an hour (if time is not occurring on such days pursuant to order 6(a) hereof), with such communication to be child focused, and (c) otherwise as agreed between the parties. supervised time pursuant to order 6(a) hereof occur at [b contact centre] [suburb 1] or such other children’s contact service agreed between the parties or nominated by the independent children’s lawyer and each of the mother and father do all such acts and things necessary to facilitate such supervised time (it being note that the mother and father are already on the waiting list at [b contact centre] [suburb 1]), and the contact service be requested to provide a written report to the parties prior to the adjourned date. the mother and the father do all such acts and things necessary for [the child] to be independently medically assessed and for a report to be provided by a paediatrician agreed between the parties (and in default of agreement nominated by the independent children’s lawyer) with such report to address those matters identified in the correspondence/report of [dr r] dated 20 january 2021 (being annexure “-2”) to the father’s affidavit filed 24 march 2021, and to specifically address whether [the child] suffers from fetal alcohol disorder. the mother and the father forthwith do all acts and things and sign all necessary documents to engage and complete a: (a) parenting orders program, and (b) tuning into kids course at [n counsellors] or such other accredited organisation as nominated by the independent children’s lawyer. for 24 hours immediately prior to the commencement of any time spent with [the child], and during all such time spent, the mother be restrained by injunction from ingesting, consuming, using, or otherwise being under the influence of, alcohol or any legal or illegal drug or substance, save and except for: (a) any legal medication prescribed for the mother by a registered medical practitioner, and taken or used by the mother strictly in accordance with such prescriptions, and (b) any over-the-counter medication or pharmaceutical substance, and taken or used by the mother strictly in accordance with the directions appearing on such medication or pharmaceutical substance. at the request of the independent children’s lawyer, the mother make an appointment and attend for hair collection at an appropriately qualified clinic or the clinic's nominee for hair drug testing purposes within 48 hours of a request being made by the independent children’s lawyer. to give effect to this order: (a) collection is to be conducted by a qualified and certified collector, (b) chain-of-custody procedure is to be applied to the sample, (c) testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory, (d) either head or body hair may be collected for testing. 12. further: (a) the mother grow her hair then maintain her head hair at a length of not less than four (4) centimetres, neither head hair nor body is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the clinic with a copy of these orders, (c) the mother provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father, the mother, their respective legal representatives if applicable, and the independent children's lawyer if applicable upon receipt of such test results, (d) the hair test shall screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine type substances (including but not limited to methamphetamines such as ice) and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (e) the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs. at the request of the independent children’s lawyer, the mother undertake supervised drug screen testing and that: (a) the testing do occur at a pathology centre or other appropriate place, as approved by the solicitors for the other party and /or the independent children’s lawyer from time to time, (b) the testing do occur randomly (but not more frequently than 3 times in any 4 week period), and within 24 hours of the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer making a request for the testing to occur, (c) the results of the testing, on each occasion, be forwarded – as soon as possible – to the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer, and (d) the cost of the testing is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs. at the request of the independent children’s lawyer, the mother undertake a carbohydrate-deficient transferrin test (cdt) and a gamma-glutamyl tranasferase test (ggt) by an accredited collection and pathology service that complies with the australian standard as/nzs4308:2008 and provide the result by email to the mother’s solicitors as soon as it becomes available, with the costs of the same to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs. the mother and the father, by themselves, their servants and/or their agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction from: (a) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, and/or (b) discussing these proceedings,   forthwith upon appointment by victoria legal aid, the independent children’s lawyer file a notice of address for service, and (b) upon notification of such appointment, the parties (by their solicitors if represented) shall provide to the independent children’s lawyer copies of all relevant documents.   upon notification of such appointment, the parties (by their solicitors if represented) shall provide to the independent children’s lawyer copies of all relevant documents.   the father and the child will be interviewed at 9.00 am, (b) the mother will be interviewed at 10.00am, and (c) the family consultant shall have leave to inspect any subpoenaed documents.   the mother will be interviewed at 10.00am, and (c) the family consultant shall have leave to inspect any subpoenaed documents.   the family consultant shall have leave to inspect any subpoenaed documents.   any notifications to dffh of suspected abuse of the child ..., born [in] 2015 to whom the proceedings relate or of suspected family violence affecting the child including but not limited to any intake reports, (b) any assessments of dffh of investigations into notifications of that kind or the findings or outcomes of these investigations including but not limited to copies of investigation and assessment outcomes, any grounds of substantiations, case plans and case closure summaries, (c) any reports commissioned by dffh in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that dffh have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   any assessments of dffh of investigations into notifications of that kind or the findings or outcomes of these investigations including but not limited to copies of investigation and assessment outcomes, any grounds of substantiations, case plans and case closure summaries, (c) any reports commissioned by dffh in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that dffh have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   any reports commissioned by dffh in the course of investigating a notification, including but not limited to any reports prepared for proceedings in the children’s court, and (d) in the event that dffh have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   in the event that dffh have an ongoing investigation in relation to the child to whom the proceedings relate, any recommendations for the future arrangements of the child taking into account the orders sought by the parties in these proceedings.   supervised at a supervised contact service not more frequently than twice per week, at such time/s as may be accommodated by the contact service, (b) by facetime each wednesday and sunday at 4.30pm for up to half an hour (if time is not occurring on such days pursuant to order 6(a) hereof), with such communication to be child focused, and (c) otherwise as agreed between the parties.   by facetime each wednesday and sunday at 4.30pm for up to half an hour (if time is not occurring on such days pursuant to order 6(a) hereof), with such communication to be child focused, and (c) otherwise as agreed between the parties.   otherwise as agreed between the parties.   parenting orders program, and (b) tuning into kids course at [n counsellors] or such other accredited organisation as nominated by the independent children’s lawyer.   tuning into kids course at [n counsellors] or such other accredited organisation as nominated by the independent children’s lawyer.   any legal medication prescribed for the mother by a registered medical practitioner, and taken or used by the mother strictly in accordance with such prescriptions, and (b) any over-the-counter medication or pharmaceutical substance, and taken or used by the mother strictly in accordance with the directions appearing on such medication or pharmaceutical substance.   any over-the-counter medication or pharmaceutical substance, and taken or used by the mother strictly in accordance with the directions appearing on such medication or pharmaceutical substance.   collection is to be conducted by a qualified and certified collector, (b) chain-of-custody procedure is to be applied to the sample, (c) testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory, (d) either head or body hair may be collected for testing.   chain-of-custody procedure is to be applied to the sample, (c) testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory, (d) either head or body hair may be collected for testing.   testing is to be conducted at an approved laboratory, accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body for that laboratory, (d) either head or body hair may be collected for testing.   either head or body hair may be collected for testing.   the mother grow her hair then maintain her head hair at a length of not less than four (4) centimetres, neither head hair nor body is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the clinic with a copy of these orders, (c) the mother provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father, the mother, their respective legal representatives if applicable, and the independent children's lawyer if applicable upon receipt of such test results, (d) the hair test shall screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine type substances (including but not limited to methamphetamines such as ice) and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (e) the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   each party or their legal representatives is at liberty to provide the clinic with a copy of these orders, (c) the mother provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father, the mother, their respective legal representatives if applicable, and the independent children's lawyer if applicable upon receipt of such test results, (d) the hair test shall screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine type substances (including but not limited to methamphetamines such as ice) and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (e) the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the mother provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father, the mother, their respective legal representatives if applicable, and the independent children's lawyer if applicable upon receipt of such test results, (d) the hair test shall screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine type substances (including but not limited to methamphetamines such as ice) and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (e) the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the hair test shall screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine type substances (including but not limited to methamphetamines such as ice) and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (e) the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the clinic shall utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (f) the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the cost of the hair tests is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the testing do occur at a pathology centre or other appropriate place, as approved by the solicitors for the other party and /or the independent children’s lawyer from time to time, (b) the testing do occur randomly (but not more frequently than 3 times in any 4 week period), and within 24 hours of the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer making a request for the testing to occur, (c) the results of the testing, on each occasion, be forwarded – as soon as possible – to the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer, and (d) the cost of the testing is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the testing do occur randomly (but not more frequently than 3 times in any 4 week period), and within 24 hours of the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer making a request for the testing to occur, (c) the results of the testing, on each occasion, be forwarded – as soon as possible – to the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer, and (d) the cost of the testing is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the results of the testing, on each occasion, be forwarded – as soon as possible – to the solicitors for the other party and/or the independent children’s lawyer, and (d) the cost of the testing is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   the cost of the testing is to be met by the mother, and victoria legal aid is requested to meet such costs.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent, and/or (b) discussing these proceedings,   discussing these proceedings,
to or in the presence or hearing of [the child] and/or from permitting any other person so to do. pursuant to ss.65da(2) and 62b of the family law act 1975 the particulars of the obligation these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders are set out in annexure a and these particulars are included in these orders.
and the court notes that: the mother and father agree to these orders without prejudice to their right to seek the orders set out in the applications before the court on the adjourned date. the report from the department of families, fairness and housing will be released to the practitioners as soon as practical after it has been received. if in any proceedings there are allegations of family violence and the provisions of section 102na of the family law act 1975 apply (see attached family violence information sheet), any unrepresented party will not be permitted to personally cross-examine the other party/parties. affected unrepresented parties may apply to the commonwealth family violence and cross-examination of parties scheme (“the scheme”) for representation but any such application must be made at least 12 weeks prior to the final hearing. further information about the legislation and the scheme can be found at part 4 of the attached family violence information sheet. if s102na applies and a party becomes unrepresented after trial directions have been made, that party is required to promptly advise the court.
child protection recommends shared care e child] deserves parents who can prioritise her needs. [the child] is a child who will benefit from positive relationships with [the father], [ms f], and [the mother]. [the child] feels comfortable voicing her feelings and needs with [the father] and child protection are not concerned for her safety or wellbeing in his care. it would be recommended that shared care that is consistent and supportive of [the child’s] needs be worked towards
supervised time eventually starts e mother] entered the room, [the child] jumped up and quickly went to [the mother] and they hugged each other. [the mother] said “i missed you. i love you. i am so happy to see you.” [the mother] quietly cried and told [the child] that she was so happy to see her. [the child] showed [the mother] her panda teddy. [the mother] shared that she had brought gifts for [the child] as it was [the child’s] birthday recently. the family sat on the couch, opened some barbies and pyjamas, and chatted about the gifts. [the mother] gave [the child] a small gift and told her that it was special. [the child] opened it to find a necklace. [the mother] said “when you wear it, you can think of me” as she put it on [the child]. [the mother] asked [the child] if she could take a photo of her opening the gifts and [the child]said yes. the worker observed that [the mother’s] phone was taking a video and asked [the mother] to take photos only, [the mother] said ok. the family laughed and chatted as they played with the gifts. [the mother] complimented [the child’s] dress and ran her hands through [the child’s] hair. [the mother] told [the child] that she was a beautiful girl. [the child] lay against [the mother]as they chatted about [the mother’s] pets. the family spoke about a pet that had died, [the mother] said he is now a star in the sky and [the child] said, “like baby [[...]]”? [the mother] showed [the child] short videos of her cats playing and the family laughed. the family spoke about [the younger child] and how he hurt himself. [the mother] hugged [the child] and said, “i love you so much.” [the child] said, “i am waiting for my daddy.” the family discussed different toys that [the child] did not have, and [the mother] shared that they were at [the mother’s] home. [the child] lay against [the mother] as they chatted. [the child] asked [the mother] to assist her to play with the barbie slime and the family laughed as they played together. the family discussed a previous trip to the beach and [the mother] showed [the child] a picture of them from that trip on her phone. [the mother] hugged [the child] and lifted her on to [the mother’s] lap. [the child] lay on [the mother], and they hugged. [the mother] said, “you give the best cuddles. i miss them.” [the child] said,” i love you” and [the mother] said, “i love you so much” and began to cry. they hugged and [the mother] told [the child] that her tears were tears of joy. [the child] lay across [the mother] as they chatted. [the mother] told [the child] that [the younger child] was starting kinder in january at the same kinder as [the child’s]. [the child] said [the younger child] could have her lunchbox. the family discussed the gifts [the child] received last christmas, including a scooter. [the child] told a story, and in it she referred to, “my mum” and [the mother] confirmed that [the child] was talking about [[...]]. [the mother] suggested that [the child] could finish playing with the slime at home and that “daddy and mummy [[...]] could help.” [the child] packed up the slime and her other gifts and the family continued to play. at the end of the visit, the worker took a couple of photos of the family together. the family hugged each other, [the mother] said she loved [the child] and [the child] replied, “me too” as they continued to hug. [the mother] told [the child] that she had the necklace to remind her of [the mother]. the family hugged again, said goodbye and [the child] left the room with worker.
supervised time stops
ms j’s report and interviews
7. federal circuit and family court recommendations: facetime calls are recorded or independently supervised due to concerns raised about the mother’s comments and behaviour when unsupervised the mother undergoes psychological assessment including personality testing the mother returns a clear hair follicle drug screen that includes alcohol testing prior to unsupervised time with [the child] commencing childcare/medical/kindergarten records are subpoenaed in relation to [the child] psychiatric/psychological records are subpoenaed in relation to the mother this report is provided to professionals involved with
risk of unsupervised time
b. each saturday from 10am until 4pm in the event the mother appears alcohol effected then time spent is to be suspended. the parties do all acts and things necessary to make application to [b contact centre] for the purpose of changeover. changeover occur at [b contact centre] and the costs be equally shared by the mother and the father.
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... in making interim decisions the court will still often be faced with conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes between the parents as to what constitutes the best interests of the child. however, the legislative pathway must be followed. 82. in an interim case that would involve the following: (a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.  2] in ss v ah [2010] famcafc 13 the majority (boland and thackray jj) discussed at [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making findings in interim parenting proceedings. their honours said:
[88] in our view, findings made at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how firmly a judge’s intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out after a full testing of the evidence. 3] later, at [100] their honours amplified their comments and said:
[100] the intuition involved in decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when a judge is obliged to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time constraints prevent the evidence being tested. apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
associate: dated: 5 october 2022
dated: 5 october 2022