last updated: 9 january 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kozma & bielen (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1250
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge l. turner:
introduction
issues
evidence  the relevant material on the digital file including the reasons for judgment and final parenting orders. (b) the notice of appeal. (c) the written and oral submissions of the parties. (d) the relevant legislation. (e) the relevant authorities.   the notice of appeal. (c) the written and oral submissions of the parties. (d) the relevant legislation. (e) the relevant authorities.   the written and oral submissions of the parties. (d) the relevant legislation. (e) the relevant authorities.   the relevant legislation. (e) the relevant authorities.   the relevant authorities.
the law
the decision to grant a stay is a completely discretionary matter (see in the marriage of kelly [1980] famca 88, (1981) flc 91-007). in aldridge & keaton (stay appeal) [2009] famcafc 106, the full court considered an appeal from the refusal of the chief federal magistrate to stay parenting orders. the full court (byrant cj, boland and crisford jj) said... the principles to be applied in determining an application for a stay of orders both in the general law and in respect of parenting proceedings are also well known (see the commissioner of taxation of the commonwealth of australia v myer emporium limited [no.1] [1986] hca 13, (1986) 160 clr 220 at 222, alexander v cambridge credit corporation (1985) 2 nsw lr 685, jennings construction limited v burgundy royale investments pty limited [1986] hca 84, (1986) 161 clr 681, clemett & clemett [1980] famca 90, (1981) flc 91-013, jrn & ken v ieg & blg [1998] hcatrans 263, (1998) 72 aljr 1329 at 1332). the authorities stress the discretionary nature of the application which should be determined on its merits. principles relevant to this matter include the following: the onus to establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay. however it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any ‘special’ or ‘exceptional’ circumstances, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment, a person who has obtained a judgment is entitled to presume the judgment is correct, the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay, the bona fides of the applicant, a stay may be granted on terms that are fair to all parties - this may involve a court weighing the balance of convenience and the competing rights of the parties, a weighing of the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted – this will be a substantial factor in determining whether it will be appropriate to grant a stay, whether the appellant has an arguable case, the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements, the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time, and the best interests of the child the subject of the proceedings are a significant consideration. the full court in sheldon & weir (stay application) [2011] famcafc 5 again stated that these principles, similarly outlined in trahn & long (no. 2) [2008] famcafc 194 and subsequently cited by the trial judge, were a correct statement of the relevant principles for the purposes of that appeal   the onus to establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay but it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate any “special” or “exceptional” circumstances. (b) the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay. (c) the bona fides of the applicant. (d) there needs to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal and whether the appellant has an arguable case. (e) the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements. (f) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   the mere filing of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay. (c) the bona fides of the applicant. (d) there needs to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal and whether the appellant has an arguable case. (e) the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements. (f) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   the bona fides of the applicant. (d) there needs to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal and whether the appellant has an arguable case. (e) the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements. (f) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   there needs to be a preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal and whether the appellant has an arguable case. (e) the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements. (f) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   the desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements. (f) the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   the period of time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory arrangements may support the granting of the stay for a short period of time. (g) the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.   the best interests of the child are a significant consideration.
fruits of the litigation  the father does not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to the children [59]. (b) the mother does pose an unacceptable risk of harm to the children [103]. (c) the mother fails to see that the mother’s words and actions have caused significant damage to the children and will continue to do so unless the mother addresses her views and attitudes towards the father [126]. (d) before any time can be spent by the mother with the children and any communication occur between the mother and the children, the mother requires effective therapeutic assistance [116]. (e) therapy alone without the involvement and support of the maternal family is unlikely to be effective [119]. (f) without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   the mother does pose an unacceptable risk of harm to the children [103]. (c) the mother fails to see that the mother’s words and actions have caused significant damage to the children and will continue to do so unless the mother addresses her views and attitudes towards the father [126]. (d) before any time can be spent by the mother with the children and any communication occur between the mother and the children, the mother requires effective therapeutic assistance [116]. (e) therapy alone without the involvement and support of the maternal family is unlikely to be effective [119]. (f) without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   the mother fails to see that the mother’s words and actions have caused significant damage to the children and will continue to do so unless the mother addresses her views and attitudes towards the father [126]. (d) before any time can be spent by the mother with the children and any communication occur between the mother and the children, the mother requires effective therapeutic assistance [116]. (e) therapy alone without the involvement and support of the maternal family is unlikely to be effective [119]. (f) without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   before any time can be spent by the mother with the children and any communication occur between the mother and the children, the mother requires effective therapeutic assistance [116]. (e) therapy alone without the involvement and support of the maternal family is unlikely to be effective [119]. (f) without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   therapy alone without the involvement and support of the maternal family is unlikely to be effective [119]. (f) without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   without effective therapy the mother will continue to raise allegations of sexual abuse of the children by the father [120]. (g) this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).   this will be a difficult finding for the mother to accept as the mother has been the primary carer of the children, she loves the children and has a deep and meaningful relationship with the children ([123] to [125]).
delay
mere filing of appeal
onus
bona fides
preliminary assessment of strength of the appeal
the manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be determined is governed by establish principles. it is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court considered that, if they had been in the position of the primary judge, they would have taken a different course. it must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. if the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or other relevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. it may not appear how the primary judge has reached a result embodied in the order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law imposes in the court of first instance. in such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial long has in fact occurred
appellate court, invited to review the exercise of discretion at first instance will avoid overly critical, or pernickety, analysis of the primary judge’s reasons, given the large element of judgment, discretion and intuition which is involved. only if a material error of the kind warranting disturbance of a discretionary decision is established is the appellate court authorised to set aside the primary decision, to substitute its own exercise of discretion or to required that it be the exercise on a retrial
on the issue of whether the trial judge gave adequate weight to the likely prospects of success of the appeal, it is not in doubt, that his honour accepted the appeal was a bone fide one. we accept that his honour did not directly canvass to any significant extent the merits of the grounds of appeal, and note that such an exercise is a difficult one for a trial judge who has diligently and carefully decided a case and made orders which he or she considers to be in the best interests of the child   failure to consider the primary consideration of the benefit of the children having a meaningful relationship with both parents (i) a finding was made that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children pursuant to the primary consideration set out in section 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975. (ii) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the primary consideration as to meaningful relationships as contained in section 60cc(2)(a). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the consideration of meaningful relationships ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) however it was acknowledged in the judgment that the children and the mother have a deep and loving relationship but that until such time as the mother addressed her attitude towards the father and received effective therapeutic intervention it would not be in the best interests of the children to spend time or communicate with the mother. (v) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (b) failure to consider the additional considerations (i) a finding was made that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children pursuant to the consideration set out in section 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975. (ii) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the additional considerations contained in section 60cc(3). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the additional considerations ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (c) erred in law in failing to correctly apply section 61da (i) the issue of parental responsibility and the resumption not applying was addressed under the heading “parental responsibility” in the reasons for judgment [137] to [140]. (ii) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (d) erred in law in that the exercise of discretion resulted in an outcome that was plainly wrong or unjust having regard to the failure to consider the impact of the parenting orders on the children given that young age, severance of the relationship with a parent or adequate weight to the mitigation of risk (i) discretion was exercised after due consideration of the evidence and a finding was made as to the mother presenting as an unacceptable risk to the children. (ii) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (e) erred in law in the consideration of unacceptable risk and the standard of proof (i) i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal. (f) inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   a finding was made that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children pursuant to the primary consideration set out in section 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975. (ii) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the primary consideration as to meaningful relationships as contained in section 60cc(2)(a). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the consideration of meaningful relationships ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) however it was acknowledged in the judgment that the children and the mother have a deep and loving relationship but that until such time as the mother addressed her attitude towards the father and received effective therapeutic intervention it would not be in the best interests of the children to spend time or communicate with the mother. (v) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the primary consideration as to meaningful relationships as contained in section 60cc(2)(a). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the consideration of meaningful relationships ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) however it was acknowledged in the judgment that the children and the mother have a deep and loving relationship but that until such time as the mother addressed her attitude towards the father and received effective therapeutic intervention it would not be in the best interests of the children to spend time or communicate with the mother. (v) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  i) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the consideration of meaningful relationships ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) however it was acknowledged in the judgment that the children and the mother have a deep and loving relationship but that until such time as the mother addressed her attitude towards the father and received effective therapeutic intervention it would not be in the best interests of the children to spend time or communicate with the mother. (v) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) however it was acknowledged in the judgment that the children and the mother have a deep and loving relationship but that until such time as the mother addressed her attitude towards the father and received effective therapeutic intervention it would not be in the best interests of the children to spend time or communicate with the mother. (v) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   failure to consider the additional considerations (i) a finding was made that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children pursuant to the consideration set out in section 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975. (ii) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the additional considerations contained in section 60cc(3). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the additional considerations ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (c) erred in law in failing to correctly apply section 61da (i) the issue of parental responsibility and the resumption not applying was addressed under the heading “parental responsibility” in the reasons for judgment [137] to [140]. (ii) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (d) erred in law in that the exercise of discretion resulted in an outcome that was plainly wrong or unjust having regard to the failure to consider the impact of the parenting orders on the children given that young age, severance of the relationship with a parent or adequate weight to the mitigation of risk (i) discretion was exercised after due consideration of the evidence and a finding was made as to the mother presenting as an unacceptable risk to the children. (ii) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (e) erred in law in the consideration of unacceptable risk and the standard of proof (i) i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal. (f) inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   a finding was made that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children pursuant to the consideration set out in section 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975. (ii) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the additional considerations contained in section 60cc(3). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the additional considerations ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) in accordance with section 60cc(2a) a finding pursuant to section 60cc(2)(b) must be given greater weight than any other consideration in section 60cc including the additional considerations contained in section 60cc(3). (iii) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the additional considerations ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  i) given this finding of unacceptable risk i made the decision that it was not necessary to explore the additional considerations ([136] reasons for judgment). (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   erred in law in failing to correctly apply section 61da (i) the issue of parental responsibility and the resumption not applying was addressed under the heading “parental responsibility” in the reasons for judgment [137] to [140]. (ii) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (d) erred in law in that the exercise of discretion resulted in an outcome that was plainly wrong or unjust having regard to the failure to consider the impact of the parenting orders on the children given that young age, severance of the relationship with a parent or adequate weight to the mitigation of risk (i) discretion was exercised after due consideration of the evidence and a finding was made as to the mother presenting as an unacceptable risk to the children. (ii) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (e) erred in law in the consideration of unacceptable risk and the standard of proof (i) i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal. (f) inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   the issue of parental responsibility and the resumption not applying was addressed under the heading “parental responsibility” in the reasons for judgment [137] to [140]. (ii) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   erred in law in that the exercise of discretion resulted in an outcome that was plainly wrong or unjust having regard to the failure to consider the impact of the parenting orders on the children given that young age, severance of the relationship with a parent or adequate weight to the mitigation of risk (i) discretion was exercised after due consideration of the evidence and a finding was made as to the mother presenting as an unacceptable risk to the children. (ii) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (e) erred in law in the consideration of unacceptable risk and the standard of proof (i) i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal. (f) inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   discretion was exercised after due consideration of the evidence and a finding was made as to the mother presenting as an unacceptable risk to the children. (ii) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) as to whether that discretion was exercised correctly or whether it was “plainly wrong” or “unjust” will be a decision for the full court to make. (iii) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  i) although there was no direct evidence before the court as to the impact on the children should the relationship with the mother be severed, there was direct evidence as to the negative impact on the children in having been exposed to the mother’s behaviours leading up to the final hearing ([95] reasons for judgment) and expert evidence as to the ongoing negative impact on the children should the children continue to be exposed to the unacceptable risk posed by the mother ([101] reasons for judgment). (iv) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) i find that this evidence was sufficient to support a finding that the mother poses an unacceptable risk to the children and that this risk could not be mitigated in any way other than an order for no time and no contact for the mother with the children. (v) it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   it was explained in the judgment that this was not the end of the matter as the issue of time and communication could be revisited once the mother was able to convince the court or the father that the mother and her family no longer pose an unacceptable risk to the children ([129] to [131] reasons for judgment). (vi) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   erred in law in the consideration of unacceptable risk and the standard of proof (i) i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal. (f) inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   i am of the view that i have applied the law correctly in respect to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof. (ii) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal.  ) as to why the mother is of the view that an error has been made in law as to unacceptable risk and the standard of proof is not clear from the notice of appeal and therefore i am unable to comment as to the prospects of success as to that aspect of the appeal.   inadequate reasoning (i) the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor. (g) failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   the mother sets out as a ground of appeal that the reasons contained in the judgment were inadequate and that it was not possible to discern the path of reasoning and the legal principles applied. (ii) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  ) this matter was complex and capturing the various issues was difficult. (iii) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.  i) great lengths were taken throughout the judgment to set out in as logical a manner as possible the events, the reasoning, the law applied and subsequently the findings that were made which led to the final parenting orders. (iv) i therefore make the preliminary assessment that the strength of this ground of appeal is poor.   failure to consider whether any condition would sufficiently ameliorate the risk and whether any other order was available to enable children to have the benefit of a relationship with the mother (i) full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).   full consideration was given in the judgment as to whether any relationship for the children with the mother would be in the children’s best interests but ultimately a finding was made that until such time as the mother received effective therapeutic treatment then no time or communication could occur between the mother and the children, otherwise the children will be at risk from the mother. (ii) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).  ) this finding was made due to continued concerns that the mother could not refrain herself whether in a phone call or face-to-face from making allegations against the father ([120] to [121]).
desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living arrangements
in determining whether a stay should be granted the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration. it is especially desirable that the frequency of any changes in the custodial arrangements relating to the child should be limited as much is possible
period of time in which the appeal can be heard
best interests of the children are a significant consideration
overall conclusion
dated: 15 september 2022