last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
parkmore & miglio [2022] fedcfamc2f 1279
orders
the court orders that:  denigrating the other party or the party’s partners or members of that party’s family via any social media platform or in the presence of or within the hearing of the child, and each party remove the child from the hearing of anyone else who may be denigrating the other party or that party’s partner or family and posting or making any reference to the child or parties to these proceedings on any social media platform, (b) using the children as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent, questioning or seeking information from the children with respect to their living or extended family communications and arrangements, (c) consuming alcohol to excess 12 hours prior to any commencement of time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any intoxicated individuals, (d) consuming illicit substances 24 hours prior to or during any time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any individuals who have consumed illicit substances, (e) physically disciplining or restraining the children or permitting a third party to do so, and (f) exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.   using the children as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent, questioning or seeking information from the children with respect to their living or extended family communications and arrangements, (c) consuming alcohol to excess 12 hours prior to any commencement of time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any intoxicated individuals, (d) consuming illicit substances 24 hours prior to or during any time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any individuals who have consumed illicit substances, (e) physically disciplining or restraining the children or permitting a third party to do so, and (f) exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.   consuming alcohol to excess 12 hours prior to any commencement of time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any intoxicated individuals, (d) consuming illicit substances 24 hours prior to or during any time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any individuals who have consumed illicit substances, (e) physically disciplining or restraining the children or permitting a third party to do so, and (f) exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.   consuming illicit substances 24 hours prior to or during any time spent and the children shall be removed from the presence of any individuals who have consumed illicit substances, (e) physically disciplining or restraining the children or permitting a third party to do so, and (f) exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.   physically disciplining or restraining the children or permitting a third party to do so, and (f) exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.   exposing the children to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parties will take all measures necessary to remove the children from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise.
reasons for judgment
judge young
background
the witnesses
the legislative pathway  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both of their parents ..., and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development ..., and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ..., and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development ..., and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ..., and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children ..., and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   to maintain a connection with that culture, and (b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary: (i) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.   to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s views, and (ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.  ) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture.
the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests): ... (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), ... (emphasis added).
... (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), ... (emphasis added).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), ... (emphasis added).   the children both expressed a wish to continue living with ms miglio and mr j and their extended family. neither child expressed any wish to reside with ms parkmore. x, in the opinion of the court expert, would like to spend some time with ms parkmore, but the child was not willing to express that unequivocally. (b) i am satisfied that each child has a close relationship with ms miglio, mr j and the mother. i am satisfied that x has a significant relationship with ms parkmore, built up over some years, but i am not satisfied y has any significant relationship with ms parkmore. (c) the role of each of the parents in the upbringing of these children is apparent from the history given above. it has been fraught and marked by very serious issues of neglect, family violence and alcohol misuse. nevertheless , i am satisfied that the parents, within their respective limits, have participated in decision-making about the children, most importantly in relation to their agreement that it is in the best interests of the children that they live with ms miglio and mr j for the foreseeable future.   i am satisfied that each child has a close relationship with ms miglio, mr j and the mother. i am satisfied that x has a significant relationship with ms parkmore, built up over some years, but i am not satisfied y has any significant relationship with ms parkmore. (c) the role of each of the parents in the upbringing of these children is apparent from the history given above. it has been fraught and marked by very serious issues of neglect, family violence and alcohol misuse. nevertheless , i am satisfied that the parents, within their respective limits, have participated in decision-making about the children, most importantly in relation to their agreement that it is in the best interests of the children that they live with ms miglio and mr j for the foreseeable future.   the role of each of the parents in the upbringing of these children is apparent from the history given above. it has been fraught and marked by very serious issues of neglect, family violence and alcohol misuse. nevertheless , i am satisfied that the parents, within their respective limits, have participated in decision-making about the children, most importantly in relation to their agreement that it is in the best interests of the children that they live with ms miglio and mr j for the foreseeable future.  ) there was no evidence about the maintenance of the children.   the will be no changes in the children’s circumstances. (e) the children appear to have no difficulty spending time with both the mother and father, subject to the mother and father being available. ms miglio and mr j support the children's relationship with their mother and father, subject to the necessity to keep the children safe. (f) the parents do not have the capacity to provide for the children’s needs. ms miglio and mr j have the capacity, for the reasons described above, to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. i am not satisfied that ms parkmore is in a position to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs in the same way or as comprehensively as ms miglio and mr j. i was particularly concerned that ms parkmore levelled serious allegations against ms miglio and mr j that were unsubstantiated or untrue. i was not satisfied that ms parkmore showed any real insight into the emotional needs of the children, particularly x, in the circumstances where x was painfully aware of hostility between her family and ms parkmore. (g) i do not propose to say anything further about the maturity, lifestyle and background of the parties. (h) the children are aboriginal children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal culture is, at their respective ages, most practically expressed through their right to spend time with their family and extended family. the orders i propose will recognise that right. (i) i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   the children appear to have no difficulty spending time with both the mother and father, subject to the mother and father being available. ms miglio and mr j support the children's relationship with their mother and father, subject to the necessity to keep the children safe. (f) the parents do not have the capacity to provide for the children’s needs. ms miglio and mr j have the capacity, for the reasons described above, to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. i am not satisfied that ms parkmore is in a position to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs in the same way or as comprehensively as ms miglio and mr j. i was particularly concerned that ms parkmore levelled serious allegations against ms miglio and mr j that were unsubstantiated or untrue. i was not satisfied that ms parkmore showed any real insight into the emotional needs of the children, particularly x, in the circumstances where x was painfully aware of hostility between her family and ms parkmore. (g) i do not propose to say anything further about the maturity, lifestyle and background of the parties. (h) the children are aboriginal children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal culture is, at their respective ages, most practically expressed through their right to spend time with their family and extended family. the orders i propose will recognise that right. (i) i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   the parents do not have the capacity to provide for the children’s needs. ms miglio and mr j have the capacity, for the reasons described above, to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs. i am not satisfied that ms parkmore is in a position to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs in the same way or as comprehensively as ms miglio and mr j. i was particularly concerned that ms parkmore levelled serious allegations against ms miglio and mr j that were unsubstantiated or untrue. i was not satisfied that ms parkmore showed any real insight into the emotional needs of the children, particularly x, in the circumstances where x was painfully aware of hostility between her family and ms parkmore. (g) i do not propose to say anything further about the maturity, lifestyle and background of the parties. (h) the children are aboriginal children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal culture is, at their respective ages, most practically expressed through their right to spend time with their family and extended family. the orders i propose will recognise that right. (i) i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   i do not propose to say anything further about the maturity, lifestyle and background of the parties. (h) the children are aboriginal children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal culture is, at their respective ages, most practically expressed through their right to spend time with their family and extended family. the orders i propose will recognise that right. (i) i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   the children are aboriginal children and their right to enjoy their aboriginal culture is, at their respective ages, most practically expressed through their right to spend time with their family and extended family. the orders i propose will recognise that right. (i) i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   i will not make any further comment about the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents or other parties. (j) i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   i am satisfied that while the children were in the care of the mother and father they were exposed to family violence. i am satisfied that while they remain living with ms miglio and mr j they are protected from exposure to family violence. (k) there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   there is no relevant family violence order of which i am aware. (l) i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   i have regard to these matters. (m) there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.   there is no other relevant fact or circumstance.
associate: dated: 21 september 2022
dated: 21 september 2022