last updated: 23 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
tabet & zadeh [2022] fedcfamc2f 1425
orders
the court orders that:  the assets and liabilities table as set out in ‘annexure a’, (b) valuations of any asset or financial resource, the value of which is in dispute and valuations of any superannuation interests, (c) a minute of proposed orders, and (d) written confirmation by each party or their solicitor that:- (i) all relevant documents have been exchanged between the parties, and (ii) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.   valuations of any asset or financial resource, the value of which is in dispute and valuations of any superannuation interests, (c) a minute of proposed orders, and (d) written confirmation by each party or their solicitor that:- (i) all relevant documents have been exchanged between the parties, and (ii) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.   a minute of proposed orders, and (d) written confirmation by each party or their solicitor that:- (i) all relevant documents have been exchanged between the parties, and (ii) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.   written confirmation by each party or their solicitor that:- (i) all relevant documents have been exchanged between the parties, and (ii) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.   all relevant documents have been exchanged between the parties, and (ii) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.  ) the superannuation trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been accorded procedural fairness.   b street, suburb c, and (b) the vacant land in country d held in the mother’s name,   the vacant land in country d held in the mother’s name,
then the parties forthwith do all acts and things necessary to obtain a joint sworn valuation from an agreed appropriately qualified person, the costs of same to be borne equally by the parties and such valuation to be filed with the court not later than 16 january 2023.   a list of the documents to be relied upon, (b) a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be part of the asset pool, with the values contended for by that party, (c) the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) what items are to be included in the pool, and (ii) the value of each asset in the pool, (d) a list of contributions claimed or contended for, (e) a list of other factors relied upon (s.75(2) factors), (f) the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and financial resources claimed to be part of the asset pool, with the values contended for by that party, (c) the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) what items are to be included in the pool, and (ii) the value of each asset in the pool, (d) a list of contributions claimed or contended for, (e) a list of other factors relied upon (s.75(2) factors), (f) the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   the main contentions on disputes as to: (i) what items are to be included in the pool, and (ii) the value of each asset in the pool, (d) a list of contributions claimed or contended for, (e) a list of other factors relied upon (s.75(2) factors), (f) the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   what items are to be included in the pool, and (ii) the value of each asset in the pool,  ) the value of each asset in the pool,   a list of contributions claimed or contended for, (e) a list of other factors relied upon (s.75(2) factors), (f) the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   a list of other factors relied upon (s.75(2) factors), (f) the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   the percentage adjustment contended for, and (g) a statement of the precise orders sought.   a statement of the precise orders sought.
final parenting orders
and the court notes that:  the application may be struck out, (b) the proceedings may be directed to proceed undefended, (c) the trial date may be vacated, and (d) orders may be made that the non-complying party pay the costs arising from their non-compliance.   the proceedings may be directed to proceed undefended, (c) the trial date may be vacated, and (d) orders may be made that the non-complying party pay the costs arising from their non-compliance.   the trial date may be vacated, and (d) orders may be made that the non-complying party pay the costs arising from their non-compliance.   orders may be made that the non-complying party pay the costs arising from their non-compliance.
reasons for judgment(revised from transcript)
judge bender:
introduction
parenting application
passport issue
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 october 2022
dated: 21 october 2022