last updated: 10 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rong & huan (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1378
orders
the court orders that:  13 january 2023, or (b) the provision of the child y, born in 2014, to the applicant mother, or (c) the respondent satisfying the court that, if released, he will do all things necessary to arrange for the child y, born in 2014, to be returned to australia.   the provision of the child y, born in 2014, to the applicant mother, or (c) the respondent satisfying the court that, if released, he will do all things necessary to arrange for the child y, born in 2014, to be returned to australia.   the respondent satisfying the court that, if released, he will do all things necessary to arrange for the child y, born in 2014, to be returned to australia.   the respondent may file and serve at any time: (i) a minute of orders sought, (ii) his affidavit in support, (iii) any affidavits of any other witnesses, (iv) any written submissions. (b) within 5 days of being served with the respondent’s material, the applicant may file and serve: (i) any competing minute of orders sought, (ii) any affidavits, (iii) any written submissions.   a minute of orders sought, (ii) his affidavit in support, (iii) any affidavits of any other witnesses, (iv) any written submissions.  ) his affidavit in support, (iii) any affidavits of any other witnesses, (iv) any written submissions.  i) any affidavits of any other witnesses, (iv) any written submissions.  ) any written submissions.   within 5 days of being served with the respondent’s material, the applicant may file and serve: (i) any competing minute of orders sought, (ii) any affidavits, (iii) any written submissions.   any competing minute of orders sought, (ii) any affidavits, (iii) any written submissions.  ) any affidavits, (iii) any written submissions.  i) any written submissions.
it is noted:
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
background
the allegations
the hearing  count 1 – paragraphs 7 to 11 (noting paragraphs 12 to 15 are relevant as to potential sanction), (b) count 4 – paragraphs 21 to 29, (c) count 5 – paragraphs 30 to 57.   count 4 – paragraphs 21 to 29, (c) count 5 – paragraphs 30 to 57.   count 5 – paragraphs 30 to 57.
in respect of count 5, if this count has not otherwise been dismissed, the respondent asserts that he has a reasonable excuse for non-compliance ....
count 1
pleading: denied. findings: allegation proved. reasonable excuse not established.
findings: allegation proved. reasonable excuse not established.
7. each party must within 28 days of the date of these orders, being by close of business on 15 july 2021:
a. do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure to the other party including but not limited to complying with rule 24.03 of the federal circuit court rules 2001. b. serve on each other party copies of the relevant documents pursuant to rule 24.04 of the federal circuit court rules 2001.   as to what was required by the respondent with respect to full and frank disclosure: (i) the respondent affirmed in the financial statement filed on his behalf by his lawyer on 12 may 2021 that he was “... aware that by law i have an obligation to make a full and frank disclosure of my financial circumstances to the court and each other party.” (ii) the respondent was further assisted from within order 7 of 17 june 2021 itself directing him to rules 24.03 and 24.04. (b) the enclosures within the letter of 15 july 2021 and their description as “financial disclosure” is self-evident that the respondent understood what financial disclosure was. (c) only the respondent knew of the extent and what was required to fill the void between partial financial disclosure and full and frank financial disclosure. there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 as to why only partial disclosure was being provided, or what disclosure was missing as at 15 july 2021 such that it would otherwise be full and frank. (d) there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 to the effect that the partial disclosure was the respondent’s reasonable attempt to comply with the order or what the necessary things that he was unable to do were. (e) the respondent took no steps to seek to prevent his non-compliance. (f) i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.   the respondent affirmed in the financial statement filed on his behalf by his lawyer on 12 may 2021 that he was “... aware that by law i have an obligation to make a full and frank disclosure of my financial circumstances to the court and each other party.” (ii) the respondent was further assisted from within order 7 of 17 june 2021 itself directing him to rules 24.03 and 24.04.  ) the respondent was further assisted from within order 7 of 17 june 2021 itself directing him to rules 24.03 and 24.04.   the enclosures within the letter of 15 july 2021 and their description as “financial disclosure” is self-evident that the respondent understood what financial disclosure was. (c) only the respondent knew of the extent and what was required to fill the void between partial financial disclosure and full and frank financial disclosure. there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 as to why only partial disclosure was being provided, or what disclosure was missing as at 15 july 2021 such that it would otherwise be full and frank. (d) there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 to the effect that the partial disclosure was the respondent’s reasonable attempt to comply with the order or what the necessary things that he was unable to do were. (e) the respondent took no steps to seek to prevent his non-compliance. (f) i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.   only the respondent knew of the extent and what was required to fill the void between partial financial disclosure and full and frank financial disclosure. there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 as to why only partial disclosure was being provided, or what disclosure was missing as at 15 july 2021 such that it would otherwise be full and frank. (d) there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 to the effect that the partial disclosure was the respondent’s reasonable attempt to comply with the order or what the necessary things that he was unable to do were. (e) the respondent took no steps to seek to prevent his non-compliance. (f) i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.   there is no information within the letter of 15 july 2021 to the effect that the partial disclosure was the respondent’s reasonable attempt to comply with the order or what the necessary things that he was unable to do were. (e) the respondent took no steps to seek to prevent his non-compliance. (f) i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.   the respondent took no steps to seek to prevent his non-compliance. (f) i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.   i find that the respondent did not care to, or it was against the respondent’s interests, to do all things necessary to provide full and frank disclosure as at 15 july 2022. in these circumstances, the appropriate inference is that his failure to comply was intentional.
count 1 - sanction
count 4
pleading: denied. findings: allegation not proved and dismissed.
findings: allegation not proved and dismissed.
3. in the event that the value of any real property is not agreed the parties shall cause that item to be valued by a single expert with the costs of such valuation to be shared equally between the parties. 4. within 14 days the parties shall exchange a list of 3 experts to provide a valuation of the business and the wife shall select one to provide a valuation and for this purpose:
a. a joint letter of instructions to be sent to the valuer, b. the parties shall provide the valuer selected with all documents and authorisations necessary to obtain documents to complete a valuation, and c. each of the parties will meet half the costs of the valuation obtained.
order 3
on 29 september 2021, my solicitor wrote to them proposing values for [mr rong’s] various properties based on appraisals i had obtained from [company l] and nominating, in the absence of agreement, three valuers for property valuations for the properties.
order 4
count 5
1. the father forthwith do all things necessary to arrange [y] born [in] 2014 ('y') to be returned to australia, within 30 days of the date of these orders.
can you and my dad help me take [y] back to australia before 02/06/2022.otherwise i could go to jail, and the consequences are severe.   on 20 may 2022, he made a booking (but did not pay) for one-way travel for y from china to australia. (b) on 26 may 2022, he sent an email to his mother in china (with whom the child was living with) requesting that either his mother or his father bring y back to australia before 2 june 2022.   on 26 may 2022, he sent an email to his mother in china (with whom the child was living with) requesting that either his mother or his father bring y back to australia before 2 june 2022.
i did not want [y] to travel to australia with another airline where he would be required to transit through another country. i considered [y], at 7 years of age, too young to cope with indirect travel and it is unsafe for him.   the respondent also deposes to owning unencumbered the residential property in which he lives and a second unencumbered residential property in which his brother lives rent free. under cross-examination, he conceded each of these properties would be worth at least $600,000. in re-examination he said his mother had lodged a caveat against each of the properties which was news to the applicant. (b) that the temporary closure of the business would cause it to fold, and even if that were to be the case, how that could possibly compare to the seriousness of preferring to leave his child languishing in china indefinitely and contrary to this court’s order.   that the temporary closure of the business would cause it to fold, and even if that were to be the case, how that could possibly compare to the seriousness of preferring to leave his child languishing in china indefinitely and contrary to this court’s order.
count 5 – consequence of failure to comply with order
b. the father and his lawyers have consistently failed to comply with both court orders/directions and the court rules throughout these proceedings.
f. should there be any further failure by the father to comply with the court’s orders, the consequences for him could be severe.  a primary order has been made, and (b) the court has jurisdiction under the act and is satisfied that the respondent committed a contravention of the primary order, and (c) the respondent has not proven that he had a reasonable excuse for the contravention, and (d) if the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is not considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention, then i am satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his obligations under the primary order, or (e) the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention.   the court has jurisdiction under the act and is satisfied that the respondent committed a contravention of the primary order, and (c) the respondent has not proven that he had a reasonable excuse for the contravention, and (d) if the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is not considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention, then i am satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his obligations under the primary order, or (e) the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention.   the respondent has not proven that he had a reasonable excuse for the contravention, and (d) if the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is not considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention, then i am satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his obligations under the primary order, or (e) the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention.   if the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is not considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention, then i am satisfied that the person has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of his obligations under the primary order, or (e) the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention.   the making of notation f to the orders of 2 may 2022 is considered to be the taking of an action in respect of a previous contravention.   pursuant to section 70nfb paragraphs (1)(a) and (2)(g), make an order that the respondent pay all of the costs of the applicant to the proceedings under this division unless the court is satisfied that it would not be in the best interests of the child concerned to make that order, and/or (b) consider making at least one (or other orders) under subsection 70nfb(2) that the court considers to be the most appropriate of the orders under subsection (2) in the circumstances.   consider making at least one (or other orders) under subsection 70nfb(2) that the court considers to be the most appropriate of the orders under subsection (2) in the circumstances.   to make an order requiring the person to enter into a bond in accordance with section 70nfe, or (d) to fine the person not more than 60 penalty units, or (e) subject to subsection (7), to impose a sentence of imprisonment on the person in accordance with section 70nfg, or
the applicant’s position  pursuant to subdivison b (and not subsection 70nfb(2)(b) and section 70nfe of subdivision f), the primary order be varied such that all within 30 days: (i) the respondent pay into court a bond of $50,000. (the applicant deposed her estimate of costs to go to china to attempt to recover y herself was $75,000 including travel, legal fees in australia and china, accommodation and living expenses in china. counsel for the applicant submitted that only $50,000 was sought by way of a bond as it was hoped a discounted amount might make it more affordable or manageable for the respondent such that it actually happens in circumstances where the respondent had not complied with financial disclosure obligations and his financial circumstances were not known), (ii) the respondent’s passport be returned to him, (iii) he comply with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia, and (iv) for y to be provided to the mother and thereafter live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance with order 9 of the orders of 10 february 2022. (b) the bond be forfeited to the applicant upon non-compliance. (counsel for the applicant identified and conceded that such a self executing order ought not be made in these proceedings and that the applicant would need to bring an application in the event of non-compliance with the varied order). (c) in the alternative, the respondent be imprisoned for 12 months or until such time as he complies with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia and for y to be provided to the mother. (in submissions, counsel for the applicant added to the proposed order that his payment of the bond also be a condition of release). (d) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs on an indemnity basis. (the applicant submitted this was consistent with the language of section 70nfb paragraphs (1)(a) and (2)(g) that the court must make an order that the respondent pay all of the costs of the applicant to the proceedings under this division, and, the court would not be satisfied that it would not be in the best interests of the child concerned to make the order).   the respondent pay into court a bond of $50,000. (the applicant deposed her estimate of costs to go to china to attempt to recover y herself was $75,000 including travel, legal fees in australia and china, accommodation and living expenses in china. counsel for the applicant submitted that only $50,000 was sought by way of a bond as it was hoped a discounted amount might make it more affordable or manageable for the respondent such that it actually happens in circumstances where the respondent had not complied with financial disclosure obligations and his financial circumstances were not known), (ii) the respondent’s passport be returned to him, (iii) he comply with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia, and (iv) for y to be provided to the mother and thereafter live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance with order 9 of the orders of 10 february 2022.  ) the respondent’s passport be returned to him, (iii) he comply with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia, and (iv) for y to be provided to the mother and thereafter live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance with order 9 of the orders of 10 february 2022.  i) he comply with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia, and (iv) for y to be provided to the mother and thereafter live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance with order 9 of the orders of 10 february 2022.  ) for y to be provided to the mother and thereafter live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance with order 9 of the orders of 10 february 2022.   the bond be forfeited to the applicant upon non-compliance. (counsel for the applicant identified and conceded that such a self executing order ought not be made in these proceedings and that the applicant would need to bring an application in the event of non-compliance with the varied order). (c) in the alternative, the respondent be imprisoned for 12 months or until such time as he complies with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia and for y to be provided to the mother. (in submissions, counsel for the applicant added to the proposed order that his payment of the bond also be a condition of release). (d) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs on an indemnity basis. (the applicant submitted this was consistent with the language of section 70nfb paragraphs (1)(a) and (2)(g) that the court must make an order that the respondent pay all of the costs of the applicant to the proceedings under this division, and, the court would not be satisfied that it would not be in the best interests of the child concerned to make the order).   in the alternative, the respondent be imprisoned for 12 months or until such time as he complies with the primary order to do all things necessary to arrange for y to be returned to australia and for y to be provided to the mother. (in submissions, counsel for the applicant added to the proposed order that his payment of the bond also be a condition of release). (d) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs on an indemnity basis. (the applicant submitted this was consistent with the language of section 70nfb paragraphs (1)(a) and (2)(g) that the court must make an order that the respondent pay all of the costs of the applicant to the proceedings under this division, and, the court would not be satisfied that it would not be in the best interests of the child concerned to make the order).   the respondent pay the applicant’s costs on an indemnity basis. (the applicant submitted this was consistent with the language of section 70nfb paragraphs (1)(a) and (2)(g) that the court must make an order that the respondent pay all of the costs of the applicant to the proceedings under this division, and, the court would not be satisfied that it would not be in the best interests of the child concerned to make the order).
the respondent’s position  he would not be able to attempt to arrange a bond whilst imprisoned. (b) he spends a few hours a week with the younger child. (c) he would lose his job. (d) he would not be able to prepare for final hearing whilst imprisoned.   he spends a few hours a week with the younger child. (c) he would lose his job. (d) he would not be able to prepare for final hearing whilst imprisoned.   he would lose his job. (d) he would not be able to prepare for final hearing whilst imprisoned.   he would not be able to prepare for final hearing whilst imprisoned.
the orders
order 1
order 2
orders 3-7   making no order and effectively leaving the respondent to continue in his efforts to have y returned unless or until the order requiring him to do so is varied or discharged after final hearing, (b) an order varying the primary order pursuant to subdivision b (to incentivise the respondent’s compliance by setting up a mechanism for payment and forfeiture of a bond to the mother in order to fund her attempt to recover the child from china herself), (c) to impose a sentence of imprisonment on the person in accordance with section 70nfg.   an order varying the primary order pursuant to subdivision b (to incentivise the respondent’s compliance by setting up a mechanism for payment and forfeiture of a bond to the mother in order to fund her attempt to recover the child from china herself), (c) to impose a sentence of imprisonment on the person in accordance with section 70nfg.   to impose a sentence of imprisonment on the person in accordance with section 70nfg.   a sentence of imprisonment imposed on a person under paragraph 70nfb(2)(e) is to be expressed to be:   for a specified period of 12 months or less, or (b) for a period ending when the person:  complies with the order concerned, or (ii) has been imprisoned under the sentence for 12 months or such lesser period as is specified by the court,
whichever happens first.   a court must not sentence a person to imprisonment under paragraph 70nfb(2)(e) unless the court is satisfied that, in all the circumstances of the case, it would not be appropriate for the court to deal with the contravention under any of the other paragraphs of subsection 70nfb(2). (3) if a court sentences a person to imprisonment under paragraph 70nfb(2)(e), the court must:   state the reasons why it is satisfied as mentioned in subsection (2), and (b) cause those reasons to be entered in the records of the court.   a court that sentences a person to imprisonment under paragraph 70nfb(2)(e) may:   suspend the sentence upon the terms and conditions determined by the court, and (b) terminate a suspension made under paragraph (a).   a court that has sentenced a person to imprisonment for a period expressed as provided by paragraph (1)(b) may order the release of the person if it is satisfied that the person will, if he or she is released, comply with the order concerned.   i am satisfied that it is not appropriate to make no further order beyond the costs order pursuant to paragraph 70nfb(2)(b) and effectively allow the matter to drift to final hearing where it is likely the child will still be in china. (b) i am satisfied that it is not appropriate to make an order for the respondent to pay a bond of $50,000 or for any other meaningful amount. firstly, i agree with the submission made by counsel on his behalf that he does not have the capacity to pay it and that the court should not make an order he is incapable of complying with. secondly, i appreciate that the orders proposed by the applicant are aimed at incentivising the respondent into action but i am not satisfied that they will have that effect. instead, i find it more likely that the respondent would again do nothing, leaving y in china and the applicant in the unfair and plainly unjust position of having to take more steps and spend more time energy and money with further enforcement proceedings. thirdly, i am not satisfied that the court has the power to make such an order in the context of proceedings under division 13a. (c) since 10 february 2022, the respondent has been directed by the court to have y returned to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. he has not done that. he has brought no case to discharge the order or as to why it might be in the best interests of the child not to return. he has brought no case setting out proposed orders or a regime to bring about the return of y from china. (d) other than the offer made at closing submissions of $50,000 being secured against one or both of the properties, there is no evidence that the respondent is willing to comply with the primary order or is willing to do anything else to deliver y to the applicant. (e) the best interests of y remain the paramount consideration of the court, which for the purposes of this application is his return to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. the respondent is uniquely placed to arrange for that to happen yet he remains contumaciously unmotivated to do so.   i am satisfied that it is not appropriate to make an order for the respondent to pay a bond of $50,000 or for any other meaningful amount. firstly, i agree with the submission made by counsel on his behalf that he does not have the capacity to pay it and that the court should not make an order he is incapable of complying with. secondly, i appreciate that the orders proposed by the applicant are aimed at incentivising the respondent into action but i am not satisfied that they will have that effect. instead, i find it more likely that the respondent would again do nothing, leaving y in china and the applicant in the unfair and plainly unjust position of having to take more steps and spend more time energy and money with further enforcement proceedings. thirdly, i am not satisfied that the court has the power to make such an order in the context of proceedings under division 13a. (c) since 10 february 2022, the respondent has been directed by the court to have y returned to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. he has not done that. he has brought no case to discharge the order or as to why it might be in the best interests of the child not to return. he has brought no case setting out proposed orders or a regime to bring about the return of y from china. (d) other than the offer made at closing submissions of $50,000 being secured against one or both of the properties, there is no evidence that the respondent is willing to comply with the primary order or is willing to do anything else to deliver y to the applicant. (e) the best interests of y remain the paramount consideration of the court, which for the purposes of this application is his return to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. the respondent is uniquely placed to arrange for that to happen yet he remains contumaciously unmotivated to do so.   since 10 february 2022, the respondent has been directed by the court to have y returned to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. he has not done that. he has brought no case to discharge the order or as to why it might be in the best interests of the child not to return. he has brought no case setting out proposed orders or a regime to bring about the return of y from china. (d) other than the offer made at closing submissions of $50,000 being secured against one or both of the properties, there is no evidence that the respondent is willing to comply with the primary order or is willing to do anything else to deliver y to the applicant. (e) the best interests of y remain the paramount consideration of the court, which for the purposes of this application is his return to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. the respondent is uniquely placed to arrange for that to happen yet he remains contumaciously unmotivated to do so.   other than the offer made at closing submissions of $50,000 being secured against one or both of the properties, there is no evidence that the respondent is willing to comply with the primary order or is willing to do anything else to deliver y to the applicant. (e) the best interests of y remain the paramount consideration of the court, which for the purposes of this application is his return to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. the respondent is uniquely placed to arrange for that to happen yet he remains contumaciously unmotivated to do so.   the best interests of y remain the paramount consideration of the court, which for the purposes of this application is his return to australia from china in order to live with the applicant. the respondent is uniquely placed to arrange for that to happen yet he remains contumaciously unmotivated to do so.   arranging for the provision of y to the applicant mother by the paternal grandmother, the paternal grandfather, the respondent’s brother or anyone else, or (b) the preparation of terms and conditions that satisfy the court that he is willing to comply with the order concerned. pursuant to subsection 70nfg(8), the test for whether or not, if released, he will comply with the order is to the satisfaction of the court. such terms and conditions are to be set out by way of a proposed minute of orders sought, supported by affidavit of himself and any other relevant witnesses.   the preparation of terms and conditions that satisfy the court that he is willing to comply with the order concerned. pursuant to subsection 70nfg(8), the test for whether or not, if released, he will comply with the order is to the satisfaction of the court. such terms and conditions are to be set out by way of a proposed minute of orders sought, supported by affidavit of himself and any other relevant witnesses.
associate: dated: 13 october 2022
dated: 13 october 2022
[1] federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 - rule 11.67a respondent to an application referred to in item 2, 3, 4 or 5 of table 11.1 may file an affidavit but is not required to do so.