last updated: 16 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
eggleston & hackett [2022] fedcfamc2f 1383
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  if a party proposes to exercise decision making about parental responsibility, they must notify the other party in writing of the proposed decision and their reason(s) for it, (b) the party receiving notice pursuant to sub-paragraph (a), must within 14 days provide their written response to the proposed decision, indicating if they agree or disagree and if they disagree stating their reason(s) for disagreeing, (c) within 7 days of the notice in sub-paragraph (b) being sent, the parties are to arrange a time with a parenting coordinator or with n counsellors to confer for the purpose of coming to a joint agreement about the decision to be taken, and (d) for the purpose of the written notice required by this order, the parties will communicate via the following email addresses and also keep the other party informed of any change of email address.   the party receiving notice pursuant to sub-paragraph (a), must within 14 days provide their written response to the proposed decision, indicating if they agree or disagree and if they disagree stating their reason(s) for disagreeing, (c) within 7 days of the notice in sub-paragraph (b) being sent, the parties are to arrange a time with a parenting coordinator or with n counsellors to confer for the purpose of coming to a joint agreement about the decision to be taken, and (d) for the purpose of the written notice required by this order, the parties will communicate via the following email addresses and also keep the other party informed of any change of email address.   within 7 days of the notice in sub-paragraph (b) being sent, the parties are to arrange a time with a parenting coordinator or with n counsellors to confer for the purpose of coming to a joint agreement about the decision to be taken, and (d) for the purpose of the written notice required by this order, the parties will communicate via the following email addresses and also keep the other party informed of any change of email address.   for the purpose of the written notice required by this order, the parties will communicate via the following email addresses and also keep the other party informed of any change of email address.
live with and communication with the children orders  during school term, commencing friday 21 october 2022 until commencement of term 1 in 2023, each alternate friday from 4:00pm to sunday 4:00pm, (b) during school holidays in the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, the respondent’s time will be two non-consecutive blocks of four (4) nights, with the precise nights will be as agreed in writing, and failing agreement, the mother’s time will commence in week one after school concludes on the last day of term and in week two at 4 pm thursday before the next school term commences. (c) by consent, during school holidays the summer school holiday periods, the respondent’s time with x will be as follows : (i) in summer holidays commencing in even numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day. (ii) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (iii) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period. (d) from term 1 2023 and commencing friday 17 february 2023, the respondent’s time each fortnight during school term will increase to friday after school to monday at commencement of school.   during school holidays in the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, the respondent’s time will be two non-consecutive blocks of four (4) nights, with the precise nights will be as agreed in writing, and failing agreement, the mother’s time will commence in week one after school concludes on the last day of term and in week two at 4 pm thursday before the next school term commences. (c) by consent, during school holidays the summer school holiday periods, the respondent’s time with x will be as follows : (i) in summer holidays commencing in even numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day. (ii) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (iii) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period. (d) from term 1 2023 and commencing friday 17 february 2023, the respondent’s time each fortnight during school term will increase to friday after school to monday at commencement of school.   by consent, during school holidays the summer school holiday periods, the respondent’s time with x will be as follows : (i) in summer holidays commencing in even numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day. (ii) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (iii) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period. (d) from term 1 2023 and commencing friday 17 february 2023, the respondent’s time each fortnight during school term will increase to friday after school to monday at commencement of school.   in summer holidays commencing in even numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day. (ii) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (iii) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period.  ) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (iii) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period.  i) on the following dates : 2 january to 6 january 13 january to 17 january 24 january to 28 january 3 february to 6 february or such other dates as agreed in writing resulting equivalent total nights that holiday period.   from term 1 2023 and commencing friday 17 february 2023, the respondent’s time each fortnight during school term will increase to friday after school to monday at commencement of school.
notation: in respect of precise changeover arrangements for the purpose of order 6, refer to the orders under the heading “changeovers of care”.   by consent, each mother’s day from 4:00pm saturday to 4:00pm sunday. (f) by consent, that the respondent will communicate with x preferably by video call, and if not by mobile telephone or between 6:00 pm and 7:00 pm each wednesday, with the respondent to initiate the call to the applicant’s mobile and the applicant will facilitate that call without anything other than mere exchange of greetings between he and the respondent. (g) by consent, that additionally, when x requests at a reasonable hour to communicate with the respondent, the applicant will facilitate that telephone call or videocall to the respondent. (h) by consent, that in the event of the respondent not having established suitable accommodation for x, she will notify the applicant in writing of this occurrence and whether she will spend time with x at temporary suitable accommodation or move to daytime contact temporarily and once the respondent has secured more permanent and suitable accommodation for x she will notify the applicant her time is moving back to overnight time as per orders 6 (a)-(d). (i) by consent, such further or alternative spend time with, and communication as agreed between the parties in writing.   by consent, that the respondent will communicate with x preferably by video call, and if not by mobile telephone or between 6:00 pm and 7:00 pm each wednesday, with the respondent to initiate the call to the applicant’s mobile and the applicant will facilitate that call without anything other than mere exchange of greetings between he and the respondent. (g) by consent, that additionally, when x requests at a reasonable hour to communicate with the respondent, the applicant will facilitate that telephone call or videocall to the respondent. (h) by consent, that in the event of the respondent not having established suitable accommodation for x, she will notify the applicant in writing of this occurrence and whether she will spend time with x at temporary suitable accommodation or move to daytime contact temporarily and once the respondent has secured more permanent and suitable accommodation for x she will notify the applicant her time is moving back to overnight time as per orders 6 (a)-(d). (i) by consent, such further or alternative spend time with, and communication as agreed between the parties in writing.   by consent, that additionally, when x requests at a reasonable hour to communicate with the respondent, the applicant will facilitate that telephone call or videocall to the respondent. (h) by consent, that in the event of the respondent not having established suitable accommodation for x, she will notify the applicant in writing of this occurrence and whether she will spend time with x at temporary suitable accommodation or move to daytime contact temporarily and once the respondent has secured more permanent and suitable accommodation for x she will notify the applicant her time is moving back to overnight time as per orders 6 (a)-(d). (i) by consent, such further or alternative spend time with, and communication as agreed between the parties in writing.   by consent, that in the event of the respondent not having established suitable accommodation for x, she will notify the applicant in writing of this occurrence and whether she will spend time with x at temporary suitable accommodation or move to daytime contact temporarily and once the respondent has secured more permanent and suitable accommodation for x she will notify the applicant her time is moving back to overnight time as per orders 6 (a)-(d). (i) by consent, such further or alternative spend time with, and communication as agreed between the parties in writing.   by consent, such further or alternative spend time with, and communication as agreed between the parties in writing.   in summer holidays commencing in even numbered years from 11:00 am boxing day to 11 am 29 december. (b) in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day, (c) on father’s day from 4 pm saturday to 4 pm father’s day. (d) such other times as agreed in writing.   in summer holidays commencing in odd numbered years from 11 am christmas eve to 11 am boxing day, (c) on father’s day from 4 pm saturday to 4 pm father’s day. (d) such other times as agreed in writing.   on father’s day from 4 pm saturday to 4 pm father’s day. (d) such other times as agreed in writing.   such other times as agreed in writing.
changeover of care
injunctions and responsibilities  criticise, abuse, denigrate, insult or belittle or otherwise speak negatively, rudely or critically about the other or their family to x, in the presence of x or within x’s hearing and nor will they permit any other person to do so. (b) discuss these proceedings or any future dispute between them in the presence or hearing of x or permit any other person to do. (c) expose x to any form of family violence (including verbal abuse) and in the event of becoming the target of family violence they will ensure x is removed promptly from that situation.   discuss these proceedings or any future dispute between them in the presence or hearing of x or permit any other person to do. (c) expose x to any form of family violence (including verbal abuse) and in the event of becoming the target of family violence they will ensure x is removed promptly from that situation.   expose x to any form of family violence (including verbal abuse) and in the event of becoming the target of family violence they will ensure x is removed promptly from that situation.
and the court notes that:
parenting coordinator
and the court notes for the purpose of this order, the independent children’s lawyer will provide ms d’s contact address, email and preferred telephone number.
and the court notes ms d has agreed to discount her fee per session to $200.00 per session to be shared between the parties equally.
reasons for judgment
judge taglieri
the mother’s evidence  what order should be made about parental responsibility? (b) whether the court should make an order for the appointment of a parenting coordinator and, if so, how the cost of the same would be met, (c) how time with the mother, which had not occurred recently, would be progressed given her new living conditions, and (d) what orders should be made for changeovers.   whether the court should make an order for the appointment of a parenting coordinator and, if so, how the cost of the same would be met, (c) how time with the mother, which had not occurred recently, would be progressed given her new living conditions, and (d) what orders should be made for changeovers.   how time with the mother, which had not occurred recently, would be progressed given her new living conditions, and (d) what orders should be made for changeovers.   what orders should be made for changeovers.
court child expert’s evidence
the applicant’s case
mr e’s evidence
closing submissions
agreed terms of orders
applicant’s submissions in opposition
evaluation of the evidence
background facts and facts not in dispute   both parents have a meaningful relationship with the child, (b) the mother does not pose an unacceptable risk of either physical or emotional harm, neglect or abuse to the child. this must be taken as conceded by the father as he agrees to an order for fortnightly unsupervised time between the child and mother, (c) both parties at various times have taken opportunity to participate in decision making about long-term issues about the child, have been the primary carer of the child for significant periods and have spent time with and communicated with him when they have not been the primary carer, despite the conflict between them, (d) both parties have at various times contributed to the financial support of the child, to greater or lesser extent based on their income and circumstances, (e) the agreement that the child live with the father will avoid any change in day to day circumstances and continue stability for the child in that regard, (f) the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   the mother does not pose an unacceptable risk of either physical or emotional harm, neglect or abuse to the child. this must be taken as conceded by the father as he agrees to an order for fortnightly unsupervised time between the child and mother, (c) both parties at various times have taken opportunity to participate in decision making about long-term issues about the child, have been the primary carer of the child for significant periods and have spent time with and communicated with him when they have not been the primary carer, despite the conflict between them, (d) both parties have at various times contributed to the financial support of the child, to greater or lesser extent based on their income and circumstances, (e) the agreement that the child live with the father will avoid any change in day to day circumstances and continue stability for the child in that regard, (f) the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   both parties at various times have taken opportunity to participate in decision making about long-term issues about the child, have been the primary carer of the child for significant periods and have spent time with and communicated with him when they have not been the primary carer, despite the conflict between them, (d) both parties have at various times contributed to the financial support of the child, to greater or lesser extent based on their income and circumstances, (e) the agreement that the child live with the father will avoid any change in day to day circumstances and continue stability for the child in that regard, (f) the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   both parties have at various times contributed to the financial support of the child, to greater or lesser extent based on their income and circumstances, (e) the agreement that the child live with the father will avoid any change in day to day circumstances and continue stability for the child in that regard, (f) the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   the agreement that the child live with the father will avoid any change in day to day circumstances and continue stability for the child in that regard, (f) the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   the mother’s return to the hobart area will ensure that she has capacity to regularly spend time with the child and her current living arrangements in the home shared with mr e at town f are suitable, (g) both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   both parties have exhibited a strong desire to discharge the responsibilities of parenthood, but each in their own way experience limitations in this regard due to their own mental health or personality traits, and (h) the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.   the limitations referred to at subparagraph (g) have both contributed to the disputes and level of conflict between the parties about the child in his presence because i prefer the views of the court child expert and the family violence and criminal records tendered in evidence also support that view.
legal principles
determination  his evidence that three monthly visits were likely to be affordable but not bimonthly visits, when his share of the difference between these positions was only $200 for a year, and (b) with the child spending time with the mother every second weekend, his expenditure on outings and activities for the benefit of the child will decline.   with the child spending time with the mother every second weekend, his expenditure on outings and activities for the benefit of the child will decline.
associate: dated: 17 october 2022
dated: 17 october 2022
[1] family report at [112] to [115].[2] case outline of icl filed 7 october 2022 at pages 9 to 12.[3] filed 5 october 2022.[4] at [113].[5] referred to at [14] to [19] of these reasons.[6] exhibit a-1 at pages 206 to 239; mother’s oral evidence.[7] section 60ca of the act.[8] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346.[9] aldridge &keaton [2009] famcafc 229; (2009) flc 93-421; slater & light [2011] famcafc 1[10] dieter & dieter [2011] famcafc 82 and marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101.[11] eg gill & ingram [2022] fedcfamc2f 109.