last updated: 20 october 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
heyden & lester (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1394
orders
the court orders that:  approaching the mother and/or the child or remain within 5 metres of the mother and/or child, (b) go to or remain within 200 metres of any place where the mother and/or child lives, works or attends school, (c) contacting or attempting to contact the mother and/or the child by any means, (d) attempting to locate, follow or keep under surveillance the mother and/or the child, (e) publishing on the internet, by email, posts or other electronic communication any material about the mother and/or the child including on social media,   go to or remain within 200 metres of any place where the mother and/or child lives, works or attends school, (c) contacting or attempting to contact the mother and/or the child by any means, (d) attempting to locate, follow or keep under surveillance the mother and/or the child, (e) publishing on the internet, by email, posts or other electronic communication any material about the mother and/or the child including on social media,   contacting or attempting to contact the mother and/or the child by any means, (d) attempting to locate, follow or keep under surveillance the mother and/or the child, (e) publishing on the internet, by email, posts or other electronic communication any material about the mother and/or the child including on social media,   attempting to locate, follow or keep under surveillance the mother and/or the child, (e) publishing on the internet, by email, posts or other electronic communication any material about the mother and/or the child including on social media,   publishing on the internet, by email, posts or other electronic communication any material about the mother and/or the child including on social media,   any school, after school care provider, or extracurricular activities provider that the child attend from time to time, (b) any medical practitioner and any other allied health professionals including counsellors, psychologist and/or psychiatrists treating the mother and/or the child, (c) any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning:- (i) parental responsibility, (ii) care of the child, (iii) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.   any medical practitioner and any other allied health professionals including counsellors, psychologist and/or psychiatrists treating the mother and/or the child, (c) any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning:- (i) parental responsibility, (ii) care of the child, (iii) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.   any government or non-government agency in relation to any matters concerning:- (i) parental responsibility, (ii) care of the child, (iii) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.   parental responsibility, (ii) care of the child, (iii) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.  ) care of the child, (iii) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.  i) the personal protection of the child and/or the mother, (iv) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.  ) applying for and obtaining a passport of the child.   the father must file an application setting out the specific orders sought and an affidavit setting out the evidence and reasons for seeking these orders, (b) unless otherwise ordered such application is not to be served on the mother or any other person, and (c) if possible, any such application for leave be listed before judge harland.   unless otherwise ordered such application is not to be served on the mother or any other person, and (c) if possible, any such application for leave be listed before judge harland.   if possible, any such application for leave be listed before judge harland.
and the court directs that:
and the court further orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge harland:
background
what are the issues in dispute?  should the parties have equal shared parental responsibility or should the mother have sole parental responsibility? (a) should the mother be able to change x’s surname? (b) should the mother be able to obtain a passport for x? (2) is there an unacceptable risk of harm to x if he comes into contact with his father? is there any way the risk can be ameliorated? (3) what other protective measures should be put in place?   should the mother be able to change x’s surname? (b) should the mother be able to obtain a passport for x?   should the mother be able to obtain a passport for x?   is there an unacceptable risk of harm to x if he comes into contact with his father? is there any way the risk can be ameliorated? (3) what other protective measures should be put in place?   what other protective measures should be put in place?
the law
parental responsibility
is there an unacceptable risk?
police material on the court file is reflective of a pattern and history of family violence incidents in which mr heyden is the respondent. the various affected family members include ms lester, her mother, mr heyden’s current partner and his own mother. mr heyden has further been charged for offences relating to weapons and assaults. this material is concerning and suggestive of the risk profile characterising this matter. whilst mr heyden confirmed completion of treatment programs whilst subject to a community corrections order, his pattern of recidivist offending suggests that these did not motivate the desired behavioural changes. consideration of spend time warrants great caution. it is pertinent that mr heyden demonstrate insight into his previous use of violence and the impact of such on a young child, abstinence, and the ability to ensure a safe and consistent presence in x’s life. the current assessment indicates that mr heyden made the decision to engage in illicit substance use and commit violence when he lived together with ms lester and x. his presentation at interview was of substantial concern, whereby he provided a minimised account of any violence in the relationship, attributing responsibility to both parties, and identifying ms lester as the primary aggressor. he described his use of violence and illicit drugs as historical behaviours, prior to x’s birth. this is not supported by his criminal history. mr heyden therefore did not present as a reliable historian and his account indicated efforts to portray himself favourably. this matter is characterised by a significant family violence risk. ms lester has relocated to queensland to escape ongoing abuse perpetrated by mr heyden. she reports having established safety and stability for x, and there is no information available to the writer at the time of assessment to suggest otherwise. as such the court may consider a cautious approach so as to ensure that the current proceedings do not introduce an element of risk that is destabilizing to mother and child, especially in light of ms lester being x’s stable and ongoing primary parent. the information available at this time informs the assessment that the court may consider communication and spend time with mr heyden be reserved, and that further consideration be given to the issue of parental responsibility. mr heyden’s criminal history is suggestive of recidivist offending and the content of his interview reflects minimal insight and deflection of personal responsibility. these attributes, in the context of the family violence disclosed, are indicative of high risk. ms lester has successfully performed the role of a stable, protective primary parent to x and any future orders should reflect her capacity to continue to be supported in this role. there is nothing to suggest that there should be any change to x’s primary parenting arrangements.
is there an unacceptable risk due to the parties drug use?
conclusions about unacceptable risk
the tendered material
father’s non-attendance at trial
conclusion
associate: dated: 17 october 2022
dated: 17 october 2022
[1]family court of australia and federal circuit court of australia, family violence best practice principles (4th edition, 2016).[2]australian institute of judicial administration, national domestic family violence bench book (june 2022).[3] see for example, oberlin & infeld [2021] famcafc 66[4] heyden & lester [2021] fedcfamc2f 447