last updated: 16 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
zane & ikeda (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1395
orders
amended pursuant to rule 10.13(1)(h) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 on 21 october 2022.
the court orders that:  such bond to be for a period of 24 months, (b) the respondent mother to be of good behaviour for the period of the bond,   the respondent mother to be of good behaviour for the period of the bond,
and it is directed that:  the purpose and effect of order 1, and (b) the consequences that may follow if the respondent mother fails to enter into the bond or having entered into the bond, fails to act in accordance with it.   the consequences that may follow if the respondent mother fails to enter into the bond or having entered into the bond, fails to act in accordance with it.
and the court further orders that:  order 16 of the final orders dated 26 november 2020 be discharged, (b) order 5 of the final orders dated 26 november 2020 insofar as it relates only to the child y born in 2007 be discharged, (c) the child x born in 2010 spend time and communicate with the respondent mother at such times and on such conditions (including but not limited as to frequency, duration and supervision) as determined by the applicant father in writing, such time or communication to be initiated by the applicant father who is to have regard to x’s wishes in making such determination, and (d) the final orders dated 26 november 2020 otherwise remain in full force and effect.   order 5 of the final orders dated 26 november 2020 insofar as it relates only to the child y born in 2007 be discharged, (c) the child x born in 2010 spend time and communicate with the respondent mother at such times and on such conditions (including but not limited as to frequency, duration and supervision) as determined by the applicant father in writing, such time or communication to be initiated by the applicant father who is to have regard to x’s wishes in making such determination, and (d) the final orders dated 26 november 2020 otherwise remain in full force and effect.   the child x born in 2010 spend time and communicate with the respondent mother at such times and on such conditions (including but not limited as to frequency, duration and supervision) as determined by the applicant father in writing, such time or communication to be initiated by the applicant father who is to have regard to x’s wishes in making such determination, and (d) the final orders dated 26 november 2020 otherwise remain in full force and effect.   the final orders dated 26 november 2020 otherwise remain in full force and effect.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
are the contraventions in the less serious or more serious category of contravention?
the theme that emerges from an examination of several of decisions by federal magistrates is that “serious disregard” tends to be found in cases of deliberate, pre-meditated non-compliance with the orders, and continued and protracted breach. in b & w (no 1) [2003] fmcafam 101 (unreported) ryan fm considered whether a mother showed serious disregard for her obligations when she contravened a residence order by not returning her child. ryan fm said:
...the following factors contribute to my comfortable satisfaction that this matter should be dealt with as a stage 3 contravention. i am satisfied that the respondent deliberately intended prior to the end of contact that she would not return the children on 11 january 2003 and would keep them until 13 january 2003. consequently her actions were considered and not impulsive. on 12 january 2003 when the applicant attended her home she had the opportunity to return the children to him without any difficulty to her. when she called the children into the front yard she involved them as direct observers of her refusal to return them to their father. next, the respondent invited jm's assistance to maintain her refusal to comply with the orders on 12 january 2003 with reckless disregard to the likelihood that he would use considerable physical force to the applicant in the presence of the children. she knew some force was likely. at the end of the assault and before she went to queensland she had the opportunity, absent jm's overt and direct influence, to return the children to the applicant or his nominee and did not do so. finally, the respondent kept the children until 1 march 2003. the continuing nature of the breach is a serious issue. for all of these reasons and in spite of the submissions to the contrary made by [the mother’s solicitor], i am satisfied that the respondent has behaved in a way which shows a serious disregard for her obligations under the primary order. because of the objective seriousness of the breach, i am satisfied that this matter cannot be dealt with appropriately under subdivision b...
in h & v [2005] fmcafam 519 brown fm dealt with a father who contravened a residence order when he did not return the children to their mother. brown fm accepted the submission that the father had shown serious disregard for his obligations under the residence order in light of:
...the length of time the children were out of [the mother’s] care [almost 7 weeks], the fact that they were recovered only after the intervention of the police and a recovery order had been made, the fact that [the father] took the children interstate far away from where they habitually lived, and the fact that [the father] was present when the order contravened was made and is well conversant with court procedure and the importance of adherence to orders of the court.
in brown & brown [2005] fmcafam 567 connolly fm dealt with a mother who contravened orders by failing to give contact on two occasions. his honour viewed the circumstances of the breach and the mother’s conduct at the attempted changeover as constituting a serious disregard of her obligations saying:
...the respondent’s behaviour in failing to facilitate the contact between the husband and the children on 16 july 2005 displayed an absolute disregard of the relationship that these children have with their father and her oral evidence given yesterday indicated that she still has that disregard. if the wife’s behaviour were to continue in this vein then there is no doubt that the children’s relationship with their father will be destroyed”
in davis & davis [2006] fmcafam 49 riethmuller fm was satisfied that a mother behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of her obligations under an order for contact. his honour said:
in this matter, the mother has not previously been found to have contravened a court order. however, i am satisfied that in this case the mother has behaved in a way that showed a serious disregard of her obligations under the primary order. i come to this conclusion as a result of the nature of the circumstances attendant upon a number of the contraventions that were the subject of the proceedings, in particular:
her conduct in attending upon a shop...rather than attending for contact handover, her comments during the course of the hearing that she ‘refuses to be a sheep following a court order’, her continued resistance of and attempts to ensure that the father did not obtain a seven-day period of contact as specifically ordered by brown j: see [d & d] [2005] famca 141, her lack of explanation with respect to count 8, despite the fact that she was clearly available later that day, and her lack of any explanation (that has any degree of credibility about it) for the events that occurred with respect to count 1, particularly given that count 1 related to the very first contact period that was ordered by her honour. i also have regard to her demeanour and conduct during the course of the proceedings.
what seems to be the common thread is that the more serious sanctions should only be invoked if there is a persistent disregard of an obligation or a clearly wilful and deliberate attempt to resist carrying out an order. mere passivity on a first breach does not appear to be sufficient to attract the more stringent sanctions set out under subdivision f.
what penalties should be imposed?  that the final parenting orders be varied, (2) that the mother be required to enter into a bond for two years to be of good behaviour and to comply with the orders, and (3) indemnity costs.   that the mother be required to enter into a bond for two years to be of good behaviour and to comply with the orders, and (3) indemnity costs.   indemnity costs.
should the parenting orders be varied?
should the mother be required to enter into a bond?
what costs order should be made?
associate: dated: 17 october 2022
dated: 17 october 2022
[1]zane & ikeda [2022] fedcfamc2f 867