last updated: 23 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
fitzgerald & fitzgerald [2022] fedcfamc2f 1423
orders
the court orders that:  that the children spend time with their father as agreed from time to time between their parents and failing agreement as follows: (b) for two (2) months from the date of the first occasion of the father spending time with the children under this order, for two (2) hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, supervised by a commercial supervision agency agreed upon by the parents and failing agreement by 31 october 2022 by the cheaper of b contact centre or c contact centre (“the agency”), at a venue selected by the father including his place of residence, the first such occasion to occur on the weekend of 5 and 6 november 2022 or such weekend thereafter that the agency is able to commence the supervised occasions, (c) then, for a further three (3) months, for three (3) hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, supervised by the agency, at a venue selected by the father including his place of residence, (d) then, for a further three (3) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (e) then, for a further four (4) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (f) then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   for two (2) months from the date of the first occasion of the father spending time with the children under this order, for two (2) hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, supervised by a commercial supervision agency agreed upon by the parents and failing agreement by 31 october 2022 by the cheaper of b contact centre or c contact centre (“the agency”), at a venue selected by the father including his place of residence, the first such occasion to occur on the weekend of 5 and 6 november 2022 or such weekend thereafter that the agency is able to commence the supervised occasions, (c) then, for a further three (3) months, for three (3) hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, supervised by the agency, at a venue selected by the father including his place of residence, (d) then, for a further three (3) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (e) then, for a further four (4) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (f) then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   then, for a further three (3) months, for three (3) hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, supervised by the agency, at a venue selected by the father including his place of residence, (d) then, for a further three (3) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (e) then, for a further four (4) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (f) then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   then, for a further three (3) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 3.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (e) then, for a further four (4) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (f) then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   then, for a further four (4) months, each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday from 10.00 am until 5.00 pm, as selected by the mother in accordance with these orders, (f) then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   then, for a further three (3) months, with y each alternate weekend from 10.00 am on saturday until 5.00 pm on sunday, (g) then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   then, during school term time, with y each alternate weekend from 6.00 pm on friday until 5.00 pm on sunday,   during the school holidays at the end of term 1 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first sunday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following wednesday, (b) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first sunday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following thursday, (c) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first saturday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following friday, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 from 9.00 am on 2 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 9 january 2025 and from 9.00 am on 16 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 23 january 2025, (e) during school holidays from the end of term 1 in 2026 and thereafter, in accordance with y’s wishes.   during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first sunday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following thursday, (c) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first saturday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following friday, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 from 9.00 am on 2 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 9 january 2025 and from 9.00 am on 16 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 23 january 2025, (e) during school holidays from the end of term 1 in 2026 and thereafter, in accordance with y’s wishes.   during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in 2024 from 9.00 am on the first saturday of the school holiday until 6.00 pm on the following friday, (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 from 9.00 am on 2 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 9 january 2025 and from 9.00 am on 16 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 23 january 2025, (e) during school holidays from the end of term 1 in 2026 and thereafter, in accordance with y’s wishes.   during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 from 9.00 am on 2 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 9 january 2025 and from 9.00 am on 16 january 2025 until 6.00 pm on 23 january 2025, (e) during school holidays from the end of term 1 in 2026 and thereafter, in accordance with y’s wishes.   during school holidays from the end of term 1 in 2026 and thereafter, in accordance with y’s wishes.
reasons for judgment
morley j:
introduction
the proceedings  the father to spend time with the children every third saturday for two hours at the suburb f remand centre with the children to be taken to the prison and supervised by their paternal aunt, ms g or by h support group, if available, (b) the father to have telephone communication with the children each saturday between 8:30am and 9:00am, and (c) for the mother to send the father all school reports, doctor’s reports and other medical information concerning the children.   the father to have telephone communication with the children each saturday between 8:30am and 9:00am, and (c) for the mother to send the father all school reports, doctor’s reports and other medical information concerning the children.   for the mother to send the father all school reports, doctor’s reports and other medical information concerning the children.
since separation the wife has re-partnered and purchased a property jointly with her new partner. the wife's contribution included joint matrimonial funds the subject of these proceedings and a redundancy that derives in part from the period of cohabitation and marriage.   that the children live with their mother, (b) that the parties engage with "j contact centre" to arrange for the father to spend time with the children for two hours each alternate weekend on a saturday or sunday for two months, then for three hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday for two months then for times nominated by the supervision service, and (c) that the father have telephone communication with the children each tuesday and sunday between 7:00pm and 7:30pm for about 15 minutes.   that the parties engage with "j contact centre" to arrange for the father to spend time with the children for two hours each alternate weekend on a saturday or sunday for two months, then for three hours each alternate weekend on saturday or sunday for two months then for times nominated by the supervision service, and (c) that the father have telephone communication with the children each tuesday and sunday between 7:00pm and 7:30pm for about 15 minutes.   that the father have telephone communication with the children each tuesday and sunday between 7:00pm and 7:30pm for about 15 minutes.
the materials relied upon at hearing.  case outline document filed 3 december 2019, (e) amended initiating application filed 20 may 2015, (f) affidavit of the mother sworn or affirmed 8 november 2019 and filed 21 november 2019, (g) updated financial statement of the mother sworn or affirmed and filed 8 october 2016, (h) affidavit of mr q, registered firearms dealer, as an expert valuation witness, affirmed 29 november 2019 and filed 1 december 2019, (i) written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   amended initiating application filed 20 may 2015, (f) affidavit of the mother sworn or affirmed 8 november 2019 and filed 21 november 2019, (g) updated financial statement of the mother sworn or affirmed and filed 8 october 2016, (h) affidavit of mr q, registered firearms dealer, as an expert valuation witness, affirmed 29 november 2019 and filed 1 december 2019, (i) written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   affidavit of the mother sworn or affirmed 8 november 2019 and filed 21 november 2019, (g) updated financial statement of the mother sworn or affirmed and filed 8 october 2016, (h) affidavit of mr q, registered firearms dealer, as an expert valuation witness, affirmed 29 november 2019 and filed 1 december 2019, (i) written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   updated financial statement of the mother sworn or affirmed and filed 8 october 2016, (h) affidavit of mr q, registered firearms dealer, as an expert valuation witness, affirmed 29 november 2019 and filed 1 december 2019, (i) written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   affidavit of mr q, registered firearms dealer, as an expert valuation witness, affirmed 29 november 2019 and filed 1 december 2019, (i) written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   written submissions in relation to the property settlement issues prepared by mr stagg and filed 27 may 2020, and (j) written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   written submissions dated and filed 5 july 2021 prepared by the mother.   exhibit a1 – being her balance sheet, (b) exhibit a2 – being a one page account statement from bank ah in relation to "... legal fund" for the period 2013 to 20 october 2015, and one page account statement from bank ah ltd in relation to "... dormant acc_savings offset" for the period 2013 to 3 november 2015, (c) exhibit a3 – being a supervised contact report by aj contact service for 2 february 2019, and (d) exhibit a4 – being a supervised contact report for 16 september 2018.   exhibit a2 – being a one page account statement from bank ah in relation to "... legal fund" for the period 2013 to 20 october 2015, and one page account statement from bank ah ltd in relation to "... dormant acc_savings offset" for the period 2013 to 3 november 2015, (c) exhibit a3 – being a supervised contact report by aj contact service for 2 february 2019, and (d) exhibit a4 – being a supervised contact report for 16 september 2018.   exhibit a3 – being a supervised contact report by aj contact service for 2 february 2019, and (d) exhibit a4 – being a supervised contact report for 16 september 2018.   exhibit a4 – being a supervised contact report for 16 september 2018.   his response filed 1 april 2015, (b) written submissions filed 5 august 2020, (c) written submissions filed 21 june 2021, and (d) written submissions in response to the icl's written submissions of 21 june 2021, filed 5 july 2021.   written submissions filed 5 august 2020, (c) written submissions filed 21 june 2021, and (d) written submissions in response to the icl's written submissions of 21 june 2021, filed 5 july 2021.   written submissions filed 21 june 2021, and (d) written submissions in response to the icl's written submissions of 21 june 2021, filed 5 july 2021.   written submissions in response to the icl's written submissions of 21 june 2021, filed 5 july 2021.   case outline document prepared by ms shedden and filed 5 december 2019, (b) proposed minutes of orders sought by the icl, (c) written submissions dated 9 february 2021 prepared by mr schroder, and (d) further written submissions filed 21 june 2021 prepared by mr schroder.   proposed minutes of orders sought by the icl, (c) written submissions dated 9 february 2021 prepared by mr schroder, and (d) further written submissions filed 21 june 2021 prepared by mr schroder.   written submissions dated 9 february 2021 prepared by mr schroder, and (d) further written submissions filed 21 june 2021 prepared by mr schroder.   further written submissions filed 21 june 2021 prepared by mr schroder.   exhibit icl1 – being documents produced on subpoena by dr ab, being medical reports relating to the father dated 18 september 2013, 21 august 2015 and 25 june 2016, (b) exhibit icl2 – being medical report by dr ab relating to the father dated 23 june 2013 contained in documents produced on subpoena by the mental health review tribunal, (c) exhibit icl 3 – being a psychiatric report by prof ae dated 9 february 2014 relating to the father contained in documents produced on subpoena by the mental health review tribunal, (d) exhibit icl4 – being all documents produced on subpoena by nsw department of family and community services, (e) exhibit icl5 – being the family report dated 30 july 2019 prepared by family consultant ms p, (f) exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl2 – being medical report by dr ab relating to the father dated 23 june 2013 contained in documents produced on subpoena by the mental health review tribunal, (c) exhibit icl 3 – being a psychiatric report by prof ae dated 9 february 2014 relating to the father contained in documents produced on subpoena by the mental health review tribunal, (d) exhibit icl4 – being all documents produced on subpoena by nsw department of family and community services, (e) exhibit icl5 – being the family report dated 30 july 2019 prepared by family consultant ms p, (f) exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl 3 – being a psychiatric report by prof ae dated 9 february 2014 relating to the father contained in documents produced on subpoena by the mental health review tribunal, (d) exhibit icl4 – being all documents produced on subpoena by nsw department of family and community services, (e) exhibit icl5 – being the family report dated 30 july 2019 prepared by family consultant ms p, (f) exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl4 – being all documents produced on subpoena by nsw department of family and community services, (e) exhibit icl5 – being the family report dated 30 july 2019 prepared by family consultant ms p, (f) exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl5 – being the family report dated 30 july 2019 prepared by family consultant ms p, (f) exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl6 – being the school report for y from suburb n school for 2020 - semester 2, (g) exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl7 – being the school report for x from w school for 2020 - semester 2 - year 7, and (h) exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.   exhibit icl8 – being the costs notice for the icl in relation to the final hearing.
the competing proposals of the parties and the icl.  that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children and all daily decisions regarding the care and development of the children. such issues include but are not limited to the children’s education, religious and cultural upbringing, health management, living arrangements and holidays. [2] that the children live with their mother. [3] that any contact time between the children and the father shall be at the discretion of the mother and that any and all such contacts shall occur in accordance with the following: that contact shall be supervised by an agreed third party who shall be responsible for the care and well-being of the children during the visit, and that contact time and duration be agreed in writing prior to the visit commencing. [4] that the children’s passports be returned to the mother and will be held by the mother. [5] that each party shall be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other party to all property and chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in their possession at the date of the making of these orders and that for this purpose bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the person whose name appears on the banks record thereof, insurance policies become the sole property of the person in whose name the policy stands as owner. [6] that superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlements. [7] each party shall be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders. [8] except as provided for in these orders, each party be and is solely liable for any debt or debts standing in their name to the exclusion of the other party, as at the date of the making of these orders.   that the matrimonial property pool be divided as to 60% to the mother and 40% to the father. [2] that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children but that she advise the father of any decision needing to be made, consult the father and take his views into account. [3] that the children spend time with and communicate with their father: every second weekend from 5 pm on friday to 4 pm on sunday, during the week, where the children are not spending time with the father on the weekend, from 4 pm to 8:30 pm on wednesday evening, for the first half of school holidays from 5 pm on the day of the end of the school term to 5 pm on the day at the end of the first half of the school holidays, from 9 am on saturday to 5 pm on sunday on father’s day weekend, if the children are not otherwise spending time with the father, on the children’s birthdays and the father’s birthday from 9 am to 12 pm where the birthday occurs on a weekend and from 5 pm to 8:30 pm where the birthday occurs on a week day, by telephone between 8 am and 8:30 am every monday and friday and between 9 am and 10 am on saturday of the weekend the children are not spending time with their father. [4] that the father’s alternate weekend time with the children under 3(i) is suspended with a weekend falls on mother’s day. [5] that the father’s school holiday time with the children is suspended from 12 noon on good friday to 5 pm on easter saturday, from 12 noon on christmas day to 12 noon on 27 december and from 12 noon to 5 pm on the children’s and the mothers birthdays should they fall during the first half of the school holidays. [6] that each of the parents: keep each other informed all times of their mobile telephone number, keep each other informed at all times of the name and address of any treating general practitioner that comes into contact with the children, inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any injury or illness affecting the children which requires medical or hospital attention, provide each other with copies of all letters, reports, brochures, notices and other documents received from the school and/or care facilities attended by either or both of the children within 48 hours of receipt of same, and confer about the treatment or care decisions required with respect to [x]’s condition. [7] that neither the mother nor the father will enrol the children in extra-curricular activities, sports, or arrange or agree to any other event for the children, including periods of travel which may occur during residence and/or time spent as enjoyed by the other parent, other than with the written consent of the other parent. [8] that the mother and the father are entitled to attend the school events to which parents are invited to attend such as parent/teacher interviews, school concerts, assemblies, prize-giving and the like. [9] that the mother and the father do all acts and sign all documents to bring the children up in the christian faith. [10] that where the mother or the father wishes to travel with the children, then the parent provide the other parent: a minimum of 72 hours notice of the parents’ intention to take the children out of the greater sydney area but within the state of new south wales, a minimum of 7 days written notice of the parents’ intention to take the children out of the state of new south wales, and a detailed itinerary of where the parent and the children are travelling, including telephone contact numbers for the places they will be staying.   that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children. [2] that the children live with their mother. [3] that the children not spend time with the father save and except that the father shall be entitled to see the children on one occasion every two months, as organised with the mother, supervised by an outside agency nominated by the mother, such as [ak contact centre] for a duration not to exceed three hours on a day nominated by the mother, paid for by the father, the first such occasion to be two months from the date of these orders. [4] that the father be at liberty to send the children’s residential address cards, and gifts on special occasions to the children including but not necessarily limited to christmas and each child on their respective birthdays. [5] that the mother is to provide any letters gifts or cards sent by the father to such of the children and/or child in a timely manner following receipt of such item(s). [6] that in the event that either child requires a passport to travel internationally in accordance with these orders then the children are permitted to travel internationally, and without the need for the consent of the father to be provided with respect to the issuing of a passport to the children. [7] that the mother shall be the only person with parental responsibility of [sic] the children for the purposes of applying for, and being issued with, an australian passport for the children. [8] that the parents, on a without admissions basis, are restrained from: denigrating the other party or any member of the other party’s household in the presence of the children, and discussing the court proceedings with the children.
the evidence  the father received $43,180 from the proceeds of sale of the ax street, suburb v property by payment of legal fees for his criminal matters, retained a bank account with a credit balance of $2,134, motorcycles, carbon fibre bicycles and a trailer with a collective value of $5,520, household goods and tools as described in paragraph 128 the mother’s trial affidavit valued at $5,000 and his then superannuation entitlements valued at $76,414, being a total of $132,248. the mother contends that consideration in this regard should also be given to the firearms parts and ammunition legally held by the father at the time of his arrest that were lost to the matrimonial property pool by confiscation in consequence of the father's offences. the mother relies upon the affidavit of mr q, a registered firearms dealer and valuer of firearms, who was appointed as a single court expert by the parties jointly by a letter of 8 february 2019 to value firearms, componentry and accessories as described on a list provided with the joint letter of instructions. mr q provided a valuation of $40,750 as at 21 march 2019. mr q did not view the items in specie, but worked from the list provided and photographs of some of the items, (b) the mother received $119,000 from the proceeds of sale of the ax street, suburb v property, retained bank accounts with credit balances totalling $20,750, household goods valued at $5,000 and superannuation entitlements at that time valued at $74,470. the mother remained liable for a credit card debt in her name of $1,500 and the balance of a novated car lease with a debit balance of $19,650, giving her a net value received of $198,070.   the mother received $119,000 from the proceeds of sale of the ax street, suburb v property, retained bank accounts with credit balances totalling $20,750, household goods valued at $5,000 and superannuation entitlements at that time valued at $74,470. the mother remained liable for a credit card debt in her name of $1,500 and the balance of a novated car lease with a debit balance of $19,650, giving her a net value received of $198,070.   on one occasion the mother returned home to find the bathroom door "off its hinges" and the father said to her words to the effect of "x shit her pants, i grabbed her by her ankles and kicked the bathroom door open, put her in the shower and hosed her off." i cannot find that this is an incident of family violence as damage to the door may have been caused by reactions of the father to his circumstances rather than anger, malice or intent to damage property. (b) on an occasion when the mother advised the father she would not be coming home from work early she "heard a noise" and on her return from work "saw a large hole in a wall and the father said words to the effect of, "you wouldn't come home. i threw the phone at the wall." as described by the mother, this incident constitutes family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act. (c) on an occasion when the mother advised the father that she would not be home from work early, she received:   on an occasion when the mother advised the father she would not be coming home from work early she "heard a noise" and on her return from work "saw a large hole in a wall and the father said words to the effect of, "you wouldn't come home. i threw the phone at the wall." as described by the mother, this incident constitutes family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act. (c) on an occasion when the mother advised the father that she would not be home from work early, she received:   on an occasion when the mother advised the father that she would not be home from work early, she received:
a further telephone call from the father who said to me words to the effect: "you must come home now. i smashed the window and i need you to come home and look after [x] while i fix it up.
i cannot find that this constitutes an act of family violence by the father as there is no evidence from the mother or otherwise as to how the window came to be broken, it could have been accidental.
daddy said mummy has had us for 3 three years so when daddy gets out of prison it will be his turn and we will live with him...daddy said when he gets out, it will be his turn to have us and we will go with him to live on a big farm with lots of animals.   and [y] appeared to be excited and puzzled by the unusual gift...although [y] did not seem concerned about taking the [pet] home, [x] stated continually, "i can't keep him." [mr fitzgerald] reassured her she could keep the [pet]...[x] asked [mr fitzgerald] how she was supposed to get the [pet] home. [mr fitzgerald] replied, "it's okay, he'll sit in the car."...[x] sat with the [pet] and [mr fitzgerald] told her, "he thinks you're his mum." [x] replied, "i don't want to be his mum."...[x] stated, "mum is not going to be happy." [mr fitzgerald] assured [x] that [ms fitzgerald] will be angry with him not [x]. [mr fitzgerald] stated, "if she is not happy she can always ring me."... [x] stated, "mummy is going to freak out when she sees the [pet]." [mr fitzgerald] again reassured [x] by saying, "she might freak out to start with, but she'll be alright." [x] did not appear to be reassured by this comment...[x] appeared to become more concerned about what's going to happen to the [pet]. [x] checked with [mr fitzgerald] saying, "are you going to leave the [pet] with us?" [mr fitzgerald] replied, "yes", then stated, "i can predict what's going to happen and you will hear daddy laughing all the way to his place."...[x] asked [mr fitzgerald] if he had a towel in the car, [mr fitzgerald] asked why, and [x] stated, "because he is going to piss all over the car." [mr fitzgerald] responded by saying, "well guess what, it's not my car" and then laughed."   fitzgerald] told [x] that [mr d] and mum had cost him a lot of money and he had spent about one hundred thousand dollars so he could see his kids. [x] then told [mr fitzgerald] she would only like to see him once a month. [mr fitzgerald] replied, "really, once a month. do you want me to go now, we can get mum back here now if you like". [mr fitzgerald] then continued and said, "i won't call any more, i will do whatever you want". "daddy is sick of bashing his head against a brick wall".
the report writer carefully noted that the father's voice did not indicate that he was angry or accusative of the children. the report then continued:   fitzgerald] said that everything he wanted to do with [x] and [y] is stopped by [ms fitzgerald]. [y] replied, "mummy thinks it's a bad idea.” [mr fitzgerald] then said, "this is not fun, we don't get to have any fun. i'm not able to take you's anywhere and teach you's things, because your mum won't let me. i'm sick of playing silly buggers. it's time you started knowing what's going on, you're old enough now". [x] replied, "well let's have fun while we can with the time that's left"."
the father then said:
how do you think dad feels having to have supervised visits? it's rubbish. we can't have fun, we can't have conversation. i want to take care of you and [y], i'm your dad. if something happens i want to tell you about it. i can only call you once a week and then i get fifteen minutes. there is no reason why you kids can't come and spend time with me, but your mother won't let you.   fitzgerald] decided to vent at [x] about [y]'s behaviour and how [ms fitzgerald] should be talking to me about [y]'s behaviour. the supervisor reminded [mr fitzgerald] to please change the topic and he did so.
the report gave no detail of what the supervisor considered amounted to the father venting at x.
that the time he currently spends with the children is "excellent". he said that there has never been any problems during his time with the children. he denies that he has ever been frustrated with the children or said anything inappropriate to them, or that he probes them for information.
those assertions by the father to the family report writer are demonstrably incorrect in view of the evidence contained in the supervised contact reports that are exhibits a3, a4, and r4.   d] claims that [mr fitzgerald] was the one who began to verbally abuse him and that [mr fitzgerald] picked [y] up and purposefully elbowed [mr d] in the face while doing so, and [mr d] hit [mr fitzgerald] in response.
the crown concedes, and i accept that the offences were not for any purpose extending to other crime including the provision of those items to others in the community. he had these items, i find, because he wanted to possess them, reflecting his personality, including his obsession and compulsion and perfectionist personality, and his evolving deterioration in his mental health.
did not describe or present with the full syndrome of hypomania, which is required to make a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, and he denied actually experiencing symptoms of psychotic illness, and he put his reported symptoms down to confusion caused by insomnia and sensory deprivation.
the report concludes with this paragraph:   fitzgerald] carries a risk of further episodes of depression, because of the severity of his previous episode and the effect of personality traits that convey an increased vulnerability to becoming depressed. however, he appeared able to recognise symptoms of depression and seek treatment if it became necessary, and was not thought to require any treatment at this stage.
the family report and the family consultant’s evidence
the co-parenting relationship appears to be extremely damaged. it appears that there is currently no communication between the parents and, significantly, it appears that there is a significant lack of trust between the parents.   said that she would be happy to spend more time with her father, but only a few more hours. she said that she would feel safe to spend time with him outside of the contact centre. [x]'s only concern was that her father may ask her questions that she did not like. she said she does not want to spend overnight time with her father because she likes sleeping at her own home.
the children's views about [spending more time with their father] and their father may have been influenced by their mother and [mr d], as the children said that their mother and [mr d] have said things about [mr fitzgerald] that may have cast him in a negative light.
children who are exposed to conflict between the parents can be distressed by the conflict and this can have a negative impact on their development. children who are exposed to significant parental conflict can also be vulnerable to emotional problems and mental health issues.
she said that she does not know what [mr fitzgerald] is capable of. she said that she has some fears that, if the children were to spend unsupervised time with him, he may try to take children from her and said that she has even had some worries at times about the possibility that he could harm the children.
it will be important for the court to scrutinise [mr fitzgerald]'s health status before orders are made for unsupervised time" and in paragraph 82 that "given the concerns raised about [mr fitzgerald]'s alleged abnormal behaviour, and also considering that [mr fitzgerald] has been diagnosed with ptsd and reportedly suffered from significant depression while incarcerated, it may be necessary that further information be obtained about [mr fitzgerald]'s current mental health and the potential impact it could have on the children. as such, it may be advisable that [mr fitzgerald] have a mental health assessment by a mental health expert.
no such assessment was available at the hearing, but there has also been nothing past the final report of dr ab dated 25 june 2016 in the evidence that indicates that the father has had any relapse of his mental health issues.
the risk of the children being exposed to conflict and inappropriate parental behaviour is likely to be reduced if the children lived primarily with their mother and spend block periods of more limited time with their father, for example, alternate weekends, or only one or two days during the school week.
in context, that opinion is expressed to address circumstances where the court has determined that there is no unacceptable risk to the children in spending such time with their father.
not all contact with parents has to be good contact. if children have no contact with a parent, especially as they reach their teenage years and perhaps conflict with their carer parent about things, they begin to think the other parent may be a better option and begin to idolise the other parent. if these children have no contact with their father, knowing that they have fun when they are spending time with him, it may grieve them if they have no contact with their father. they may start to romanticise their father and that can lead to trouble in their relationship their mother. the impression i got from the father was that he would be very permissive if the children say they want to live with him. if time with the father needs to be supervised then an ongoing regime of two hours at a children's contact centre is unfulfilling for the children.   y said that the father is a "bad man", as his mother and mr d told him and that his father had "done something bad", (b) y's stated reason for not wanting to spend more time with his father without supervision "was that his mother said that he cannot go to his father's and that he needs his mother and mr d to keep him safe", and (c) x told the report writer that "she believes that he has been "mean" to her mother". the father suggested to the report writer that such material strongly indicated that the children had been exposed to negative comments by the mother and mr d about the father in the face of the then existing interim order prohibiting denigration by a parent of the other parent in the presence of the children.   y's stated reason for not wanting to spend more time with his father without supervision "was that his mother said that he cannot go to his father's and that he needs his mother and mr d to keep him safe", and (c) x told the report writer that "she believes that he has been "mean" to her mother". the father suggested to the report writer that such material strongly indicated that the children had been exposed to negative comments by the mother and mr d about the father in the face of the then existing interim order prohibiting denigration by a parent of the other parent in the presence of the children.   x told the report writer that "she believes that he has been "mean" to her mother". the father suggested to the report writer that such material strongly indicated that the children had been exposed to negative comments by the mother and mr d about the father in the face of the then existing interim order prohibiting denigration by a parent of the other parent in the presence of the children.
the father suggested to the report writer that such material strongly indicated that the children had been exposed to negative comments by the mother and mr d about the father in the face of the then existing interim order prohibiting denigration by a parent of the other parent in the presence of the children.
the submissions  the father being fixated on the mother and mr d and holding the mother responsible for his incarceration, (b) the father’s maintenance of his assertions that his criminal actions were under direction of undercover police and due to threats made him to behave unlawfully when those assertions were tested in evidence at his sentencing hearing and dismissed by the presiding judge as lies, (c) the alternative possibility that the threats described by the father are true – that he did not lie – and in consequence the children “are clearly at risk in his care”, (d) the father’s “unresolved mental health issues” and his assertion that he does not need assistance, (e) the father displaying “no boundaries and a contempt of court orders in relation to supervised time by attending the school, to the detriment of the children’s emotional well-being, his fixation on proving that mr d was the aggressor and his lack of insight in relation to the fact that he chose to attend”, (f) his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   the father’s maintenance of his assertions that his criminal actions were under direction of undercover police and due to threats made him to behave unlawfully when those assertions were tested in evidence at his sentencing hearing and dismissed by the presiding judge as lies, (c) the alternative possibility that the threats described by the father are true – that he did not lie – and in consequence the children “are clearly at risk in his care”, (d) the father’s “unresolved mental health issues” and his assertion that he does not need assistance, (e) the father displaying “no boundaries and a contempt of court orders in relation to supervised time by attending the school, to the detriment of the children’s emotional well-being, his fixation on proving that mr d was the aggressor and his lack of insight in relation to the fact that he chose to attend”, (f) his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   the alternative possibility that the threats described by the father are true – that he did not lie – and in consequence the children “are clearly at risk in his care”, (d) the father’s “unresolved mental health issues” and his assertion that he does not need assistance, (e) the father displaying “no boundaries and a contempt of court orders in relation to supervised time by attending the school, to the detriment of the children’s emotional well-being, his fixation on proving that mr d was the aggressor and his lack of insight in relation to the fact that he chose to attend”, (f) his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   the father’s “unresolved mental health issues” and his assertion that he does not need assistance, (e) the father displaying “no boundaries and a contempt of court orders in relation to supervised time by attending the school, to the detriment of the children’s emotional well-being, his fixation on proving that mr d was the aggressor and his lack of insight in relation to the fact that he chose to attend”, (f) his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   the father displaying “no boundaries and a contempt of court orders in relation to supervised time by attending the school, to the detriment of the children’s emotional well-being, his fixation on proving that mr d was the aggressor and his lack of insight in relation to the fact that he chose to attend”, (f) his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   his use of his supervised time with the children to harass and intimidate the mother by his questioning of the children and making spurious allegations of sexual misconduct (that being the spa incident) by mr d, so demonstrating that the father is not able to place the children’s needs above his own, (g) “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   “a strong inference that the father has utilised the lengthy [court] process to maintain coercion on the mother, involving the children in protracted litigation throughout the majority of their childhood”, (h) concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   concern in relation to mental health issues regarding the father in consequence of his having been assessed by the mental health review tribunal to be unfit to stand trial on criminal charges, the father’s threats to suicide in prison leading to him being placed in a safe cell, (i) the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   the finding by judge ad in the district court that the father’s perceptions “board on if not extend to grandiose delusions” and that the father’s “delusional style of behaviour” extended during these proceedings, with counsel for the icl giving an example of the father’s assertion in an affidavit [not in evidence] from february 2018 that “i have re-integrated well into public life” despite his assertion that he suffered from ptsd arising from witnessing a colleague being severely injured in an explosion in 2000, and (j) “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”   “the court would accept the mother as a witness of truth where she asserts the particulars of family violence in paragraph 25 of her affidavit. these would have been terrifying.”
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[5] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[6]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[6]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition. [8]   assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (2) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled 'unacceptable risk - a return to basics' the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term 'unacceptable risk'. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) "risk" is referred to as an all-embracing term, a "general" finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of "ipso facto consequences" for the orders made. yet, "risk" is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions:  what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, 'psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law' (2008) 38 family law 569). ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise "risk" may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as "serious", "grave", "real", "appreciable" and "unacceptable".  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty's statement (which also has echoes in the english author's statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court's formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
section 60cc – the primary considerations  the father is fixated upon the mother and upon her relationship with mr d and his belief that the mother and/or mr d may have been involved in the giving of information leading to his original arrest in 2013, leading to the father having an attitude of animosity towards the mother and mr d, (b) the father’s persistence in maintaining his assertions about others being involved in and the cause of his criminal acts in relation to firearms that led to his convictions, to the extent that the father is asserted to be delusional on an ongoing basis, (c) the possibility that if the father’s assertions about others being involved in and the cause of his criminal acts in relation to firearms are not fabrications or delusions of the father then the father may be at risk from third parties seeking revenge against him - revenge for reasons not specified in the evidence - or seeking to do him harm for some reason and in consequence the children being at risk of harm also if in his care, (d) the father’s propensity to disobey court orders as shown by his attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018, giving occasion to the incident between himself and mr d, (e) the father’s persistence in questioning the children about the mother to x’s evident distress during supervised occasions of spending time, his conduct in complaining to the children about the unfairness of the restrictions on his time with the children, his comments that can have the effect of making the children feel blamed for the circumstances of the time they spend with the father, and his ill-considered actions aimed at harassing the mother and/or mr d, such as the pet gift incident – all of which would certainly have the effect of causing the children confusion and distress, (f) the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the father’s persistence in maintaining his assertions about others being involved in and the cause of his criminal acts in relation to firearms that led to his convictions, to the extent that the father is asserted to be delusional on an ongoing basis, (c) the possibility that if the father’s assertions about others being involved in and the cause of his criminal acts in relation to firearms are not fabrications or delusions of the father then the father may be at risk from third parties seeking revenge against him - revenge for reasons not specified in the evidence - or seeking to do him harm for some reason and in consequence the children being at risk of harm also if in his care, (d) the father’s propensity to disobey court orders as shown by his attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018, giving occasion to the incident between himself and mr d, (e) the father’s persistence in questioning the children about the mother to x’s evident distress during supervised occasions of spending time, his conduct in complaining to the children about the unfairness of the restrictions on his time with the children, his comments that can have the effect of making the children feel blamed for the circumstances of the time they spend with the father, and his ill-considered actions aimed at harassing the mother and/or mr d, such as the pet gift incident – all of which would certainly have the effect of causing the children confusion and distress, (f) the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the possibility that if the father’s assertions about others being involved in and the cause of his criminal acts in relation to firearms are not fabrications or delusions of the father then the father may be at risk from third parties seeking revenge against him - revenge for reasons not specified in the evidence - or seeking to do him harm for some reason and in consequence the children being at risk of harm also if in his care, (d) the father’s propensity to disobey court orders as shown by his attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018, giving occasion to the incident between himself and mr d, (e) the father’s persistence in questioning the children about the mother to x’s evident distress during supervised occasions of spending time, his conduct in complaining to the children about the unfairness of the restrictions on his time with the children, his comments that can have the effect of making the children feel blamed for the circumstances of the time they spend with the father, and his ill-considered actions aimed at harassing the mother and/or mr d, such as the pet gift incident – all of which would certainly have the effect of causing the children confusion and distress, (f) the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the father’s propensity to disobey court orders as shown by his attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018, giving occasion to the incident between himself and mr d, (e) the father’s persistence in questioning the children about the mother to x’s evident distress during supervised occasions of spending time, his conduct in complaining to the children about the unfairness of the restrictions on his time with the children, his comments that can have the effect of making the children feel blamed for the circumstances of the time they spend with the father, and his ill-considered actions aimed at harassing the mother and/or mr d, such as the pet gift incident – all of which would certainly have the effect of causing the children confusion and distress, (f) the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the father’s persistence in questioning the children about the mother to x’s evident distress during supervised occasions of spending time, his conduct in complaining to the children about the unfairness of the restrictions on his time with the children, his comments that can have the effect of making the children feel blamed for the circumstances of the time they spend with the father, and his ill-considered actions aimed at harassing the mother and/or mr d, such as the pet gift incident – all of which would certainly have the effect of causing the children confusion and distress, (f) the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the particular effect of spending time with the father on the children in terms of their special needs, both diagnosed with adhd and x with autism level i and general anxiety disorder, in circumstances where the children have had very limited time with the father since 2013 and no time or communication whatsoever with the father since 2019, x now being 15 years of age and y 11 years of age, (g) the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the father’s mental health issues, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder and diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, the father’s suicidal ideation in the early years of his incarceration, (h) family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   family violence perpetrated by the father possibly in the presence of x when between two and five years of age, and coming to the knowledge of the mother shortly thereafter, (i) the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the possibility that the father’s perception of reality and thinking is somewhat skewed, (j) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may try to take the children away from her by abducting them and keeping them from her contrary to orders, (k) the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the possibility referred to by the mother that the father may physically harm the children so as to get back at the mother, and (l) the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   the possible neglect of the children due to an inability on the father’s part to adequately care for them.   where the father was demonstrably fixated upon what he perceived as the unfairness of the breakdown of his relationship with the mother and his distress and even anger at the mother’s relationship with mr d up to and including at least the time of his second arrest in 2019, i find that there is nothing in the evidence to demonstrate that the father has maintained that fixation, animosity, distress or anger to the end of the hearing, but, rather, that he has now moved on in his life, formed a new relationship with ms z (though the full nature and extent of that relationship is not in the evidence) and is more able to concentrate upon his relationship with his children, if he is enabled by orders to have such, without negatively impacting their best interests by involving them in the parental and adult relationships as he has done in the past. nevertheless, past conduct should always be carefully considered as a warning call to the possibility of relapse into behaviours and such a relapse would represent an unacceptable risk to the children. i find, however, that such an unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders going to restrictions on the father's conduct in the presence or hearing of the children during any time he may spend with them and, further, can be mitigated by orders providing for any time that may be spent between the father and the children being supervised by a commercial agency for a suitable period of time so that a report would be available of any conduct by the father while with the children motivated or caused by his past animosities and so forth. i say that in the context of the father having shown that whilst in the grip of such feelings he was unable to restrain himself from venting in the presence and hearing of the children despite being under close supervision and subject to reports. (b) i have already made findings about the father's maintenance of his fabricated excuses for his criminal actions and i do not find that the fact that the father maintained those stories past his sentencing hearing and up to at least the interview for the family report are indicative of either delusional beliefs or representative of a risk to the children. the father did not present formal evidence in chief by himself on final hearing and he was not given an opportunity during cross examination to indicate if he maintained his self-excusing stories in relation to his criminal activities - that is certainly absolutely no criticism of counsel appearing for the mother or the icl as it is a valid forensic decision to not use cross examination as offering the other party a chance to give evidence helpful to that party's case - though one may assume that he did maintain them given that he voiced them to the report writer in may 2019 and the oral evidence of the father occurred during the december 2019 days of the final hearing. i cannot find that the father's maintenance of those stories is delusional, for the reason i have already given going to the father's use of those stories for originally defence and later in mitigation - unsuccessfully. (c) i find that there is absolutely no credible evidence, and it is virtually contrary to the case presented for the mother and the icl, that the father was involved with third persons in relation to his criminal activities. the assertion that he was, was made only by the father, was denied by the crown in the prosecution case, and was found to be a fabrication by judge ad. it is also necessarily fading from relevance with the passing of nine years and nothing emerging or happening to give it any credence whatsoever. accordingly, there is no risk to the children in the care of the father, supervised or otherwise, from third parties seeking to do the father harm for reasons associated with his criminal activities. (d) the father's attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018 was contrary to orders, there being interim orders current at that time that the children live with their mother and defining the time that the children would spend with their father. it is not explicit that the father intended to approach the children on the day, with his approach to y coming at the end of the event when the father was leaving. there is however, another basis to assert that the father's disobedience of orders can cause risk to the children, and that is his disobedience of the interim non-denigration order evidenced in the comments he made to, and in the hearing of, the children as reported in the aj contact service supervision reports. however, that specific risk to the children of hearing the father make comments derogatory or critical of their mother will be addressed more directly in the next consideration of risk. i find that the one occasion of the father attending the school concert does not establish a risk to the best interests of the children that the father will disobey final orders by approaching or seeking to take them into his care outside of any time that may be allowed by such orders. i find that one occasion of either conscious or technical disobedience with the interim orders is not sufficient to ground a risk. (e) there is certainly a risk, an unacceptable risk, to the children in consequence of the father's proven propensity in the past to make wholly ill-considered and inappropriate comments to, and in the hearing of, the children and in particular, comments derogatory and critical of the mother and mr d, comments complaining of the restricted circumstances of time between the children and the father and harassing of the mother when conveyed to her. in this regard i add in actions by the father in the nature of the pet gift incident. the unacceptable risk is that the father's behaviours in that regard would cause the children distress and confusion, which are particularly harmful in the case of x with her autism condition, and present a danger of harmful impact on the relationship of the children with their mother and with mr d who is, whether the father likes it or not being described as such, certainly a parent figure for the children far more present in their lives since 2014 than the father, at the father's own fault. i find that such unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders of the same nature as those referred to in (a) above and for the same reasons. (f) there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   i have already made findings about the father's maintenance of his fabricated excuses for his criminal actions and i do not find that the fact that the father maintained those stories past his sentencing hearing and up to at least the interview for the family report are indicative of either delusional beliefs or representative of a risk to the children. the father did not present formal evidence in chief by himself on final hearing and he was not given an opportunity during cross examination to indicate if he maintained his self-excusing stories in relation to his criminal activities - that is certainly absolutely no criticism of counsel appearing for the mother or the icl as it is a valid forensic decision to not use cross examination as offering the other party a chance to give evidence helpful to that party's case - though one may assume that he did maintain them given that he voiced them to the report writer in may 2019 and the oral evidence of the father occurred during the december 2019 days of the final hearing. i cannot find that the father's maintenance of those stories is delusional, for the reason i have already given going to the father's use of those stories for originally defence and later in mitigation - unsuccessfully. (c) i find that there is absolutely no credible evidence, and it is virtually contrary to the case presented for the mother and the icl, that the father was involved with third persons in relation to his criminal activities. the assertion that he was, was made only by the father, was denied by the crown in the prosecution case, and was found to be a fabrication by judge ad. it is also necessarily fading from relevance with the passing of nine years and nothing emerging or happening to give it any credence whatsoever. accordingly, there is no risk to the children in the care of the father, supervised or otherwise, from third parties seeking to do the father harm for reasons associated with his criminal activities. (d) the father's attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018 was contrary to orders, there being interim orders current at that time that the children live with their mother and defining the time that the children would spend with their father. it is not explicit that the father intended to approach the children on the day, with his approach to y coming at the end of the event when the father was leaving. there is however, another basis to assert that the father's disobedience of orders can cause risk to the children, and that is his disobedience of the interim non-denigration order evidenced in the comments he made to, and in the hearing of, the children as reported in the aj contact service supervision reports. however, that specific risk to the children of hearing the father make comments derogatory or critical of their mother will be addressed more directly in the next consideration of risk. i find that the one occasion of the father attending the school concert does not establish a risk to the best interests of the children that the father will disobey final orders by approaching or seeking to take them into his care outside of any time that may be allowed by such orders. i find that one occasion of either conscious or technical disobedience with the interim orders is not sufficient to ground a risk. (e) there is certainly a risk, an unacceptable risk, to the children in consequence of the father's proven propensity in the past to make wholly ill-considered and inappropriate comments to, and in the hearing of, the children and in particular, comments derogatory and critical of the mother and mr d, comments complaining of the restricted circumstances of time between the children and the father and harassing of the mother when conveyed to her. in this regard i add in actions by the father in the nature of the pet gift incident. the unacceptable risk is that the father's behaviours in that regard would cause the children distress and confusion, which are particularly harmful in the case of x with her autism condition, and present a danger of harmful impact on the relationship of the children with their mother and with mr d who is, whether the father likes it or not being described as such, certainly a parent figure for the children far more present in their lives since 2014 than the father, at the father's own fault. i find that such unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders of the same nature as those referred to in (a) above and for the same reasons. (f) there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   i find that there is absolutely no credible evidence, and it is virtually contrary to the case presented for the mother and the icl, that the father was involved with third persons in relation to his criminal activities. the assertion that he was, was made only by the father, was denied by the crown in the prosecution case, and was found to be a fabrication by judge ad. it is also necessarily fading from relevance with the passing of nine years and nothing emerging or happening to give it any credence whatsoever. accordingly, there is no risk to the children in the care of the father, supervised or otherwise, from third parties seeking to do the father harm for reasons associated with his criminal activities. (d) the father's attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018 was contrary to orders, there being interim orders current at that time that the children live with their mother and defining the time that the children would spend with their father. it is not explicit that the father intended to approach the children on the day, with his approach to y coming at the end of the event when the father was leaving. there is however, another basis to assert that the father's disobedience of orders can cause risk to the children, and that is his disobedience of the interim non-denigration order evidenced in the comments he made to, and in the hearing of, the children as reported in the aj contact service supervision reports. however, that specific risk to the children of hearing the father make comments derogatory or critical of their mother will be addressed more directly in the next consideration of risk. i find that the one occasion of the father attending the school concert does not establish a risk to the best interests of the children that the father will disobey final orders by approaching or seeking to take them into his care outside of any time that may be allowed by such orders. i find that one occasion of either conscious or technical disobedience with the interim orders is not sufficient to ground a risk. (e) there is certainly a risk, an unacceptable risk, to the children in consequence of the father's proven propensity in the past to make wholly ill-considered and inappropriate comments to, and in the hearing of, the children and in particular, comments derogatory and critical of the mother and mr d, comments complaining of the restricted circumstances of time between the children and the father and harassing of the mother when conveyed to her. in this regard i add in actions by the father in the nature of the pet gift incident. the unacceptable risk is that the father's behaviours in that regard would cause the children distress and confusion, which are particularly harmful in the case of x with her autism condition, and present a danger of harmful impact on the relationship of the children with their mother and with mr d who is, whether the father likes it or not being described as such, certainly a parent figure for the children far more present in their lives since 2014 than the father, at the father's own fault. i find that such unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders of the same nature as those referred to in (a) above and for the same reasons. (f) there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   the father's attendance at the school concert on 25 september 2018 was contrary to orders, there being interim orders current at that time that the children live with their mother and defining the time that the children would spend with their father. it is not explicit that the father intended to approach the children on the day, with his approach to y coming at the end of the event when the father was leaving. there is however, another basis to assert that the father's disobedience of orders can cause risk to the children, and that is his disobedience of the interim non-denigration order evidenced in the comments he made to, and in the hearing of, the children as reported in the aj contact service supervision reports. however, that specific risk to the children of hearing the father make comments derogatory or critical of their mother will be addressed more directly in the next consideration of risk. i find that the one occasion of the father attending the school concert does not establish a risk to the best interests of the children that the father will disobey final orders by approaching or seeking to take them into his care outside of any time that may be allowed by such orders. i find that one occasion of either conscious or technical disobedience with the interim orders is not sufficient to ground a risk. (e) there is certainly a risk, an unacceptable risk, to the children in consequence of the father's proven propensity in the past to make wholly ill-considered and inappropriate comments to, and in the hearing of, the children and in particular, comments derogatory and critical of the mother and mr d, comments complaining of the restricted circumstances of time between the children and the father and harassing of the mother when conveyed to her. in this regard i add in actions by the father in the nature of the pet gift incident. the unacceptable risk is that the father's behaviours in that regard would cause the children distress and confusion, which are particularly harmful in the case of x with her autism condition, and present a danger of harmful impact on the relationship of the children with their mother and with mr d who is, whether the father likes it or not being described as such, certainly a parent figure for the children far more present in their lives since 2014 than the father, at the father's own fault. i find that such unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders of the same nature as those referred to in (a) above and for the same reasons. (f) there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   there is certainly a risk, an unacceptable risk, to the children in consequence of the father's proven propensity in the past to make wholly ill-considered and inappropriate comments to, and in the hearing of, the children and in particular, comments derogatory and critical of the mother and mr d, comments complaining of the restricted circumstances of time between the children and the father and harassing of the mother when conveyed to her. in this regard i add in actions by the father in the nature of the pet gift incident. the unacceptable risk is that the father's behaviours in that regard would cause the children distress and confusion, which are particularly harmful in the case of x with her autism condition, and present a danger of harmful impact on the relationship of the children with their mother and with mr d who is, whether the father likes it or not being described as such, certainly a parent figure for the children far more present in their lives since 2014 than the father, at the father's own fault. i find that such unacceptable risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders of the same nature as those referred to in (a) above and for the same reasons. (f) there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   there is a risk to the children in orders being made that they spend time with their father, supervised or unsupervised, that it may cause them particular stress given their special needs in circumstances where they have spent limited time with their father since 2013, no overnight time and no time without supervision, and no time at all for three years since 2019. both children have special needs and are diagnosed with adhd and x is diagnosed with autism level i, sensory processing disorder and general anxiety disorder. whether or not this risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders is something i must evaluate and determine if i find that it is proper and in the best interests of the children, with those interests as the paramount consideration, to make orders that involve the children spending time with their father, in determining what those orders should be. (g) i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   i have already made sufficient comment upon and findings in relation to the asserted risk issue around the father's mental health issues and i find that whilst there must always be a risk to the children consequent upon the father's diagnosis with major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense that there will always be a possibility of relapse, or the father's post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting behaviours not yet seen (the report writer refers to this in paragraph 81 as "ptsd can also have a serious impact on a person's behaviour") i do not find that such possibility is an unacceptable risk in terms of there being no evidence of the father being detrimentally affected by those mental health issues since he was found fit to plead and stand trial in 2016. (h) i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   i have already made comment that the icl’s submission that the mother's description of family violence in paragraph 25 of her trial affidavit leads to a conclusion that such family violence would have been "terrifying" is not supported by that evidence itself. i find that though the occasion of the father causing a hole in the wall by throwing a telephone is an incident of family violence within the meaning of that term in section 4ab of the act, it is not such as to present a risk now to the children. however, there is another aspect to the father's conduct that is relevant to family violence. the definition of family violence in section 4ab includes behaviour by a person that causes a family member to be fearful. the father's stories to the police about threats being made to the safety of his family by third persons associated with his criminal activity certainly caused the mother to be fearful, though there is no evidence that such fears were communicated to the children so as to cause fear in them. the fear experienced by the mother in consequence of the father's assertions as conveyed to her by police were so severe as to cause her to flee the family home virtually "on the spot" in 2013. i must find that such behaviour by the father in making those assertions, which i find to be unfounded fabrications, was certainly family violence within the definition, but i do not find that that incident family violence presents a current risk to the children in spending time with the father. (i) i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   i find that despite the father's obvious exaggeration of his participation in certain events so as to lead to a suggestion that he is prone to “grandiose delusions”, there is not sufficient evidence for me to find that the father's perception of reality and/or his thinking are "somewhat skewed". i am careful to note that in basing any assessment of risk on such findings, i am consciously engaging in a predictive exercise and not making findings of fact on the balance of probabilities, keeping well in mind the decision of the appellate bench in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. (j) the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   the risk referred to by the mother and reported in the family report that the father may try to or actually take the children away from her by retaining them contrary to orders seems to be based upon: both the mother's perception of the father's animosity toward her and presumed desire to revenge himself upon her for perceived wrongs, and his actions between being confronted by police in 2013 and being arrested on his voluntary surrender at the ax street, suburb v property in 2013 in fleeing and keeping hidden in bushland so as to evade capture whilst a state-wide man-hunt for him was conducted. i find on my evaluation of all of the evidence that there is no such risk to the children in the face of final orders. (k) similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   similarly, and on the same basis, i find that there is no risk to the children that the father may do them harm, deliberate or inadvertent, as a way revenging himself upon the mother or for any other reason. (l) any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.   any assertion that the children are at risk in the care of the father of being neglected or inadequately cared for cannot be founded on predictive conduct based on the father's asserted inabilities in caring for x one day per week between 2009 and 2011, given the paucity of evidence of the father's actual inability at that time and given the children's current ages. rather, any such risk would be more likely to be predicted by the father's lack of experience in caring for the children caused by his almost total absence from their lives except for the period of the aj contact service supervised visits. however, any such risk, which involves additional consideration of parenting capacity, can be mitigated by it being a consideration in framing the scope of any orders in relation to the time the father spends with the children and any conditions affecting that time. given the ages of the children, i do not consider that any such risk is an unacceptable risk, but risk does not have to be an unacceptable risk to be addressed by appropriate orders or a consideration in determining what orders are proper to be made with the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration.
section 60cc - the additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the children’s views.
the nature of the relationship of each of the children with each of their parents and other relevant persons.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children, and to spend time with the children, and to communicate with the children.
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of their parents or from mr d.
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with their father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with their father on a regular basis.
the capacity of each of the children’s parents and mr d to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and of either of the children’s parents, and any other characteristics of each of the children that the court thinks are relevant.
the attitude to the children, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents.
any family violence involving either of the children or a member of the children’s family.
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to either of the children or a member of the children’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter.
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children.
parental responsibility – section 61da.
what orders are proper to be made in relation to the children spending time with and communicating with their father with the children’s interests as the paramount consideration?
the property alteration issue
section 79 of the act  the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in property, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, (b) the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[14]   the existing liabilities of the parties, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, and (c) the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[14]   the rights of the parties, if any, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles and under legislation, in relation to any asserted resources of the parties that may, if it is considered just and equitable to proceed with the property settlement, be taken into account in the court’s consideration of the matters referred to in section 75(2) of the act, to which section 79(4)(e) directs the court’s attention.[14]
in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).[16]   first, “the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing”,[18] (e) second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [19] (f) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[20] (g) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[21]   second, “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b), and (c), and determine the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”, [19] (f) third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[20] (g) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[21]   third, “the court should identify and assess the relevant matters ... (“the other factors”) including...the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant...”,[20] (g) fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[21]   fourth, “the court should ... resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case”.[21]
... indeed, the authorities are consistent in finding that assessing contributions is not an accounting exercise but a holistic one (brandt & brandt [1997] famca 21, (1997) flc 92-758, norbis & norbis (1986) 161 clr 513).[24]  ] as is plain from earlier decisions of this court, regard must be had to the use made of contributions of various types so as to compare the contributions made by each of the parties during the course of, and over the length of, their relationship (see, for example, in the marriage of pierce (1998) flc 92-844) but that is an entirely different proposition to, as it were, causally linking contributions with their asserted financial “product” or “value”. the former recognises that the nature, form and extent of contributions made by each of the parties might differ, the latter suggests that the absence of a causal link counts as no contribution at all. [15] the search for a causal link might be seen to come instinctively to the necessary inquiry and all the more so when regard is had to s 79(4)(a) which refers to financial contributions made “...directly or indirectly...” “...to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property ...” and goes on to also refer to the financial contribution made “...otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property...” the terms of that sub-paragraph might, naturally enough, be seen to suggest a causal link between those contributions and the “financial product” which those contributions of that type are said to have produced. that same requirement might also be seen to suggest that relevant contributions of that type can be seen to be quantifiable – or, at least, conceptualised – in monetary terms, in contradistinction to contributions made pursuant to s 79(4)(c). [16] while that apparent “causal connection” might be seen in s 79(4)(a) (and (b)), no such connection is apparent from the terms of s 79(4)(c), contributions of that latter type are not linked by the words of the sub-paragraph to the “...acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property...” or, indeed, to “property” at all. this is not a legislative oversight, the 1983 amendments to the act which inserted the current s 79(4)(c) were specifically intended, relevantly, to remove any suggestion that there needed to be a causal link between contributions of that type and any particular asset or property. the explanatory memorandum to the family law act amendment bill 1983 provides, at clause 36, that a specific purpose of the re-casting of s 79(4) was, relevantly, to:
... revise sub-section 79(4) to remove the possibility of an interpretation of the sub-section requiring that there be a nexus between a spouse’s contribution and a specific item of property in section 79 proceedings ...[26]
...the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.[28]
as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.[29]
addbacks ] to date, three clear categories of cases have emerged where the court has determined that it is appropriate to notionally add back to the pool of assets, that is, assets that no longer exist. they are: (a) where the parties have expended money on legal fees. in djm v jlm [1998] famca 97, (1998) 23 fam lr 396 the full court said (at 410-411):   where the parties have expended money on legal fees. in djm v jlm [1998] famca 97, (1998) 23 fam lr 396 the full court said (at 410-411):
11.6 for reasons set out in farnell, s 117 provides that each party to proceedings under the family law act shall bear their own costs unless the court otherwise orders. failing to add back monies expended by parties on costs frequently has the effect of defeating the policy of s 117 by permitting the pool of available assets for distribution between the parties to be diminished by any monies that either of the parties have managed to spend on their costs up to the date of trial. we are of the view that the normal approach ought be to add costs already paid back into the pool. whilst there may be cases where that approach is inappropriate, the reasons why it is not taken ought normally be spelt out. (b) where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets. in in marriage of townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505 nicholson cj as he then was with whom fogarty and jordan jj agreed, said (at 509): in my view, what occurred in this case, as i said during the course of argument was, in fact, a premature distribution of a proportion of the matrimonial assets. what the husband did was to distribute to himself an asset in which the wife had a legitimate interest. in such circumstances i consider that it would be unjust in the extreme to simply treat such conduct by the husband as a matter to which regard should be had under section 75(2). it seems to me that the husband has had the benefit of that money. had he retained, for example, the taxi licence instead of selling it, that would have been brought into account as an item of property which would have been dealt with in the same way as the remaining items of property in this case. accordingly, i am of the view that the correct way in which to deal with the husband’s receipt of those moneys is to bring them into the pool of assets on a notional basis and make a distribution accordingly. (c) in the circumstances outlined by baker j in in marriage of kowaliw [1981] famca 70, [1981] flc 91-092 at 76,644: as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets. in in marriage of townsend [1994] famca 144, (1994) 18 fam lr 505 nicholson cj as he then was with whom fogarty and jordan jj agreed, said (at 509):   in the circumstances outlined by baker j in in marriage of kowaliw [1981] famca 70, [1981] flc 91-092 at 76,644: as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.
conduct of the kind referred to in para. (a) and (b) above having economic consequences is clearly in my view relevant under sec 75(2)(o) to applications for settlement of property instituted under the provisions of sec 79.  ] as the full court said in browne v green [1999] famca 1483, [1999] flc 92-873 at 86,360:  ] we agree with her honour that the principles stated by baker j in kowaliw certainly do not constitute any form of fixed code. they are no more than guidelines for use in the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction conferred by s 79 of the family law act 1975. nevertheless, they have over the considerable period of time since they were enunciated, become a well accepted guideline in this jurisdiction — a guideline the use of which assists in the achievement of the important goal of consistency within the jurisdiction.[32]
where one party unilaterally distributes to themselves property which no longer exists and which, but for that premature distribution, would be susceptible to section 79 orders, justice and equity may require the court to take account of the dissipated property by adding it back as against the dissipating party (townsend & townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569). whether that should occur, or whether the dissipation should be taken into account pursuant to section 75(2)(o), or indeed at all, are all matters requiring the exercise of a trial judge’s discretion (in the marriage of ad and ac townsend [1994] famca 144, (1995) flc 92-569, omacini & omacini, cerini & cerini [1998] famca 143).[34]  7] at [50] to [65] of the first reasons under the heading “add-backs,” the trial judge held that $25,000 withdrawn by the husband from the parties’ bank accounts post-separation should be added back into the pool of assets, and further concluded that $50,000 which the husband had, post-separation, paid to his parents, purportedly in repayment of a loan from them, should also be added back. [138] there is no error committed per se in adjusting the parties’ actual property interests by a calculation involving notionally adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the parties. we reject any suggestion that the decision of bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 – or, more particularly, the decision of the high court in stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 - is authority for any necessary contrary solution. some statements made by the high court may lead to the conclusion that references to “notional property” as have been referred to in decisions of this court and at first instance may need to be reconsidered. [139] the decisions referred to seek to remind the court that, however the exercise of discretion might seek to deal with property that is said to be the subject of “add back”, proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property, and the question posed by s 79(2) as a separate inquiry from any adjustment to property interests by reference to s 79(4) if a consideration of s 79(2) reveals that it is just and equitable to alter existing interests in property.[35]  ] we observe that “notional property”, which is sometimes “added back” to a list of assets to account for the unilateral disposal of assets, is unlikely to constitute “property of the parties to the marriage or either of them”, and thus is not amenable to alteration under section 79. it is important to deal with such disposals carefully, recognising the assets no longer exist, but that the disposal of them forms part of the history of the marriage – and potentially an important part. as the question does not arise here, we need say nothing more on this topic, save to note that section 79(4) and in particular section 75(2)(o) gives ample scope to ensure a just and equitable outcome when dealing with the unilateral disposal of property.[36]  ] ... the way in which non-existent property is to be treated remains a matter for judicial discretion (see townsend & townsend flc 92-569) ... the provision of an agreed balance sheet providing for the inclusion of notional property would not mandate his honour’s acceptance of it or that he would treat the notional property in the same way as had the parties.[37]  0] ... a court cannot create property for the purposes of alteration. section 79 empowers a court to alter interests of the parties to the proceedings in property. property is defined in section 4 of the act to mean:
... [in] relation to the parties to a marriage or either of them – means property to which those parties are, or that party is, as the case may be, entitled, whether in possession or reversion.  1] as french cj said in kennon & spry [2008] hca 56, (2008) 238 clr 366 at 390, “‘property’ in section 79 is to be read as part of the collocation ‘property of the parties to the marriage’”. it is to be read widely and conformably with the purposes of the act. gummow and hayne jj said at 397 that “the term ‘property’ is not a term of art with one specific and precise meaning”. the purpose of the act as set out in section 79(1) is to alter interests in property to which a party has an interest in possession or reversion.[38]
guidelines for adding back to the property available at trial (a) dissipation of property and expenditure other than on legal fees [27] the full court held in omacini and omacini[39] that addbacks fall into “three clear categories”: where the parties have expended money on legal fees, where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and “waste” or wanton, negligent, or reckless dissipation of assets.[40] [28] however, the full court also made it clear that an addback does not necessarily occur whenever “a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation”, the full court describing such a proposition as “unduly simplistic”.[41] an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is “the exception rather than the rule”.[42] [29] the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it”[43] at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation.[44] thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. [30] two fundamental premises emerge from omacini and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property.[45] (b) expenditure on legal fees [31] to the considerations just discussed must be added the propositions emerging from authority that paid legal fees as a category of addback is imbued with considerations specific to that expenditure. the full court said in chorn:  ] in summary, we consider that the above mentioned decisions of the full court establish that, while the treatment of funds used to pay legal costs remains ultimately a matter for the discretion of the trial judge, in determining how to exercise that discretion, regard should be had to the source of the funds. [57] if the funds used existed at separation, and are such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them (on account, for example, of contributions), then such funds should be added back as a notional asset of the party, who has had the benefit of them. [58] if funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post‑separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance), they would generally not be added back as a notional asset, nor would any borrowing undertaken by a party post-separation to pay legal fees be taken into account as a liability in the calculation of the net property of the parties. funds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement may need to be looked at differently from other post‑separation income or acquisitions.  ] those passages can be seen as an attempt to establish “guidelines”,[46] undertaken after a detailed examination of earlier authorities,[47] for the treatment of paid legal fees within s 79 proceedings. there can be little doubt that the statements made in that case have been applied by trial judges ever since. [33] the word “guidelines” is used advisedly so as to distinguish the same from “binding principles of law”.[48] the distinction is important. failure to follow a binding principle of law is an error of law. by contrast, the failure of a trial judge to follow a guideline:[49]
...does not of itself amount to error, for it may appear that the case is one in which it is inappropriate to invoke the guideline or that, notwithstanding the failure to apply it, the decision is the product of sound discretionary judgment. [however] [t]he failure to apply a legitimate guideline to a situation to which it is applicable may ... throw a question mark over the trial judge’s decision and ease the appellant’s burden of showing that it is wrong...  ] the guidelines emerging from chorn should be read together and read conformably with the full court authorities upon which they are based. that being so, the delineations there referred to — “the funds used existed at separation ... such that both parties can be seen as having an interest in them”, or “funds used to pay legal fees have been generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours” or received by a party “in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)” - cannot be seen as determinative of the exercise of discretion but, rather, as informing it. [35] again, the matters just referred to have important ramifications in an appellate context. they may ease the appellant’s burden of showing that “although the nature of the error may not be discoverable ... a substantial wrong has in fact occurred”,[50] or that the decision is “plainly wrong, [the] decision being no proper exercise of [the] judicial discretion”.[51] equally, they may ease the burden of establishing that irrelevant considerations have been taken into account or that relevant considerations have not been taken into account. [36] paid legal fees occupy a particular position in the consideration of addbacks by reason of s 117(1) of the act, a matter not relevant to any other form of expenditure or dissipation of property the subject of an addback claim. [37] an order failing to addback legal costs is a pre-emptive decision about one party paying the other’s legal costs. the statutorily prescribed default position is that neither party pays all or some of the other party’s costs.[52] [38] if, contrary to the demands of that section, there is to be a payment of costs, the award is dependent upon a finding of justifying circumstances which, in turn, is dependent upon (non-exhaustive) considerations all of which are informed by antecedent events - for example, whether one party has been “wholly unsuccessful” and “the conduct of the parties to the proceedings”.[53] an award of the costs of trial, if any, is in the usual run of events made after the respective entitlements of the parties to a settlement of property have been assessed and, importantly, any awarded costs are paid from the assessed entitlement to property received by the paying party. [39] as has been said, legitimate guidelines “guide the exercise of a discretion”, they do not replace it.[54] guidelines, must “[preserve], so far as it is possible to do so, the capacity ... to do justice according to the needs of the individual case”.[55] the decision to addback or not addback paid legal fees remains a matter of discretion. but, a finding that it is just and equitable to not addback an amount of legal fees so paid is a finding that it is just and equitable for the other party to contribute to the costs of the first party in that proportion as part of an overall assessment of the justice and equity governing their property division. [40] the considerations just referred to are plainly always important and central to the exercise of that discretion in respect of paid legal fees. [41] the passages from chorn, quoted above, draw a distinction between legal costs met from property that would otherwise be available at trial and legal costs met from funds “generated by a party post-separation from his or her own endeavours or received in his or her own right (for example, by way of gift or inheritance)”. the proposition there advanced, that such expenditure “would generally not be added back”, also needs to be seen as a guideline informing the relevant discretion rather than determining it. a further distinction is suggested in chorn between funds generated in that manner and “[f]unds generated from assets or businesses to which the other party had made a significant contribution or has an actual legal entitlement”. [42] the latter suggestion recognises the discretion inherent in the task and also, perhaps, that in the particular circumstances of a case, adding back sums generated post-separation in the different manners suggested might create injustice as much as it might cure it.[56] ... [46] in stanford v stanford,[57] the high court emphasised as fundamental that a consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order begins by “identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property”.[58] [47] the essence of a claim for addbacks is that the asserted sum/s should be added to the value of the existing property interests of the parties and, subsequent to the assessment of contributions, credited to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements. doing so does not offend what was emphasised by the high court. adding back does not seek to create property interests that do not exist. rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements of ss 79(2) and (4) of the act to do justice and equity can require an “accounting” or “balance sheet” exercise for the purposes of s 79(2) and (4), so as to include the value of the dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties’ existing interests in property, and to credit the value of same against the assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending party.[59]
is it just and equitable to make an order under section 79 of the act altering the interests of the parties in the matrimonial property pool?  the mother has her interest in the m street, suburb n property as a co-owner with mr d, whether as joint tenant or tenant-in-common it is not known, and if as a tenant-in-common the extent of her interest and value thereof is not known, (b) the mother is the owner at law or in equity as between herself and the father of a motor vehicle 2, subject to a lease and with an equity that the mother states as nil in consequence of the lease payout figure being $16,000 and the amount owing being $24,562, and which the father states as $22,000, but acknowledging the debt of $24,562, (c) the mother has savings of $2,352, (d) the father has a motor vehicle 3 with an agreed value of $3,200 and a motorcycle asserted by the mother to be worth $5,350 and by the father to be worth $3,500, (e) the mother may be liable, herself or together with mr d, the latter being the most likely, in relation to a loan account for the purchase of the m street, suburb n property and secured on that property, but there is no evidence to determine such matter, (f) the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the mother is the owner at law or in equity as between herself and the father of a motor vehicle 2, subject to a lease and with an equity that the mother states as nil in consequence of the lease payout figure being $16,000 and the amount owing being $24,562, and which the father states as $22,000, but acknowledging the debt of $24,562, (c) the mother has savings of $2,352, (d) the father has a motor vehicle 3 with an agreed value of $3,200 and a motorcycle asserted by the mother to be worth $5,350 and by the father to be worth $3,500, (e) the mother may be liable, herself or together with mr d, the latter being the most likely, in relation to a loan account for the purchase of the m street, suburb n property and secured on that property, but there is no evidence to determine such matter, (f) the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the mother has savings of $2,352, (d) the father has a motor vehicle 3 with an agreed value of $3,200 and a motorcycle asserted by the mother to be worth $5,350 and by the father to be worth $3,500, (e) the mother may be liable, herself or together with mr d, the latter being the most likely, in relation to a loan account for the purchase of the m street, suburb n property and secured on that property, but there is no evidence to determine such matter, (f) the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the father has a motor vehicle 3 with an agreed value of $3,200 and a motorcycle asserted by the mother to be worth $5,350 and by the father to be worth $3,500, (e) the mother may be liable, herself or together with mr d, the latter being the most likely, in relation to a loan account for the purchase of the m street, suburb n property and secured on that property, but there is no evidence to determine such matter, (f) the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the mother may be liable, herself or together with mr d, the latter being the most likely, in relation to a loan account for the purchase of the m street, suburb n property and secured on that property, but there is no evidence to determine such matter, (f) the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the mother has a credit card debt with bank at in the sum of $1,215, a credit card debt with bank au in a sum of $3,145, and a car lease debt with an unknown financial institution in a sum of $24,562, (g) the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the mother has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund av that she values at $235,648 (the father gives a much lower valuation at $160,000 but i will accept the mother’s valuation), and (h) the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.   the father has superannuation entitlements in an accumulation fund with super fund aw and he asserts it has a value of $90,000 and the mother asserts it has a value of $110,000. no documentary evidence was presented at the hearing to resolve that issue and no financial statement was relied on by the father at the hearing.
mr stagg: you say in an affidavit and to the family report writer that you were the children's primary carer? father: i was when i had the children. mr stagg: when the mother had the children, she was the primary carer? father: yes.
the icl’s costs application
associate: dated: 21 october 2022
dated: 21 october 2022
[1] mother’s trial affidavit at paragraphs 153 to 155.[2] her honour is now retired and is a judge of very widely acknowledged great wisdom, experience and expertise in parenting matters.[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[6] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[8] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[9] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79.[10] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(a).[11] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(1)(d).[12] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(2).[13] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108.[14] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108; see, especially, [37].[15] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, [37].[16] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, [42].[17] hickey & hickey & attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (‘hickey’) [2003] famca 395, [39].[18] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[19] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39]. see also family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(4)(a)-(c):(4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ... the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party ...; the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage ... including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent; ...[20] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[21] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[22] hickey [2003] famca 395, [47].[23] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63.[24] fontana & fontana [2018] famcafc 63, [27].[25] see, eg, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78.[26] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154, [14]-[16].[27] in the marriage of harris [1991] famca 124; (1991) 104 flr 458, 464.[28] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, [168].[29] grier & malphas [2016] famcafc 84; (2017) 55 fam lr 107, [129].[30] family law act 1975 (cth) s 75(2)(o).[31] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317.[32] ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30]-[31].[33] see especially, ajo v gro [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) 191 flr 317, [30](b).[34] talbot & talbot [2015] famcafc 132, [31].[35] vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51, [137]-[139] (emphasis in original). [36] bevan v bevan, [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) 279 flr 1, [79].[37] masoud & masoud [2016] famcafc 24, [97].[38] shan & prasad [2018] famcafc 12, [130]-[131].[39] [2005] famcafc 104; (2005) flc 93-218 (“omacini”).[40] omacini at 79,617 [30], referencing in particular kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70; (1981) flc 91-092 (“kowaliw”); townsend and townsend [1994] famca 144; (1995) flc 92-569 (“townsend”). [41] omacini at 79,619 [39]. [42] cerini & cerini sub nom c & c [1998] famca 143 (“cerini”) at [46].[43] ascot investments pty ltd v harper (1981) 148 clr 337 at 355. see also, stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108.[44] marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42 at [2.11].[45] line and line [1996] famca 145; (1997) flc 92-729 at [4.72] as quoted in chorn at 79,317 [38] (noting that, at [4.71], legal fees were said, in obiter, to be different and there is reference to the “notional property” approach). it has also been said that premature expenditure might be taken up in the assessment of contributions, for example by a party making a disproportionately greater indirect contributions to the existing property by reason of other property having been dissipated (see, watson & ling [2013] famca 57; (2013) flc 93-527 at 86,924 [33]).[46] see, the comment to that effect in the earlier decision of browne v green [1999] famca 1483; (1999) flc 92-873 at 86,360 [44].[47] chorn at [32] – [55] referencing: farnell and farnell [1995] famca 140; (1996) flc 92-681; line and line; a and a (unreported, 23 december 1997, lindenmayer, kay & dessau jj); marker & marker sub nom m & m [1998] famca 42; djm v jlm [1998] famca 97; (1998) flc 92-816; c v c [1998] famca 114; (1998) flc 92-824; ibrahim and beavis [1999] famca 765; gartner & gartner [2000] famca 793; clifford and lodge [2000] famca 1666; finlayson v finlayson and gillam [2002] famca 898; (2002) flc 93-121. [48] see, norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17; (1986) 161 clr 513 (“norbis”) at 520 (mason & deane jj); at 537-8 (brennan j); mallet v mallet (1984) 156 clr 605 at 608-9 (gibbs cj). see also, the discussion in hoffman & hoffman [2014] famcafc 92; (2014) flc 93-591 at [21]–[44].[49] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[50] house v the king (1936) 55 clr 499 at 505 (dixon, evatt and mctiernan jj).[51] gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63; (1979) 144 clr 513 at 519 (stephen j).[52] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(1).[53] family law act 1975 (cth) s 117(2a), specifically sub-paragraphs (e) and (c), respectively.[54] norbis at 537 (brennan j); 519-520 (mason & deane jj).[55] norbis at 520 (mason & deane jj).[56] see, doolan, p., “now you see it, now you don’t: notional property and add-backs in family law”, families, broken, blended, mended: conference handbook: 13th national family law conference, p 255 at [2.3]ff. the paper itself provides examples of the potential injustice and inequity that can occur by a strict adherence to the “source of funds” distinction referred to in chorn.[57] (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”). [58] stanford at 120 [37] (emphasis in original) (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[59] see, eg, bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) flc 93-545 at [79]; vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51; (2015) 53 fam lr 373 and pre‑stanford statements to similar effect in milankov & milankov [2002] famca 195; (2002) flc 93-095.