last updated: 6 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ferras & chong [2022] fedcfamc2f 1495
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment(revised from transcript)
judge bender:
intoduction
background
the law  subject to subsection (6), a party to a de facto relationship may apply for an order under sections 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, only if: (a) the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of:   the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of:
i. 2 years after the end of the de facto relationship, or 12 months after a financial agreement between the parties to the de facto relationship was set aside, or found to be invalid, as the case may be, or (b) both parties to the de facto relationship consent to the application.
subsection 44(6) of the act provides: (6) the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party – the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. subsection 44(6)(b) is not relevant to this application.   the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party – the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. subsection 44(6)(b) is not relevant to this application.   hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party – the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. subsection 44(6)(b) is not relevant to this application.   in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party – the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit. subsection 44(6)(b) is not relevant to this application.
subsection 44(6)(b) is not relevant to this application.
hardship
“it is well accepted that hardship for these purposes is more than the loss of a right to commence proceedings. it is the consequences attending the loss of the right to commence proceedings that constitutes hardship. that is a matter to be determined by the circumstances of the particular case. in assessing hardship in this context, the well-established test is that the applicant must have a prima facie claim worth pursuing or a “real” probability of success. further, leave will not be granted if to do so would not, in the substantive result, alleviate that hardship. however, whether or not hardship exists is not to be assessed only by reason of the monetary value of the probable order to be made if leave were granted. in considering the meaning of hardship, in whitford at page 78,144 the court said: ... the requirement, that the court must be satisfied that hardship would be caused if leave were not granted, implies that it must be made to appear to the court that the applicant would probably succeed, if the substantive application were heard on the merits. if there is no real probability of success, then the court cannot be satisfied that hardship would be caused if leave were not granted... if the probable result of the hearing on the merits is that the hardship is not likely to be alleviated, then the court cannot be satisfied that the applicant or a child would suffer hardship if leave were not granted. further at page 78,145 the court said: ... as a general proposition it might be said that the inability of an applicant to pursue a claim which in the circumstances of the applicant or a child of the marriage is trifling, generally will not cause hardship. similarly, where the costs which the applicant will have to bear himself or herself are about as much or more than what the applicant is likely to be awarded on a property claim, ordinarily hardship would not result if leave to institute proceedings were not granted. but otherwise, we find no warrant in either subsec. 44(3) or 44(4) for saying that the right or entitlement lost must be a substantial one. (emphasis in original) at the same page the court continued: in an appropriate case, and depending on the circumstances of the applicant or the children, hardship may be caused by the loss or deprivation of something which is of comparatively small money value...”
“in whitford (supra) the full court at 78, 144 to 78, 145, in addition to the passages cited in the reasons of may and ainslie-wallace jj above, specifically considered the meaning of hardship as stated in s 44(4)(a). the full court observed that: in our view the meaning of “hardship” in subsec. 44(4) is akin to such concepts as hardness, severity, privation, that which is hard to bear or a substantial detriment. cf. the meanings assigned to “hardship” in the shorter oxford dictionary and in webster’s new international dictionary. see also in the marriage of mackenzie (1978) flc 90-496... ... in ordinary parlance, hardship means something more burdensome than “any appreciable detriment”. we consider that in subsection 44(4) the word should have its usual, though not necessarily it’s most stringent, connotations. it is impossible to lay down in advance what particular facts may or may not amount to hardship in the relevant sense. similarly, in hall (supra) at 78, 627 the full court stated that the authorities: ... have considered what is meant by the term “hardship” in this context, and the term “substantial detriment” seems to be the generally accepted interpretation of that word. it follows from the discussion in whitford (supra) at 78,144, and hall (supra) at 78,627, that in the context of s 44(4)(a) hardship has a broad meaning and, as identified by the majority, although the mere loss of a prospective entitlement to pursue a substantive claim may not of itself constitute hardship it is the consequences attending the loss of the right “with which the subsection is concerned”. however, in whitford (supra) it is important to note that the court observed at 78,145 that: hardship may be caused to an applicant if leave were not granted to institute proceedings, although the applicant is not in necessitous circumstances. whatever the financial situation of an applicant may be, his or her loss of a prospective entitlement to property including money, or his or her inability to have the financial and property relations of the parties adjusted or resolved, may constitute hardship. in some cases, where a resolution of the property or financial relationships of the parties is desired, it might be, that the applicant would receive no more or even less, than he or she already owns at law or in equity. nevertheless, hardship might be caused to the applicant if leave were not granted so as to facilitate such resolution... from the observations in whitford (supra) and hall (supra), and in view of the recent authorities of the full court on the subject of hardship, it is apparent that an assessment of hardship requires the court to consider whether the applicant would suffer a substantial detriment as a consequence of the loss of the right to institute the proceedings, although that detriment, in the circumstances of a particular matter, may not be entirely related to financial considerations. in my opinion, it is not possible nor desirable to define exhaustively what will, in all the circumstances of a particular application, constitute hardship for the purposes of s 44(4)(a). however, in undertaking the exercise the court should have regard to the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by the family court and the power should be “exercised liberally in order to avoid hardship, but nevertheless in a manner, which would not render nugatory the requirement that proceedings should be instituted within a year from the decree nisi” per whitford (supra) at 78,146. in undertaking an assessment of hardship the court is required to consider whether the applicant has established a prima facie claim and in hall (supra), at 78,627, the full court stated that: fundamental to a finding of hardship is a determination of the quality or character of the potential claim. in relation to that different cases have used somewhat different phrases to describe it so that it has become something of a matter of semantics to describe in different ways what is really the same basic concept. for example in swallow’s case (unreported emery j, 16 september 1977, referred to in mcdonald’s case) it was said to be “a prima facie case which is in the circumstances substantial”, the full court in mcdonald’s case differed from that by stating that it ought to be “a reasonable prima facie case”. in mackenzie’s case it was described as being “a probability of success”, and in whitford’s case the distinction was said to be that the applicant would need to show that she would “probably succeed” to be contrasted with a situation where she had “no real probability of success”. in perkins’ case [1979] famca 4, (1979) flc 90-600 lindenmayer j described it as “a reasonable probability of the claim being successful in some measure”. these varying phrases may tend to suggest different shades of meaning whereas in reality they are directed to the same fundamental inquiry which basically is in the context whether on the applicant’s material he or she has a reasonable claim to be heard by the court... in althaus (supra) at 77,267 the full court similarly observed that “the exercise is to determine whether there is a reasonable claim to be heard. that is the essence of the inquiry into whether hardship will be suffered by denying the applicant the right to litigate that claim.” more recently in hedley (supra) at paragraph 215, cronin j cited the full court decision of richardson (supra) at paragraph 14, in which finn, warnick and boland jj stated and affirmed the principles set out by the primary judge who observed that “it is not a decision about whether the claim will succeed but whether there is a reasonable claim to be heard”. in my opinion, in undertaking a determination of whether the requisite hardship will be occasioned to the applicant under s 44(4)(a) what is required by the court is an assessment of the asserted hardship, and in view of that hardship, a determination of whether the applicant has demonstrated that there is a reasonable claim to be heard. if the applicant has established that there is a reasonable claim to be heard and has demonstrated that she or he would suffer hardship in the form of a substantial detriment as a consequence of the loss of the right to institute the proceedings, then the statutory precondition in s 44(4)(a) will be satisfied and the court may then consider whether in all the circumstances leave should be granted to allow the application under s 44(3) of the act.”
the full court recently had occasion to affirm that the application of s 44(6) of the act entails satisfaction of its criteria by sequential steps (arcand & boen [2021] famcafc 155, flc 94-046). first, the applicant must demonstrate hardship and, if that hurdle is surmounted, must still persuade the exercise of discretion in his or her favour to extend time. as the full court said: the applicant bore the onus of demonstrating to the primary judge’s satisfaction that, supposing leave to bring the property settlement claim out of time was denied, the deprivation of his reasonable chance of success in those prospective proceedings would occasion him hardship (gadzen & simkin [2018] famcafc 219, (2018) flc 93-871 (“gadzen”) a [29]-[31]). in assessing whether the applicant discharged the onus, the primary judge merely needed to be satisfied the prospective property settlement was reasonable or arguable, with such assessment made summarily without a detailed hearing on the merits (gadzen at [33]–[37], edmunds & edmunds [2018] famcafc 121, (2018) flc 93-847 (“edmunds”) at [16]–[17], althaus and althaus (1982) flc 91-233 (“althaus”) at 77,267).
conclusion
associate: dated: 4 november 2022
dated: 4 november 2022