last updated: 29 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hossain & karam [2022] fedcfamc2f 1472
orders
the court orders that:
“(iii) such time to be supervised by the q children’s contact centre located at ab street, city l”.
notations:
account name: ms karam
bsb: ...00
account number: ...70
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
... that no less than 7 days prior to any visit at the [q] children’s contact centre in [city l], the father pay to the mother’s bank account an amount of $150. in the event of non-compliance with this order, the father’s visit with [x] will not take place.   per the original)
material relied upon  mother’s case outline filed 14 october 2022, (b) initiating application filed 14 march 2022, (c) icl’s proposed minute of order (handed up in court at the hearing), (d) affidavit of mother filed 14 october 2022, (e) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   initiating application filed 14 march 2022, (c) icl’s proposed minute of order (handed up in court at the hearing), (d) affidavit of mother filed 14 october 2022, (e) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   icl’s proposed minute of order (handed up in court at the hearing), (d) affidavit of mother filed 14 october 2022, (e) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   affidavit of mother filed 14 october 2022, (e) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   his affidavits filed 25 august 2022 and 17 october 2022, (b) his financial statements filed 28 october 2016 and 18 march 2022, (c) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   his financial statements filed 28 october 2016 and 18 march 2022, (c) the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.   the court’s reasons for judgment dated 15 july 2021.
submissions
a the father’s financial circumstances have materially changed (negatively),  he no longer has the support of his parents due to their death noting that they had supported him financially previously to see the child at a contact centre at city l, (b) the death of his parents had impacted his brother’s financial capacity as it has put his brother into financial difficulties. the father alleged that his brothers had to come up with the cost of a funeral for his parents which had an effect on his brother supporting him to see the child in accordance with the court orders, (c) his brother was willing to make a small contribution for some of his fuel costs to see the child at a contact centre in canberra, (d) he no longer has access to a caravan therefore he would need to pay for a budget hotel of $120.   the death of his parents had impacted his brother’s financial capacity as it has put his brother into financial difficulties. the father alleged that his brothers had to come up with the cost of a funeral for his parents which had an effect on his brother supporting him to see the child in accordance with the court orders, (c) his brother was willing to make a small contribution for some of his fuel costs to see the child at a contact centre in canberra, (d) he no longer has access to a caravan therefore he would need to pay for a budget hotel of $120.   his brother was willing to make a small contribution for some of his fuel costs to see the child at a contact centre in canberra, (d) he no longer has access to a caravan therefore he would need to pay for a budget hotel of $120.   he no longer has access to a caravan therefore he would need to pay for a budget hotel of $120.
b b families is no longer offering supervision services in city c,c the city l contact centre has an eight week waiting period, as opposed to a four week waiting period as alleged by the mother.
legal principles: rice v asplund
... 18 in sps and pls, warnick j said at [48(v)] and [82]–[83]: ...the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order.
... 83 accordingly, the rule may not impede hearing an application for a small alteration, which may require only a short and narrow enquiry, but may properly prevent a hearing in respect of more far-reaching changes. in our view, the rice & asplund test applies to all applications which seek to revisit parenting orders. sometimes the test will be easily satisfied even though the issues to reconsider are major ones and sometimes the test will be easily satisfied even though the issues to be revisited are relatively minor in character. in both situations, the overarching test is to be applied, namely, (having regard to the best interests of the child) new events or changed circumstances have to be sufficient to provoke a new inquiry. it is also useful when considering, as a preliminary matter, what issues a parent might be permitted to re-litigate, to remember that under s 69zq(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), there is a mandatory requirement to decide which of these issues in the proceedings require full investigation and hearing. the rule in rice & asplund involves the exercise of discretion and not merely a process of making factual findings. that is because the “rule” is a manifestation of the best interests principle. all s 60cc(2) and (3) matters, so far as they are relevant, must be considered, to the extent that they can be, based on the material before the court. the rule focuses particularly on s 60cc(3)(l) and the preference to make final orders in parenting matters that are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child. axiomatically that is because unless other considerations are more weighty, it is not in the best interests of a child for that child to be the subject of repeated litigation between his/her parents. there is a focus in an application of this kind upon the change(s) in circumstances that outweigh the negative impact of reopening litigation. although when considering the preliminary issue, if cross-examination is not permitted, then the evidence of the father is to be taken at its highest, and it is not only the father’s evidence that is considered.”
... far from the search for any material changes in circumstances working to obstruct the attainment of an outcome which promotes children’s best interests, the rice v asplund principles embody the paramountcy principle, as the underlying policy is that children’s best interests are not served by their constant immersion in litigation between parties who are interested in their welfare (marsden v winch [2009] famcafc 152, (2009) 42 fam lr 1 at [55], miller & harrington (2008) flc 93–383 at [101]). the principle enjoins the court to prevent endless litigation over the care and supervision of children, unless there has been a change of circumstances of sufficient magnitude to justify the review of arrangements already determined.
discussion
summary
associate: dated: 1 november 2022
dated: 1 november 2022