last updated: 6 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
scalia & antarus [2022] fedcfamc2f 1496
orders
the court orders that:  46.63% to the wife, and (b) subject to order 2 herein, the balance then remaining, 53.37%, to the husband.   subject to order 2 herein, the balance then remaining, 53.37%, to the husband.   her right, title and interest in the real property at b street, suburb c, (b) the benefit part property settlements from the sale proceeds of the former matrimonial home, (c) her motor vehicle 1, (d) her motor vehicle 2, (e) the benefit of funds in any account in the name of the wife, (f) the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   the benefit part property settlements from the sale proceeds of the former matrimonial home, (c) her motor vehicle 1, (d) her motor vehicle 2, (e) the benefit of funds in any account in the name of the wife, (f) the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   her motor vehicle 1, (d) her motor vehicle 2, (e) the benefit of funds in any account in the name of the wife, (f) the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   her motor vehicle 2, (e) the benefit of funds in any account in the name of the wife, (f) the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   the benefit of funds in any account in the name of the wife, (f) the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   the personal effects and chattels in her possession as at the date of these orders.   his right, title and interest in the real property at d street, suburb c, (b) the benefit of part property settlements from the sale proceeds of the former matrimonial home, (c) the benefit of any monies lent to e pty ltd (or any other related entity) by the parties, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) the benefit of the funds in any account in the name of the husband, (f) the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   the benefit of part property settlements from the sale proceeds of the former matrimonial home, (c) the benefit of any monies lent to e pty ltd (or any other related entity) by the parties, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) the benefit of the funds in any account in the name of the husband, (f) the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   the benefit of any monies lent to e pty ltd (or any other related entity) by the parties, (d) his motor vehicle 3, (e) the benefit of the funds in any account in the name of the husband, (f) the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   his motor vehicle 3, (e) the benefit of the funds in any account in the name of the husband, (f) the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   the benefit of the funds in any account in the name of the husband, (f) the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   the personal effects and chattels in his possession as at the date of these orders.   be solely liable for and indemnify the wife against any liability encumbering any item of property to which he is entitled, and (b) retain sole liability for, and indemnify the wife with respect to, any loan from f pty ltd or any other related entity and/or mr g, and any credit card or other liability held or registered in the husband’s name, including any personal taxation liability of or as arising from his involvement or connection with e pty ltd, f pty ltd or any related entity.   retain sole liability for, and indemnify the wife with respect to, any loan from f pty ltd or any other related entity and/or mr g, and any credit card or other liability held or registered in the husband’s name, including any personal taxation liability of or as arising from his involvement or connection with e pty ltd, f pty ltd or any related entity.   be solely liable for and indemnify the husband against any liability encumbering any item of property to which she is entitled, and (b) retain sole liability for and indemnify the husband with respect to any loan, credit card or other liability held or registered in her name.   retain sole liability for and indemnify the husband with respect to any loan, credit card or other liability held or registered in her name.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other party all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to be retained by the party named on the bank account, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account are to be divided equally between the parties and the account/s forthwith closed, (d) save as provided herein, each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation, long service leave, redundancy, retirement, retrenchment and like benefits belonging to or earned by the other save for where expressly provided for herein, (e) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any bank account are to be retained by the party named on the bank account, (c) monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account are to be divided equally between the parties and the account/s forthwith closed, (d) save as provided herein, each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation, long service leave, redundancy, retirement, retrenchment and like benefits belonging to or earned by the other save for where expressly provided for herein, (e) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of the parties in any joint bank account are to be divided equally between the parties and the account/s forthwith closed, (d) save as provided herein, each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation, long service leave, redundancy, retirement, retrenchment and like benefits belonging to or earned by the other save for where expressly provided for herein, (e) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   save as provided herein, each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation, long service leave, redundancy, retirement, retrenchment and like benefits belonging to or earned by the other save for where expressly provided for herein, (e) insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies and income protection policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (g) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction e husband] and i met in 2005 in [country a] whilst [the husband] was visiting for business. we commenced cohabitation in 2006 in melbourne, when i moved to melbourne, australia....
proceedings & final hearing
background
documents relied upon  the interpretation of a foreign country tax document and the tax law of a foreign country must be given by expert evidence rather than the inexpert opinion of a party or to just leave it to the judge to sort out, (b) i do not understand how those returns would assist me resolve a relevant dispute, and (c) in a case said to be of two days, after six days of evidence and written submissions, for documents to be tendered by the husband, in written closing address is oppressive to the wife and maybe prejudicial to her.   i do not understand how those returns would assist me resolve a relevant dispute, and (c) in a case said to be of two days, after six days of evidence and written submissions, for documents to be tendered by the husband, in written closing address is oppressive to the wife and maybe prejudicial to her.   in a case said to be of two days, after six days of evidence and written submissions, for documents to be tendered by the husband, in written closing address is oppressive to the wife and maybe prejudicial to her.
exhibits tendered
applicable law
stanford v stanford ] first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property... the question posed by s 79(2) ... is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order.  ] ...the fundamental propositions that have been identified require a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interest during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife...
the preferred approach ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”. the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) – the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) – ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) – the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case. [citations omitted]
legislative provisions
s 79 alteration of property interests ... (2) the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.
s 75 matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal maintenance ... (2) the matters to be so taken into account are:   the age and state of health of each of the parties, and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and\ (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and\ (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   whether either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and (e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,   any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  ) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and   where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and   the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and  ) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and   if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and   the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (naa) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viiiab in relation to: (i) a party to the marriage, or  ) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a party to the marriage, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  ) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage, and   any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and   the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the marriage, and (q) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage.
standard of proof and burden of proof  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
witnesses: credit & reliability ] in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
chronology of some significant events
the other loan
mr marchetti: you see, the truth is, though, that your financial statement is not to accurate, is it?---why? well, you haven’t set out the loans that you – your father provided to you in relation to your first wife. correct?---no. no. well, you haven’t. so that’s not accurate?---that was a forgotten situation and i’ve spoken to my father since, who says that it’s ..... so sorry, you’ve spoken to your father? what? today?---i spoke to my father. am i not allowed - - - his honour: today? no, the question was, “have you spoken to your father today”?--- - - - yes, i did. mr marchetti: about your evidence?---no. well, it has to be about your evidence?---no. about the loan. that’s your evidence, isn’t it, sir?---yes, it is. yes. what other helpful suggestions did your father give you? his honour: i think you’ve got to ask him the question without the comment within it, mr marchetti. mr marchetti: sorry. i will ask ..... so what did you specifically say to your father?---when i separated from [previous partner] and he leaved me the money to pay for the – what do you call it? the legal fees and the balance to pay her out, is that something that you would want back? and he said no. so it’s a gift, back then?---well, no. it’s the – on his case it’s not a gift, it’s forgiving a loan.
mr marcheti: you have also assisted your son when he had to pay out his first wife in her settlement, didn’t you?---i don’t recall. i can’t recall that. well, his evidence is that you provided money - - -?---..... - - - certainly for legal fees?---possibly. and possibly to pay out or to top up whatever payment was due to his first wife?---possibly. i – i can’t recall.   that he brought in about $400,000 of equity and/or “sale proceeds” (exhibit w7 page 106) in his former property, and (b) that the wife did not bring in any equity from her property in country a.   that the wife did not bring in any equity from her property in country a.
mr marchetti: that you have provided weekly sums to him since 2015?---not all – not all the way, no. sometimes when money was available to me - - - okay?--- - - - i did. when it wasn’t, i didn’t. certainly in the currency of since january last year, january of 2020, you have provided a sum of $1312.31 into [the husband’s] account?---i’m not sure of the exact amount. the accountant does that. but i’ve told them to pay whatever sum they had available at the time, pay it. i said, “just give it to him.” well, each and every week on there there seems to be the sum of $1312.31 deposited into that account?---yes. does that mean that you are aware each and every week of that sum being available?---i’m aware that they are paying him some money and that - - - that sum?---that is in the – in the ledger of what is loaned to him by me. because the company owes me money that i’ve lent the company time and time again. company owes me money. so that money, instead of coming to me, it has gone to [the husband]. but it’s – it’s repaying my debt. the company is repaying my debt. before i can loan the money to [the husband] or [husband’s sister] or whoever i see fit. so am i understanding this correctly. it’s a capital repayment then to you?---what? it’s a repayment to you of debts?---the company is repaying debt to me. yes. and you’re passing it on to [the husband]?---and i’m loaning it to [the husband].
transfers to the company from 2016
the 2018 advances
the 20 august 2020 reconciliation of money due from the company
the company h shares saga: late 2018 to august 2019
we want to let you know that we no longer offer brokerage services to clients located in certain foreign countries. our records indicate that you reside or have citizenship in one of those identified foreign countries. unfortunately, this means that we’ve had to close your account ending in [...]01, except for liquidating (closing) transactions. you will no longer have online access to your account, so you will have to make these transactions by calling us to speak with a (a trader) associate. you will not be able to purchase new securities or make deposits into the account any opening orders (orders to establish new positions) will be cancelled. if the address currently listed on your account is correct: you will need to take action on your account by (5 december 2018). you can either: - transfer your account to another firm... or - liquidate your account... by calling (a trader) important: if you have not initiated the account transfer or liquidation process by 5 december 2018, we will need to liquidate your account for you, then mail a check for your account balance to your address of record. ...
thank you for choosing (a trader) to serve your brokerage and investment needs. to reinforce our commitment to providing an exceptional brokerage experience, (‘a trader’) is dedicated to ensuring all aspects of your trading experience are within the scope of our business model. this means addressing specific concerns when necessary. the use of your a trader accounts does not appear to fall within the expected range of activity for a brokerage account. in order to gain a better understanding of your account activity, please respond to this letter providing the following information at your earliest convenience: - state the country you are in. if you’re in a foreign country, please state the reason for the visit and the length of stay it is essential that we receive this information as soon as possible. thank you for your cooperation with this matter. sincerely, [d] client account services ... we’re here to help ... (punctuation as in original)
hi, thanks social team for responding. my account number is #[...]1. i changed my address to australian address a few months ago with a very friendly team member over the phone. i had [no] idea the repercussions that i would face - having my account immediately liquidated without my consent. i have had this account for over 20 years - this is my [retirement]. i am in no position to pay tax and have faced subsequent losses given the [fluctuation] of the stock price of [the [company h] shares]. i would like my stock reinstated as i never consented nor was i made aware of any policy stating that a trader had the right to act on my behalf. i have considered taking this to the [authority] however .. my first course of action is to get this rectified with [a trader]. i have heard of this happening to other [country a] citizens living abroad after only 6 months and i find this action [reprehensible]. please let me know the next course of action. thank you, [wife]
... i have spoken [with] an associate last weekend who was to pass my case over to a [manager]. i am after [legislation], policy, documentation that confirms your process of liquidating a customer’s stocks without consent then mailing a paper check not even [by] registered mail. i would ideally like my stock reinstated. thank you and i look forward to speaking soon...
hi..., as you can imagine, i have been quite distressed by the sale of my [[company h]] shares. i would like to cancel the cheque if possible and have the funds moved across into an account. i need to set this account up and i am not sure how long this may take as i need to find a resource to help with this process. my question is, how long can i keep the money in the account or is this even an option? also, how long is the cheque valid for if the first option is not valid?
payments to the company continue
separation under one roof on 11 june 2019
the $5,000 “loan”
repayment of [e pty ltd] loan, [husband] $5,000 (dr)
mr marchetti: ... now, what i’m putting to you is this. look at the entry for 1 october?---yes. now, $28,460.85 is what you ..... transfer across to [e pty ltd]?---no. no. no. there’s two transactions. ..... - - - sir. sir, just stop?--- - - - ..... thousand. stop. the first transaction, $28,460.85?---yes. you transferred to [e pty ltd]. correct?---yes. then – you’re quite correct, because you’re so eager to get to it, that you also transferred $5000?---mmm. read out to his honour how you describe it?---i don’t describe it. well, you’ve put it in there. it’s your bank account. you authorised the transfer. you described it?---no. i’m sorry. i don’t recall that – that transaction ..... sorry. read it out?---well, it’s misspelt. it says: repayment of [e pty ltd] loan, [husband]. right. and when you look at $28,460.85 plus $5000, equals? what does it equal?---well, what the transfer is for $33,000. right. $460.85?---mmm. what i’m putting to you is that in actual fact the whole thing i’m putting to you is somewhat not quite the way you described it?---no, i’m sorry. don’t agree. okay. well, is there any reason why you would have put “repayments of [e pty ltd] loan, [husband]”?---no clue. and it may have actually been – depends on the date, mr marchetti. it may have - - - ..... 1 october?--- - - - it may have actually been while i was traveling overseas to the [country q] or [country r]. and if i have given access to the office to make payments. okay?--- ..... so what you’re saying is you’ve given access. so they got it right the first one. they didn’t get it right the second transaction?---possibly, yes. possibly. meaning that the repayment of [e pty ltd] loan ..... but if we look at 28 september you were up in [suburb s] at [store t]?---mmm. yes. and if we look on - - -?---mr marchetti, i’ve answered your question. you can’t - - - his honour: hang on. no, no. [husband], you don’t get to do that. mr marchetti: - - - and what you say is you have no reasonable explanation as to why that arises or appears on your bank statement?---correct.
husband’s credit card debt: $59,500 at separation?
the nab credit card
the amex credit card
the bank u credit card
actually $13,085
first solicitor’s letters in 2019: between separation and issue
... your letter does not accurately state your client’s financial position at the time of cohabitation. we are also instructed that your firm acted for [the husband] with respect to family law matters when he separated from his first wife and that their property settlement was formalised by way of consent orders prepared by your office around the time that our clients commenced cohabitation[1]. kindly provide documentary evidence as to the assets and liabilities your client had at cohabitation. ... approximately one (1) year after cohabitation, our client sold her property in [country a] and applied the net sale proceeds of around au$80,000[2] towards the purchase of the former matrimonial home. during the relationship, without our client’s consent your client redrew funds totalling around $215,000 (from) the line of credit secured by the former matrimonial home, which he applied to his parent’s business[3]... where your client is engaged as chief executive officer. your client and his parents have since asserted to our client during the relationship and post separation that the funds would be repaid in full, although to date they have not. in april 2019, while our client was sleeping your client stole our client’s anz and [bank o] credit cards from her bag and incurred expenses of around $35,000 without our client’s consent.... your client later divulged that he used the credit cards to purchase items for his parent’s business. your client and his parents have stated that they would repay the full debt. to date this has not occurred, although some repayments have been made.... 10 ... the [company h] shares which our client owned at cohabitation... as your client would be aware, the shares were liquidated in december 2019. our client has had to utilise some of these funds to meet living expenses. the shares are also subject to tax. ... duty of disclosure so that we can ascertain the complete matrimonial pool and advise our client with respect to financial matters, and accordance with your (client’s) duty of disclosure, we request copies of the following documents within fourteen (14) days, ... bank statements for any account in which your client has an interest or control, including but not limited to credit card statements, term deposits, savings accounts, every day accounts, home loans for the last three... years.
demand for repayment of the $80,000 loan
dear [wife] & [husband] it is my understanding that both of you have put the house up for sale. i loaned you money to reduce your interest on the bank loan for the house. therefore as the house is being sold i am calling the loan back as it will no longer serve the purpose that the loan was made for. i want the loan repaid within the terms of the loan. please see the attachment which show the terms & conditions that both of you signed should you have any queries please let me know. regards [husband’s father]...
husband issues proceedings 11 december 2019
i swear/affirm that:   i have read rule 24.03 and i am aware that by law i have an obligation to make a full and frank disclosure of my financial circumstances to the court and each other party. in particular, i have disclosed in this document all matters i am required to disclose under rule 24.03. (b) the information in the financial statement and any attachments to it which are within my personal knowledge are true. where i have given an estimate in this financial statement, it is based on my knowledge and is given in good faith. all other information given in this financial statement and any attachments is true to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. (c) i have no income, property or financial resources other than as set out in this document.   the information in the financial statement and any attachments to it which are within my personal knowledge are true. where i have given an estimate in this financial statement, it is based on my knowledge and is given in good faith. all other information given in this financial statement and any attachments is true to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. (c) i have no income, property or financial resources other than as set out in this document.   i have no income, property or financial resources other than as set out in this document.  phasis added)
e pty ltd – loan frm [husband’s father]
$700 per week starts in january 2020
each party shall provide full and frank discovery of all documents requested by the other party’s solicitor within 14 days of receiving the request.
mr marchetti: ...the purchase price was $1.2 million. is that correct? --- mmm. so that is what you are committed to pay? --- me and my family. yes.
item 53 - loan from [husband’s father] - $124,000 - 100%
mr marchetti: [husband], looking at your document then – and i’m going to take you first to your income. now, on your income you set out that your total salary and wages is 1393 per week. you see that, item 9?---yes. now, approximately that is $72,000 a year. to be precise, $72,436 per year, correct? okay. now, nowhere else on there though do you set out what you otherwise detail at paragraph 19 of your affidavit or at paragraph 11 of your statement provided today. that is the $750 per week that you get?---it’s not income. it’s a repayment of a loan, sir. okay. so it’s not income?---no. is it set out anywhere in that document that you received that money?---it’s under – under the liabilities section, section e. no, i understand it’s there. ... his honour: yes, loan – loan to [e pty ltd]. thank you?---thank you. so that’s where basically the income – each week that that income comes in, that loan is reducing. mr marchetti: but it doesn’t show an income, does it?---pardon? it doesn’t show your income?---my income, again, sir, please understand, in taxation and accounting purposes income is not a loan repayment. okay. that’s not income, that’s cash. okay. it might be a big difference. your background is in [finance], isn’t it?---i’m a bachelor of business and i have done [finance], yes. okay. and what’s your position at the moment?---my position? yes?---ceo. ceo, chief executive officer of [e pty ltd]?---correct. and that company is wholly owned by your parents?---wholly owned by my father. okay. and he would be shareholder and director of it?---correct. okay. and you derive an income out of that company?---i do. okay. so you’re at pains to point out that you show the asset – that is the loan to your father’s company – but you don’t show the moneys that come back in. the repayments, in other words?---what do you mean, the repayment? well, you don’t show the $750 coming in?---well, you don’t because it’s not an income. so each time that this statement would be derived, based on time, it would be reassessed as at what time that loan would be. ... no, no, item 53 is: loan from [the husband’s father]. this is last page, your honour, page 12 of my financial statement, o, part o. his honour: yes, thank you. yes. yes, part o. item 53: loan from [the husband’s father], $124,000. ---thank you, your honour. that is how my income is being supported, that my father is actually supporting me privately to assist me to keep me afloat. ... mr marchetti: yes, sir, thank you. i will ask the question again. so at item 53 on part o you talk about a loan from [the husband’s father]. what does that refer to? you have given details that your - - - his honour: no, stop, there’s the question. what does that refer to? mr marchetti: yes?---that refers to money which my dad gives me on time to time and has done so when he has got it available to assist me and my previous wife to pay the bills. okay. you say that that is a debt that you owe to your father?---sure. do you?---sure. i’ve said yes. yes?---yes, thank you. and over what period of time do you then say that that debt has accrued?---two years. okay. so over the past two years you say your father has given you $124,000. okay. and should his honour understand that because of that the debt to [e pty ltd] has gone down from $117,000 to 75 or 80?---pardon? do you say that part of that $124,000 - - -?---no. - - - is the reason – okay?---no, that’s up to [the husband’s father]. okay. so you would say that there’s $124,000 in the last two years, and in addition to that there has been 37-odd thousand dollars repaid, being the $750 that has been repaid to you?---correct. and in addition to that, you’ve also got your $72,000 income?---correct.
first reference to the other loan
the husband as a witness
collectively caused me to find that the husband’s account of any financial event cannot be regarded at face value and cannot be regarded as reliable. this is so notwithstanding that an implausible assertion is not necessarily false, and such an event may have occurred although it is appears implausible at first brush.
mr marchetti: the moneys that are coming out from – the moneys coming to you, the $1300, are coming to you from the company?---because he’s depositing it via the company. yes. his honour: pardon. i – you ..... there. i didn’t catch that. what did you say?---he – he’s depositing money via the company. mr marchetti: okay. you also remember that what i had taken you to in – on 4 december was payments that come into your account and then are paid out to [e pty ltd]?---yes. from external parties. yes. from external parties?---mmm. correct. so – and it appears to be that those continue to be made into your account, in your [bank w] – in the [bank w] account?--- no. no. no. so only into your [bank p] account?---yes. sorry. how are those – when they’re paid to the [e pty ltd] account, how are they recorded?---in [e pty ltd]? yes?---i have no idea. i’m not the accountant - - - again, you’re the ceo, though?---yes. but i’ve got - - - yes. and you have no idea?---no. i believe - - - will your father have an idea?---probably not, because he has got accounting people there that do that work. okay. can you get that information? you can get that information, can’t you?---from the business? yes?---well, he can. you can. you’re the ceo?---if he authorises me to get it. yes. sorry. he authorises the ceo to get it?---absolutely. he’s the owner of the company. you’re the ceo?---doesn’t matter.  ] while the failure to accept a witness’s evidence is a necessary component of a finding of untruthfulness or fabrication, such mere failure is less than a finding of untruthfulness, untruthfulness is a further fact that is required to be found. [41] insofar as the primary judge’s reasoning as to untruthfulness is expressed as the result of the failure to accept the appellant’s evidence on the balance of probabilities, it is a conclusion that cannot stand.
the wife as a witness
in 2018, being during the relationship, at [the husband]’s insistence, the [company h] shares i owned at cohabitation were sold. (emphasis added)
the husband’ father as a witness
mr marchetti: in relation to the moneys, the funds, that are paid out to your son and now paid out, on your evidence, for a number of years, what is the arrangement with your son for those funds? his honour: well, firstly, “is there an arrangement?” mr marchetti: sorry. is there an arrangement?---yes, that if i want – if i want it back at some stage, he’s meant to pay it back, because i will – i will have a ledger there that says - - - where’s the ledger?---where’s the ledger? yes, where is it?---the account girl will have it. ... mr marchetti: [husband], you’ve just given evidence that you don’t know how the funds are treated by the company or how they’re labelled as they come in from [the husband]?--- ..... they would be – they would be labelled as they’re coming from [the husband], that they’re coming in from [the husband], but i don’t know - - - is it a loan?--- - - - exactly. a contribution? is it a loan or a contribution?---it’s neither a loan - - - [the husband] looks like - - -?--- - - - nor contribution. - - - he’s shaking his head?--- ..... i’m sorry, sir?---it’s just passing the money back to [e pty ltd]. yes?---it’s not a loan or contribution. neither. it’s the money that has been paid by the finance company to [the husband] on our behalf and [the husband] gives it back to the [e pty ltd], because we get – we’ve told the company – i beg your pardon – the finance company the account number to put it into. [the husband] knows it’s not his money so he’s passing it back onto the company, so what - - - okay?---what is the - - - can you get those – the ledger details? can you obtain those over the lunch break?---no. no?---i would say no. why not?---because i don’t know how long it will take the girl to – to get that. i don’t know how long it will take her to get that information. she wasn’t - - - last financial year?--- - - - ..... you wouldn’t know?---which period are we – this girl wasn’t even there - - - last financial year?--- - - - at the time. the girl that we’ve got presently wasn’t even there at the time. okay?---it was a different accountant. yes?---i don’t know what the - - - how – what system does your company use?---look, i – i’m not a computer-literate person and what system it uses or not i’m – i’m not sure. okay? ... his honour: [husband’s father], were you aware that [husband] and [wife] had separated - - -?---yes. - - - in 2019?---yes. yes. yes?---i was aware that they separated and this loan repayment that we had been making is towards the money that was forwarded to us. now, how they split the money – whether it’s given to [the husband] or to [the wife] or whoever, i just been - - - yes. but it only started – the $700 started in january 2020?---the – the 700 – yes. yes. okay?---yes. so are you saying that you thought that it was a matter for [the husband] and [the wife]- - -?---yes. - - - how this was split up?---yes. well, what was in your mind about how [the wife] would know about this? or [the husband], for that matter?---well, they would have to reconcile the accounts themselves, what – what was given and how much had come back from [e pty ltd]. yes. and did you discuss with [the husband]- - -?---no. no, i don’t discuss ..... so this issue has not been discussed between you and [the husband]?---no.
the accountant mr z as a witness
on our third meeting in or about august 2018, whilst i was going through their bank statements and receipts, [the husband] mentioned to [the wife] in my presence words to the effect ‘i might have to put money into [e pty ltd]” to which [the wife] responded “do what you gotta do as long as the money comes back”.
mr marchetti: no, i understand that. yes, your honour. and he asked you then to provide the affidavit?---mmm. or to provide your recollection?---okay. what then happened? his honour: could you just go back a bit? mr marchetti: sorry. his honour: what did [the husband] say to you?---he said, “do you remember more or less the conversation that i had in reference to the comment that i’ve just made,” and i said, “yes, i do remember it crystal clear because it happened in the last time we met, where [the wife] just refused not to proceed with the ato paperwork, and i remember you just mentioned that while we were doing this”. he suggested the form of the words to the effect that he might have to put money into [e pty ltd]?---yes. that’s what he – and you said, “yes, i do remember”?---i do remember that, yes. because if i didn’t – if i didn’t remember or didn’t – didn’t hear it, i wouldn’t be here making this evidence.
the husband’s case  the wife earns a significant income including bonuses: (b) bonus of $27,983.34 in february 2020, (c) post tax bonus received by wife: (d) 2018 – approx $22,000 (e) 2019 - $26,00 (f) 2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   bonus of $27,983.34 in february 2020, (c) post tax bonus received by wife: (d) 2018 – approx $22,000 (e) 2019 - $26,00 (f) 2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   post tax bonus received by wife: (d) 2018 – approx $22,000 (e) 2019 - $26,00 (f) 2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   2018 – approx $22,000 (e) 2019 - $26,00 (f) 2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   2019 - $26,00 (f) 2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   2020 – pre-tax - $52,500 post tax $28,000 (g) 2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   2021 after tax $14,000 (h) the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   the true position with respect to the wife’s income can be found in her home loan application, exhibit w11, (made to secure finance for the recent purchase of her new home) and when determining the wife’s income this information should be accepted by the court in preference to her financial statement. (i) if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   if there is no add back for the wife’s wastage in relation to the company h shares, the court should make a section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband . (j) there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   there should also be consequences for the wife due to her disgraceful and dishonest behaviour in breaching court orders during the hearing of this matter. this can occur via a further section 75(2)(o) adjustment in favour of the husband, see: townsend v townsend [1994] famca 144 (7 december 1994). (k) section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   section 75(2) factors should be assessed in the husband’s favour at no less than a further 5%. (l) if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   if the court decides not to add back the company h share money spent by the wife then there should be a total adjustment of section 75(2) factors including section 75(2)(o) of a further 15%. (m) if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   if the court declines to accept the husband’s argument re wastage due to the wife’s conduct in relation to failing to reinvest the company h shares, then the total adjustment of all section 75(2) factors (including all section 75(2)(o) factors should be a further 20%.”   (a request to rely on more than 10 pages in final address)(2) the husband be granted leave to tender the wife’s country q tax returns for 2018 and 2015 noting that while she was asked questions about these documents they were not tendered during the hearing.(3) the wife within 60 days (“the first date”) pay: (a) the debt owed to the other company in the sum of $80,000, (b) the sum of $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, (c) the sum of $30,000 to compensate the husband for interest paid on his credit cards (“the first payments”). (a) the balance of the funds in the husband’s solicitors trust account ($114,000), and (b) the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”). (7) except as otherwise provided by these orders and save for the purposes of enforcing any monies due under these or any subsequent orders: (a) each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to superannuation held in their name and each party foregoes any claims they may have in relation to the other, (c) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any/all liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and any other liability in their name, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed. (8) the wife pay the husband’s costs of these proceedings. (9) such further or other orders as this honourable court deems appropriate.   the debt owed to the other company in the sum of $80,000, (b) the sum of $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, (c) the sum of $30,000 to compensate the husband for interest paid on his credit cards (“the first payments”). (a) the balance of the funds in the husband’s solicitors trust account ($114,000), and (b) the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”).   the sum of $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, (c) the sum of $30,000 to compensate the husband for interest paid on his credit cards (“the first payments”). (a) the balance of the funds in the husband’s solicitors trust account ($114,000), and (b) the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”).   the sum of $30,000 to compensate the husband for interest paid on his credit cards (“the first payments”). (a) the balance of the funds in the husband’s solicitors trust account ($114,000), and (b) the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”).   the balance of the funds in the husband’s solicitors trust account ($114,000), and (b) the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”).   the loan from (the company) (alleged by the wife to be $117,362 and by the husband to be down to about $75,000 due to the $700 “repayments”).   except as otherwise provided by these orders and save for the purposes of enforcing any monies due under these or any subsequent orders: (a) each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to superannuation held in their name and each party foregoes any claims they may have in relation to the other, (c) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any/all liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and any other liability in their name, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed. (8) the wife pay the husband’s costs of these proceedings. (9) such further or other orders as this honourable court deems appropriate.   each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to superannuation held in their name and each party foregoes any claims they may have in relation to the other, (c) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any/all liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and any other liability in their name, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed.   each party is solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to superannuation held in their name and each party foregoes any claims they may have in relation to the other, (c) each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any/all liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and any other liability in their name, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed.   each party is solely liable for and indemnifies the other against any/all liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders and any other liability in their name, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal property is severed.   the wife pay the husband’s costs of these proceedings. (9) such further or other orders as this honourable court deems appropriate.   such further or other orders as this honourable court deems appropriate.   funds in his solicitor’s trust account - $50,816 (b) funds in his solicitor’s trust account including remaining [company h] shares money - $93,794 (c) part property settlement of - $140,000 (d) half of deposit from same of fmh = $77,500 (e) money owed by [e pty ltd] - $77,500 (f) money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   funds in his solicitor’s trust account including remaining [company h] shares money - $93,794 (c) part property settlement of - $140,000 (d) half of deposit from same of fmh = $77,500 (e) money owed by [e pty ltd] - $77,500 (f) money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   part property settlement of - $140,000 (d) half of deposit from same of fmh = $77,500 (e) money owed by [e pty ltd] - $77,500 (f) money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   half of deposit from same of fmh = $77,500 (e) money owed by [e pty ltd] - $77,500 (f) money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   money owed by [e pty ltd] - $77,500 (f) money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   money owed to [the other company] – ($80,000) (although it is proposed that this be paid out by the wife in lieu of monies paid to the husband) (g) [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   [motor vehicle 3] - $15,000 (h) credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   credit card debts - $59,500) (also to be paid out by the wife in lieu of moneys to be received by the husband) (i) credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   credit card interest – ($30,000) (j) loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   loan from [the husband’s father] ($5,000) (k) total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.   total - $255,610 if the add backs are included to achieve a 55% division to the husband, the wife would pay $417,686 being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards and then a further sum of $248,186 to the husband. if the [company h] share money is included to achieve a 65% division to the husband, the wife would pay $233,596, being $80,000 to discharge the money owed to [the other company], $59,500 to discharge the husband’s credit cards, $30,000 to the husband for interest that he had paid on the credit cards then a further sum of $64,096. given the current position of the asset pool, it may be that the wife would need to pay a further sum to the husband over a period of time.
the wife’s case
1. release from deposit of sale of fmh $53,000 2. part property settlement from sale proceeds of fmh $20,000 f. part property settlement from sale proceeds of fmh $140,000 i funds retained from [company h] shares $38,022 j motor vehicles 1 & 2 $20,000 l funds in bank ab $ 6,185 total $277,207[8]
assets to be retained by the husband,
$345,712 (not $356,362 as at [8] her final submission)
assets to be retained by the wife,
$277,207 (as asserted at [8] of her final submission)
assets held in trust,
$144,611 (rounded and common ground)
total non-super assets
$767,530
step one: identify the property pool
the company h shares ] we would say, at the outset of our discussion of her honour's assessment of the parties' contributions, that we agree with her conclusion that "contributions by a party do not necessarily have to produce a positive result for that party's contributions which fall within [paragraphs 79(4)(a) and (b) of the family law act 1975] to be taken into account". in our view, there is so little doubt about this conclusion, that we do not need to undertake any analysis of the wording of paragraphs 79(4)(a) and (b). see shaw [1989] famca 5, (1989) flc 92-010 at 77,291-77,293 and merriman [1993] famca 115, (1993) flc 92-422 at 80,348.  ] to date, three clear categories of cases have emerged where the court has determined that it is appropriate to notionally add back to the pool of assets, that is, assets that no longer exist. they are: ...   in the circumstances outlined by baker j in kowaliw and kowaliw [1981] famca 70, (1981) flc 91-092 at 76,644:
“as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by parties or either of them in the course of a marriage whether such losses result from a joint or several liability, should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances:   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.
conduct of the kind referred to in para. (a) and (b) above having economic consequences is clearly in my view relevant under sec 75(2)(o) to applications for settlement of property instituted under the provisions of sec 79.'' [31] as the full court said in browne v green [1999] famca 1483, (1999) flc 92-873 at 86,360: “44. we agree with her honour that the principles stated by baker j in kowaliw certainly do not constitute any form of fixed code. they are no more than guidelines for use in the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction conferred by s 79 of the family law act 1975. nevertheless, they have over the considerable period of time since they were enunciated, become a well accepted guideline in this jurisdiction — a guideline the use of which assists in the achievement of the important goal of consistency within the jurisdiction.''  ] with respect to the second category, in trevi & trevi [2018] famcafc 173, (2018) flc 93-858 at [28]–[30] the full court (murphy j, alstergren dcj (as he then was) and kent j agreeing) explained the decision in ajo & gro as follows: however, the full court also made it clear that an addback does not necessarily occur whenever “a party has expended money realised from the disposition of assets that existed as at the date of separation”, the full court describing such a proposition as “unduly simplistic”. an earlier full court made the same point, saying that adding back is “the exception rather than the rule”. the fundamental precept that addbacks are exceptional, reflected in the decisions just referred to, also mirrors what has been said in earlier decisions of the full court that, for example, “the family court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it” at trial. an important parallel proposition is that the parties do not “go into a state of suspended economic animation” after separation. thus, reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. two fundamental premises emerge from ajo & gro and the authorities preceding it. first, “adding back” is a discretionary exercise. when the discretion is exercised in favour of adding back, it reflects a decision that, exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity requires it. the second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not “exceptional” justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back, but by the exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a relevant s 75(2) factor. indeed, it has been said that the latter is “a course which is, perhaps, technically more correct” than adding back to the list of existing interests in property. (footnotes omitted) [55] murphy j continued at [47]: the essence of a claim for addbacks is that the asserted sum/s should be added to the value of the existing property interests of the parties and, subsequent to the assessment of contributions, credited to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements. doing so does not offend what was emphasised by the high court [in stanford]. adding back does not seek to create property interests that do not exist. rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements of ss 79(2) and (4) of the act to do justice and equity can require an “accounting” or “balance sheet” exercise for the purposes of s 79(2) and (4), so as to include the value of the dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties’ existing interests in property, and to credit the value of same against the assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending party. (footnotes omitted) ... [58] in our view, these authorities establish four relevant propositions. first, adding back property which has been distributed and spent is discretionary, and reflects an exceptional exercise of the discretion as an “accounting” or “balance sheet” exercise for the purposes of ss 79(2) and (4) to achieve justice and equity between the parties. secondly, the nature of the expenditure reflected in add backs is relevant, and reasonably incurred expenditure does not usually come within accepted categories of addback. thirdly, the decision in stanford, followed by bevan, does not necessarily require the conclusion that adding back notional property is per se an error, but proper consideration must be given to existing interests in property. fourthly, in cases which are not exceptional, expended interim distributions can be taken up under s 75(2) rather than as part of the balance sheet exercise.
company h shares liquidation $81,599 unaccounted for
the husband’s credit cards
$30,000 interest on the $59,500 credit cards
... neither the family law act nor the case law require that parties go into a state of suspended economic animation once their marriage breaks down pending the resolution of their financial arrangements. parties are entitled to continue to provide for their own support.
the $80,000 loan from the other company
loans - [the husband] & [the wife] $80,000   there was no mention of the $80,000 being a loan or the loan agreement from the date the funds were deposited in the bank account until the demand (two days after the wife’s solicitors first letter), (b) the failure of the evidence to explain why this advance was a loan that must be repaid as opposed to the other loan, (c) the unreconciled extent of funds being paid to the company (not the same entity but an entity owned and controlled by the same person, the husband’s father) and allegations repaid in part, (d) the deposit of the funds was described as “repayment”, (e) the unreliability of the evidence of the husband and of his father which results in the reality of transactions between those entities and the husband’s father on the one hand and the husband on the other, being entirely opaque, (f) the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the failure of the evidence to explain why this advance was a loan that must be repaid as opposed to the other loan, (c) the unreconciled extent of funds being paid to the company (not the same entity but an entity owned and controlled by the same person, the husband’s father) and allegations repaid in part, (d) the deposit of the funds was described as “repayment”, (e) the unreliability of the evidence of the husband and of his father which results in the reality of transactions between those entities and the husband’s father on the one hand and the husband on the other, being entirely opaque, (f) the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the unreconciled extent of funds being paid to the company (not the same entity but an entity owned and controlled by the same person, the husband’s father) and allegations repaid in part, (d) the deposit of the funds was described as “repayment”, (e) the unreliability of the evidence of the husband and of his father which results in the reality of transactions between those entities and the husband’s father on the one hand and the husband on the other, being entirely opaque, (f) the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the deposit of the funds was described as “repayment”, (e) the unreliability of the evidence of the husband and of his father which results in the reality of transactions between those entities and the husband’s father on the one hand and the husband on the other, being entirely opaque, (f) the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the unreliability of the evidence of the husband and of his father which results in the reality of transactions between those entities and the husband’s father on the one hand and the husband on the other, being entirely opaque, (f) the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the extent of financial assistance that the husband expects from his family to purchase his $1.2 million home, (g) the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   the husband does not seek that this $80,000 be repaid but simply left on his side of the ledger as a joint liability that he will bear, and (h) i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.   i am unable to turn determine whether the $700 per week or the $1,312 usually per week are income or a loan or repayment of a loan between the same related parties as the $80,000 is said to be payable to.
the $117,365 or $77,500 debt due to the parties
the $5,000 loan
the foreign tax offset
cash in country a
children’s anz progress saver accounts
the employment bonus received by the wife
the value of motorcars: my redbook v your redbook
how much was the deposit part property settlement
the wife’s jewellery
step two: contribution
... in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to the provisions of s 79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties' cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.
the wife has persistently failed to disclose documents requested by the husband or been selective in the documents provided. see paragraphs 37 and 38 of the husband’s trial affidavit filed on 26 november 2021. the husband was not challenged on this evidence. the obligation to make disclosure is a positive obligation and selective or “forgotten disclosure” is non-disclosure. the husband should be compensated for the wife’s failure to make full and frank disclosure: what is meant by “full and frank disclosure” is set out at rule 13.04 of the family law rules 2004. it includes inter alia any “vested or contingent interest in property” and any “financial resource”. it is submitted that the obligation to make full and frank disclosure places a positive obligation on the disclosing party and “not denying” fails to meet that obligation. see sewin & cheals [2020] famca 820 (28 september 2020) at paragraph 74 for a useful summary of the full court decision in tate & tate [2000] famca 1040, (2000) flc 93-047: “discovery is a continuing process” (see brambles holdings ltd v trade practices commission [1941] arguslawrp 18, (1983) 47 alr 69) the full court in oriolo v oriolo [1985] famca 54, (1985) flc 91-653 (“oriolo”) cited the decision of lord brandon in livessey v jenkins [1984] ukhl 3, (1985) 1 all er 106 at page 114: “..... unless a court is provided with correct, complete and up to date information on the matter to which .... it is required to have regard, it cannot lawfully or properly exercise its discretion .....” in oriolo the full court also approved the statement of smithers j in briese and briese [1985] famca 23, (1986) flc 91-713 at 75,180:
“i believe that a person in the position of the husband in this case has a positive obligation to set out at an early stage his financial position in a clear and comprehensive manner”.... “the need for each party to understand the financial position of the other party is at the very heart of cases concerning property and maintenance. unless each party adopts a positive approach in this regard delays will ensue with the consequent escalation of legal, accounting and other expenses, ...” (emphasis added) it is submitted that by failing to fully disclosure her financial circumstances the wife did mislead the court and this may impede the ability of the court to properly exercise it’s discretion. in kannis & kannis (2002) flc 93-135 the trial judge made an adjustment of 10% to the ascertained pool to allow for findings in relation to undisclosed assets. in morrison & morrison (1995) flc 92-463 it was held by the full court that wilful non-disclosure by the husband amounted to a miscarriage of justice. in weir & weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338 the wife successfully appealed in relation to no costs order being made in her favour despite the husband’s deliberate non-disclosure.
step three: section 75(2) factors
step four: conclusion, calculations and just and equitable order
associate: dated: 4 november 2022
dated: 4 november 2022
[1] this assertion was not challenged and both parties put this letter in evidence.[2] the wife’s affidavit of evidence in chief asserted $60,000 not $80,000.[3] this assertion was not challenged or qualified by the husband.[4] the husband’s father later deposed that the payments were $700 per week from jan 2020 in repayment of a $145,000 debt. the payments shown in the husband’s bank statements tender in evidence show $700 per week. these $700, not $750, per week payments continued during the trial. [5] the husband’s payment total of $169,500, his with addbacks figure of $877,586 and his without addbacks figure of $349,001 all erroneously ignores his primary case payment of $248,186 and the alternative case payment of $64,096: the various totals only take account of the last three “further” payments sought.[6] same error, see the above footnote.[7] same error, see the above footnote.[8] this omits the $1,069 the wife says she holds in the children’s accounts.[9] numbering from husband’s asset and liability table in amended written final address[10] numbering from husband’s asset and liability table in amended written final address[11] to “equalise” superannuation a payment split of $32,750 would be required.