last updated: 10 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wylder & wylder [2022] fedcfamc2f 1366
orders
the court orders:
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge vasta
introduction
life in the country b
december 2015 to september 2019
proceedings brc11666/2019
the parties have sent through a purported agreement in relation to the parenting arrangements for the child and yet failed to participate in the hearing on 30 april 2020 and seek the making of orders in those terms. the child is separately represented. the independent children’s lawyer has responsibilities in relation to the child and is entitled to be heard in relation to the proposed arrangements before the court considers what orders, if any, should be made. the parents are also entitled to be heard. both parties are required to participate by telephone at the next court date and inform the court what outcome they seek. the parties are advised to obtain legal advice from a community-based legal service.
ramifications
father’s version of the end of the previous proceedings and institution of new ones
mother’s version of the end of the previous proceedings and institution of new ones
july 2021
on 11 july 2021, three police officers came to my house to serve a protection order. the front gate was closed. there is a big “no entry” sign on my gate. which means “no entry”. now unless i have “committed a crime” police are not allowed to enter my private residence. the police illegally entered my private residence. yes, i told the police officers to fuck off. as i had not committed a crime and i was within my legal right to tell them to leave. the three police officers loitered in my front yard and would not leave. continually harassing myself and my child. banging on my door, yelling out so my neighbours could hear. my daughter is five years old and was begging me not to let them in. she was crying her eyes out in the bath. she is massively scared of police officers and they would not leave. the officers stayed and i opened the window three times telling them to leave. finally they put paperwork under my door and left. if the police officers had tried to force illegal entry into my private home that night, while my daughter was in great fear, as no domestic violence was taking place in my residence and there was no reason for illegal entry, physical action would have been taken by myself. i would treat this as a home invasion and do whatever is in my power to stop these perpetrators seeing them as criminals with intent to kill and weaponised. i advised the police officers to leave me alone. i do not play games and i am feeling very threatened inside my own home currently by police and their tyrant behaviour.
the present proceedings
physical abuse of the child by the mother
videos taken by the father
the police interview with x on 5 february 2021
i was in the tv room playing with the ball. i accidentally knocked over a picture but it didn’t break. mummy then kicked my leg. mummy said she doesn’t like the doing that. i was in trouble. i just cried and walked to my bedroom.
follow-up by child safety
...whilst this information is concerning, there is insufficient information to indicate that the child has been harmed or placed at risk of harm to a level which would cause a detrimental physical, emotional or psychological impact, or that there is no parent willing and able to meet her care and protective needs adequately. the child attends school and is therefore highly visible within that community.
consideration needs to be given to the father continuing to perpetrate this fdv through reporting to cs and other government departments, including education, and controlling the narrative in relation to information reported on the mother.
the information does not indicate a level of significant and demonstrable harm to the subject child and the notifier was unable to provide any information which warrants further investigation by the department in relation to harm or risk of harm to the subject child. in further consideration of the history, it is noted that the child has been interviewed by police, most recently on 5 february 2021 and there have been several investigations by cs over the period 2017 to 2019, all of which were unsubstantiated.
while the information appears to indicate some low-level neglect worries, there was no information to indicate that the child’s basic necessities of life are unmet by the parent to such an extent that the child’s self and development is affected, causing harm, or an unacceptable risk of significant harm. history indicates there are numerous reports alleging harm to the child in the mother’s care... should further worries of same/similar nature continue to present, further investigation may be required at that time around cumulative harm to the child.
...had made no indications/disclosures about feeling unsafe of either parent. x does not talk much about her family but appears to have appropriate interactions with both parents at school. she is well behaved and there have been no observed changes in behaviour or emotional state.
...no independent party to come forward in support of the notifier’s allegations, including the several reports provided by the gp around alleged (minor) bruises which also note that the child appeared happy and alert, not distressed and well nourished, suggesting in fact that there is a good standard of care being provided to the child and that she presents as a happy and energetic child.
dr e
...had been in the care of the mother and that there was a haematoma over the lower patella and a 2 cm mark over the mid and lower right tibia. it noted a haematoma of 2 cm on the left thigh and ½ cm mark on the left medial aspect (indecipherable). these were allegedly caused by a “pinch” by mother.
child safety notes following the execution of the recovery order
interview with x on 27 august 2021
aftermath
discussion of harm to x caused by the mother
the health (particularly mental health) of the father
domestic violence
his mental health deteriorated over the years. in 2014, he returned to australia from the [country b] where he was homicidal and suicidal for 18 months. he was in [suburb j] psychiatric hospital for nearly a month. on 22 august 2019, he told me twice - seriously and threatening - he would kill me if i reported them to docs again, today i am! he visited for four hours and was extremely angry the whole time. he will kill.
kicked my three year old granddaughter on 17 september 2019. she, [x], has seen her dad, my son, verbally abuse and offer to fight too many people in her life. he does get overly angry instantly! he boasts to me year after year of the dangerous things he has done in instigating physical fights. people back down from him as i think he is crazy. he needs to go to [suburb j] psychiatric immediately.
he can be a loving dad to [x] though his anger flicks to extreme too quickly. she is at risk of being frightened or hurt by other people’s reactions to his anger. he will kill!
late last year, [the father] befriended and developed a very close relationship with his dad [paternal grandfather]. me and my 2 children left his dad when [the father] was [young]. [i had a] domestic violence order. since then, [the father] has hated me and his sister immensely, he believes his dad was innocent. their dad never paid maintenance or even sent one card - ever”.
relevant text messages of the period
...if you really care about our daughter. you should think about going back to work full-time and let me take over. you know i am a good dad. i have all the time in the world for a beautiful daughter. i would devote my entire life to making sure she has everything in life. i looked after you. i bought [sic] you here. i did everything for you. i will do the same for her. you know my heart.
your daughter is growing up too despise you [ms wylder]. she is fucking scared shitless of you. it's all your own fault. you [ms wylder] are a verv bad mother. you don’t even deserve a child. you don’t even know how to care for this one. you are nothing but a problem in her life. you cause nothing but heartache, pain and suffering to our daughter. you spend no money on her at all. you only ever so free shit. you've fucked up her karate, swimming, her good school [l school], you constantly hurt her physically and abuse her you feed her shit food. you always change her custody to what suits your and [mr k]s life, not what's best for our daughter. you ruined our marriage with your greed for money, which has had a huge negative impact on our daughters mind and her life. it's all on you. she knows you lied and you still lie to the cops about hurting her and about the night we broke up. you and ya mother told the cops i had a knife. that was a fucking lie. that's why they were so rough. it's all your fault. [x] can read now. so when you lie about who gets her payments or what was said or done by [ms m] or you in court documents. i iust let her read the court documents. your, [mr k]'s and [ms m’s] lies are being exposed one by one by me. your here for the centrelink money and that's all your here for. your 3 fake dvo's are proof of who you are and what you thought of me. you only got a dvo against me so you could get her parenting payments. once you got the payments transferred into your name, you dropped the·dvo against me. this was all your master plan. at.the start of 2020 i had [x] 80 percent of the time and you just took all the money from centrelink. that worked well for you. until i couldn't financially afford it anymore. then i approached centrelink told them and only then you demanded your 51 percent custody. so you wouldn’t lose the payments. your all about the money. you don't love [x]. you want her parenting payment. so you can send it too the [country b]   is just a problem for you now. i can clearly see that you don’t want [x]. you and ya pedofile need space, take it. go away with ya pedofile, go live ya life, and give me [x] full-time. i will take her. i will tell her your dead. you hurt her non-stop. you don’t want her annoying you. your pedofile doesn’t want [x] in your relationship. give her to me. just disappear...forget about [x] ...you hurt her, your fucking up her life, just go [ms wylder]. disappear with ya pedo. [x] will be better off without you in her life.
she [x] was not interviewed today as a result of only just having returned home. she had been told by her father that her mother was dead, so was still confused about how her mother was still here.
other text messages  - knows you put [mr k] before her. [x] knows that your family getting their monthly money is more important to you than she is. [x]’s an aussie. she isn’t a dumb [country b] whore. she’s half me. she’s smart as fuck...   wylder]. you open ya legs for dirty old men and their money and so do all your friends. so don’t preach to me about life, your a two bit whore. i didn’t marry you for ya brains love. neither does [mr k]. i found you in the trash bin. i made you who you are today. remember that. you and your entire family will be in debt to me for the rest of your miserable lives.
you could just use [mr k] or [mr n], like you used me to get inside this country. your a parasite [ms wylder]. you spat out a kid to hitch a ride to the first world now your gonna spit out a kid to get ya hooks into a rich guy. i wouldn’t be proud of opening ya legs for money [ms wylder]. everyone with half a brain can see what you are. you lie and lie some more. the only crowd you will ever get into is ya pedofile crowd. all the dirty old pedo men with their young wives. all of you ashamed to be seen in public because of ya age differences. so you all hang out together at a house. yes [ms wylder] people are staring at you all. because it's fucken sick and not normal. i look forward to the day [mr k] uses you up and spits you out. just like the ex wife and two children he just abandoned. those two houses would be sold by now if he stopped paying the mortgages. keep that in ya memory. good riddens to bad things. i hope you step under a bus.
social media posts
the trial is coming, i hope you’ve got an extremely good fucking memory because you’re gonna have to remember all your lies and i know you’re gonna watch this video. i hope you’re ready because it’s easy to recall from here (pointing to his head) but it’s not easy to just remember what you’ve just written on a piece of paper which is fucking garbage or bullshit and lies. this is where you are gonna come unstuck and i’m gonna expose you for exactly what you are.
if anybody knows me, it’s you. you know me. am i the sort of person that just gives up and walks away from anything? no. no i’m not, you know that. i’m here for the long run, i’m here to stay. and i’m not going nowhere. i’m going to keep going. i’m never gonna stop. not until things are right. you know that.
that the parents are restrained, and an injunction to issue restraining the parents from making any posts on social media in relation to the child, the other parent or these proceedings.
here we go. [ms o] [sic] here’s an idea. give me permission to go on a seven night killing spree at mountains to mangroves and kids space parklands. i will get every person that walks the path from 10 pm to 4 am. just a seven day shift and i promise there will be no more rapes, bashings or robberies in the local area ever again. deal?
the father’s attitude towards the family law system
the father’s belief about a teacher being a rapist
subject: rape...rapist at large... hi, [mr y]. i hear your interested in catching a rapist. this has already been reported to police link. the victim hasn't come forward. but i have her admissions on my messenger to anal rape and theft. my friend that was raped, her name is [redacted] she is [nationality z]. she is married with two children. hence her keeping secret about the rape. only myself and her husband know. she was having an affair with me at the time she was raped by this other guy. the victim sent me photos of the rapist. i tried to arrange meeting with the rapist at midnight in [ab park] to get [redacted] watch back and to break his teeth or more. the rapist refused to meet me. i talked to the rapist via messenger chat. he called himself [redacted] on facebook. he also called himself [redacted] on facebook. he has several accounts. he has targeted 3 women now. two from the [ac club] that got away and [redacted] from a singles site, who was not so lucky. the photos sent to me of the rapist are an exact match for my daughter's teacher, [redacted] otherwise known as [redacted] he is a prep school teacher at [t school] working along side women and children. the rapist is a primary school teacher in the [suburb j] area on his fb profile, so is , the rapist owns two motorbikes, [redacted] drives [a] motorbike to work, [redacted] looks exactly like the pictures i was sent from the victims. myself and two other parents believe my pictures are and he is the rapist. my 5 year old daughter saw the pic and said it was [redacted] . i will spread my photos far and wide to all parents until this man is investigated and if appropriate, put in a cage with his fellow animal brethren or preferably hung with a short rope." i can supply the rope" please do not quote to me... "the victim has to come forward herself, to talk to us, before any charges can be laid" because rape is rape, murder or murder. no matter who reports it. it's still a crime and deserves attention. i am looking for a police officer that is interested in doing real police work. not just revenue raising for the government. if this is the man and i beleive it is. this needs to be investigated. if he touches my daughter. you will be locking me away and throwing away the key. i don't want a rapist teaching my kid. kind regards [mr wylder]   wylder], police require a complaint to investigate offences of this nature. if these offences have occurred, the victim needs to make contact with police so it can be investigated. if you want to help in regards to this, perhaps encourage the victim to make contact with police. i can not locate any documentation regarding this matter between you and police link. if they provided you a reference number, i can follow up with that. the school can not do anything in regards to this, and have requested that you desist in contacting them in regards to this matter. regards, [mr y] [suburb w] police   y]... wow a police officer threatens me to desist in catching a rapist who raped a women and is a school teacher at [t school]. [redacted] surrounded by women and children. refusing to do police work. is it a common thing to aid and abbett rapists for the [suburb w] police station officers? i can come forward on the victims behalf. both the school principle at [t school] and the [suburb w] police are aiding and abetting a community rapist in [suburb j]. i have reported him three times to three different government body's. i know this is him!!! he raped my friend. he is my daughter's teacher! [redacted] just because the women victim is too scared to come forward does not mean rape should go unchecked and the fact that the principle just doesn't want to deal with it because she is new and only a fill in. so not only will you not investigate a rape case. but you and the principle are telling me to back down and leave the rapist alone so he can work at the school along side women and children. you as a police officer and the principle at [t school] as a children's representative. you've been informed that i know the victim personally, i also know the rapist. i was with the victim two weeks ago, discussing exactly this. she is too scared to come forward on her own, she is [country b] decent. the most vonerable in our community. she needs your help and you need to talk to her and give her the support she needs as a representative of this community and law enforcement officer. you've been informed that i have all the victims messages stating she was raped by this exact man. you have been informed this is 100% the rapist and he is a teacher at [t school]. my daughter's teacher! will you wait for him to rape again? he has attacked 3 women that i personally know of. maybe he will kill and torture the next women. what happened to protecting the women of our community? are you waiting till he murders? is that what you would like? we need preventive legislation not reactive legislation. if it's reactive, then it's already too late. well here's what i am gonna say and do, and you and the principle won't like it. you two rape lovers can go get fucked. i will pass this guy's details onto the rebels, the highway boys, nomads, mongals, hells angels, and they can deal with him. i will tell them exactly where they can find him. i ride with alot of different people. wanna ping me for association? go for it. you will be incriminating the wrong man for defending his friend and daughter. my daughter is getting taught by a rapist. what if it was your daughter? if your not gonna do shit then maybe they will. it's worth a try. you can pin it to me if you want. i really don't give a fuck. worse things in life have happend to me. 2 parents one child plus myself identified [redacted] as the rapist. i am not gonna drop it, you will just have to arrest me. what is the charge? "identifying a rapist in the community and exposing him...? " what a joke. not only will i not desist but i am going higher and i will approach every parent out side of the school and i can show them my evidence, that you have refused to look at. if has done nothing wrong than i guess he has nothing to worry about. cops have proved themselves once again. fucking useless. if it was soely up to me. i would have removed my daughter from that deadshit school already. my bitch cheating whore ex won't sign the papers. thanks for nothing. [mr wylder].
the family report
the psychiatric reports
report relating to the mother
report relating to the father
the risk assessment
the father’s rating for all three measures was “high”.
evidence of dr ae
post –evidence social media posts
hi everyone, my child is alienated. she is six years old. the family court of australia is currently destroying her little life. the blood of the innocent is on their hands.
i have never felt better in my entire life mentally and in the family court i have a psych report writter [sic] and an icl telling the judge i am gonna murder suicide... the system is a joke.
they want me to do a one year course, prevention of murder suicide. they say i will kill my ex-wife and child. they are a fucking joke... my ex-wife will kill our child. she already bruised her and cut her. but that’s all supported by the family court and ignored.
i had 50/50 her bf kept trying to control my custody. now i am on gag orders. i am not allowed to tell you that my ex-wife bashes my daughter and no one is doing anything about it.
they are not basing their report on today. they have backdated all information to 7 years ago and are using it today. also the icl is massively bias and surrounds herself with powerful bias feminists. a bias forensic psychiatrist. not a treating one. and a bias family report writer [sic]. also the bias icl barrister who is suppose to representing the child. tried to force me to apologise to my ex-wife at the trial!!! massive bias!!!
application of the act
application of law to the circumstances of the case
primary considerations – section 60b  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   it is important to x that she has a meaningful relationship with her mother, and (b) there is a very great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse.   there is a very great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse.   there is simply too much conflict between the mother and the father for the child to have a meaningful relationship with both. the child would simply not be able to cope with the differences in parenting styles of the parents. (b) there is a great deal of evidence that the child has been exposed to family violence and there is a totally unacceptable risk to the child in the presence of the father.   there is a great deal of evidence that the child has been exposed to family violence and there is a totally unacceptable risk to the child in the presence of the father.
additional considerations – section 60cc(3)  in my view, x is too young to be able to form any firm and considered view about this subject. it may be that the mother has previously expressed the view that the father is the “favoured parent” but, from what the child has said, this has been based on a superficial premise as to the “fun times” in which the father has indulged the child. (b) i have spoken a great deal about the relationship that the child has with her parents. the problem for x is that she has received totally inconsistent messages from her parents. if this were to continue, it would be extremely deleterious for the child. (c) the fact is that x has been involved in a tug-of-war between her parents ever since their separation. the father, especially, has been involved in a game of one-upmanship in which he has tried to prove at all times that he is better than the mother. when his failings were put to him during cross examination, his immediate response was to attempt to contrast himself with the mother as if to say “if i’m bad, then the mother is worse”. whilst it may be that on the surface it appears that the father has tried to take every opportunity to spend time, communicate and make decisions for the child, there is a superficiality to those endeavours. (ca) a very disturbing aspect of this matter has been the battle between the parents over centrelink payments. the number of times where the father has sent messages to the mother for the purpose of increasing his centrelink payments is astonishing. as a result of the dv orders in place, it is not appropriate for the father to be contributing to child support. (d) i have thought long and hard about this aspect because there will be consequences for the child if the child has no contact, or very little contact, with her father. (e) there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have spoken a great deal about the relationship that the child has with her parents. the problem for x is that she has received totally inconsistent messages from her parents. if this were to continue, it would be extremely deleterious for the child. (c) the fact is that x has been involved in a tug-of-war between her parents ever since their separation. the father, especially, has been involved in a game of one-upmanship in which he has tried to prove at all times that he is better than the mother. when his failings were put to him during cross examination, his immediate response was to attempt to contrast himself with the mother as if to say “if i’m bad, then the mother is worse”. whilst it may be that on the surface it appears that the father has tried to take every opportunity to spend time, communicate and make decisions for the child, there is a superficiality to those endeavours. (ca) a very disturbing aspect of this matter has been the battle between the parents over centrelink payments. the number of times where the father has sent messages to the mother for the purpose of increasing his centrelink payments is astonishing. as a result of the dv orders in place, it is not appropriate for the father to be contributing to child support. (d) i have thought long and hard about this aspect because there will be consequences for the child if the child has no contact, or very little contact, with her father. (e) there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   the fact is that x has been involved in a tug-of-war between her parents ever since their separation. the father, especially, has been involved in a game of one-upmanship in which he has tried to prove at all times that he is better than the mother. when his failings were put to him during cross examination, his immediate response was to attempt to contrast himself with the mother as if to say “if i’m bad, then the mother is worse”. whilst it may be that on the surface it appears that the father has tried to take every opportunity to spend time, communicate and make decisions for the child, there is a superficiality to those endeavours. (ca) a very disturbing aspect of this matter has been the battle between the parents over centrelink payments. the number of times where the father has sent messages to the mother for the purpose of increasing his centrelink payments is astonishing. as a result of the dv orders in place, it is not appropriate for the father to be contributing to child support. (d) i have thought long and hard about this aspect because there will be consequences for the child if the child has no contact, or very little contact, with her father. (e) there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.  ) a very disturbing aspect of this matter has been the battle between the parents over centrelink payments. the number of times where the father has sent messages to the mother for the purpose of increasing his centrelink payments is astonishing. as a result of the dv orders in place, it is not appropriate for the father to be contributing to child support. (d) i have thought long and hard about this aspect because there will be consequences for the child if the child has no contact, or very little contact, with her father. (e) there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have thought long and hard about this aspect because there will be consequences for the child if the child has no contact, or very little contact, with her father. (e) there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   there is no practical difficulty about spending time arrangements. the only question is the appropriateness of any arrangements. (f) i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have spent the majority of these reasons looking at the capacity of the parents to provide for the needs of x, especially her intellectual and emotional needs. (g) i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have taken into account these considerations especially that the child does have an anglo/country b ancestry. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance does not apply (i) i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have spoken at great lengths about this aspect throughout the course of these reasons. (j) there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   there is a current dv order in place and i have taken that into account. (k) i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have taken all of these aspects into account. (l) i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i am acutely aware that the father has said that he will continue to fight until it is that he achieves what he wants. whilst it is always beneficial to make an order that would not lead to further proceedings, in this case the appropriate order is the one that keeps the child safe, even if that means there will be further litigation. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.
parental responsibility
conclusions
associate: dated: 9 november 2022
dated: 9 november 2022