last updated: 6 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pavlic & pavlic (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1550
orders
the court orders that:
ex temporereasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mcclelland:
that the assets in [b pty ltd] be sold and the net sale proceeds be applied to repaying any sales commission costs and any business liabilities (save for the [b pty ltd] tax debt), with the balance thereafter to be divided 57/43 in the wife's favour,
the wife's payment to our client of $287,632 does not provide our client with his 43% entitlement, as the total calculation of our client’s retained property at paragraph 162 of the reasons ($1,157,728) omits the liabilities our client is to retain pursuant to paragraphs 18, 20 and 23 of the final orders,
relevant legal principles
having determined that such an adjustment was appropriate, the primary judge then adopted what has been regarded as the “preferred” approach to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to by the full court in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 (“hickey”) (at [39]) by: firstly, making findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties as at the date of the hearing. secondly, the court identifying and assessing the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss 79(4)(a), (b) and (c), and determining the contribution-based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the parties’ property. thirdly, identifying and assessing the relevant matters referred to in ss 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g) including, as a result of s 79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and determining the adjustment (if any) that should be made to the contribution-based entitlements of the parties established at step two above. fourthly, considering the effect of those findings and determinations, resolving what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.  hasis added)
...the first task of a trial judge considering an application pursuant to pt viii of the act is “to identify and value, as far as the evidence would allow, the parties’ existing legal and equitable property interests”. this necessarily involves identifying the value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties as at the date of the hearing: hickey at [39].
mr mcivor: in terms of the orders 1 to 5 – but the key orders are really paragraph 1 and paragraph 5 of the proposed orders, your honour – relating to the proposed sale of [b pty ltd], what had been sought in his amended application, at paragraph 5, was that once the assets of the business are sold, it’s applied to outstanding business liabilities, including but not limited to the [b pty ltd] tax debt. (emphasis added)
mr mcivor: ... now, the business is held in – each party has a share in the company that operates the business – would have left a messy situation, if i can put it that way, in terms of the outstanding tax debt. so what – the effect of what he has proposed in the amended minute [exhibit 2 in the proceedings] is that he take on the tax debt and the net proceeds of sale of the assets of the business. his honour: is the tax debt in his name? mr mcivor: no, it’s not. it’s in the company name, your honour, but he would indemnify the wife in respect to that. (emphasis added)
mr mcivor: yes. but not asking your honour to make a finding about what those vehicles [owned by [b pty ltd]] are worth. his honour: and, as i recall, your orders are the husband would indemnify the wife in the event that there was any loss from the sale of [b pty ltd], is that right? mr mcivor: yes. yes. and the tax liability. his honour: yes. mr mcivor: he will indemnify her with respect to that as well. (emphasis added)
mr mcivor: ...the husband will be taking on, under these proposed orders, the liabilities, for example, the tax debt of 185,000, his personal tax debt of 103,000. his honour: but that – those debts would come off the pool to determine – those liabilities would come off the pool to determine what the pool is – mr mcivor: yes. his honour: – and then you would say – so, say, the net pool – i haven’t got a calculator here and i’m sorry about this. so we take out superannuation, so the total pool is 2,904 – mr mcivor: yes, 2,904,000.
his honour: well, no, the tax – the debts – if i included those liabilities on the balance sheet – mr mcivor: yes. his honour: they will come off the property of the parties. they will – that will come off to get to that figure of 2,904,000. mr mcivor: yes. his honour: and then i will apply the percentage adjustment to that figure – mr mcivor: yes. his honour: – if i – assuming i take that – mr mcivor: yes. his honour: – and then i will work out what property each party has in their own column – mr mcivor: yes. his honour: – and if there’s any financial adjustment to get to whatever the 52/48, 55/45, whatever it is, less what that party has in their pool. mr mcivor: yes. whether that’s a net figure or be it – yes, net figure for each..., but – his honour: yes, i’m looking at a – in terms of cash adjustment for the wife, if she does keep, if she wants to, the matrimonial home. (emphasis added)
associate: dated: 14 november 2022
dated: 14 november 2022
[1] transcript 27 april 2022, p.23 lines 42–46.