last updated: 6 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carlisle & neely [2022] fedcfamc2f 1539
orders
the court orders that:  first, payment of the agent’s commission and advertising and legal expenses of the sale, (b) second, payment of the money due and owing to the mortgagee, and (c) third, such that the applicant receives 100% of any part of the proceeds of the sale which remains outstanding.   second, payment of the money due and owing to the mortgagee, and (c) third, such that the applicant receives 100% of any part of the proceeds of the sale which remains outstanding.   third, such that the applicant receives 100% of any part of the proceeds of the sale which remains outstanding.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other party to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders including but not limited to the shareholdings as or in the respective name of each party, (b) insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, (d) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, (c) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, (d) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled to pursuant to these orders, (d) each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forego any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   an affidavit by the compliant party and/or their solicitor setting out the non-compliant party’s failure to comply with these orders will be sufficient evidence of non-compliance, and (b) the compliant party nominate a solicitor who is authorised to sign documents of pexa transfers and such solicitor shall sign on behalf of the non-compliant party upon the written request from the compliant party to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.   the compliant party nominate a solicitor who is authorised to sign documents of pexa transfers and such solicitor shall sign on behalf of the non-compliant party upon the written request from the compliant party to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.
reasons for judgmentjudge harland  the parties were in a short de facto relationship, (2) all the capital for the purchase of the b street, suburb c property was paid by the applicant, (3) any financial contributions made by the respondent is less than half of what he would have been obliged to pay in rent, (4) the applicant was subjected to family violence throughout the relationship including threats and physical assaults, (5) the parties signed a separation agreement in 2018 and thereafter acted as though they were bound by that agreement.   all the capital for the purchase of the b street, suburb c property was paid by the applicant, (3) any financial contributions made by the respondent is less than half of what he would have been obliged to pay in rent, (4) the applicant was subjected to family violence throughout the relationship including threats and physical assaults, (5) the parties signed a separation agreement in 2018 and thereafter acted as though they were bound by that agreement.   any financial contributions made by the respondent is less than half of what he would have been obliged to pay in rent, (4) the applicant was subjected to family violence throughout the relationship including threats and physical assaults, (5) the parties signed a separation agreement in 2018 and thereafter acted as though they were bound by that agreement.   the applicant was subjected to family violence throughout the relationship including threats and physical assaults, (5) the parties signed a separation agreement in 2018 and thereafter acted as though they were bound by that agreement.   the parties signed a separation agreement in 2018 and thereafter acted as though they were bound by that agreement.
issues in dispute  what are the parties’ legal and equitable interests and what assets should be included in the asset pool? (2) what is the length of the de facto relationship? (3) what weight should be given to the parties’ respective contributions including: (a) the applicant’s initial contributions to the purchase of the b street, suburb c property, (b) the works carried out on the b street, suburb c property, (c) homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions. (4) what weight should be put on the applicant’s allegations of significant family violence impacting on her contributions? (5) what are the extent of the parties’ respective earning capacities and whether there should be any adjustments under s90sf(3)?   what is the length of the de facto relationship? (3) what weight should be given to the parties’ respective contributions including: (a) the applicant’s initial contributions to the purchase of the b street, suburb c property, (b) the works carried out on the b street, suburb c property, (c) homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions. (4) what weight should be put on the applicant’s allegations of significant family violence impacting on her contributions? (5) what are the extent of the parties’ respective earning capacities and whether there should be any adjustments under s90sf(3)?   what weight should be given to the parties’ respective contributions including: (a) the applicant’s initial contributions to the purchase of the b street, suburb c property, (b) the works carried out on the b street, suburb c property, (c) homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions. (4) what weight should be put on the applicant’s allegations of significant family violence impacting on her contributions? (5) what are the extent of the parties’ respective earning capacities and whether there should be any adjustments under s90sf(3)?   the applicant’s initial contributions to the purchase of the b street, suburb c property, (b) the works carried out on the b street, suburb c property, (c) homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions.   the works carried out on the b street, suburb c property, (c) homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions.   homemaking and parenting contributions, and (d) post separation contributions.   post separation contributions.   what weight should be put on the applicant’s allegations of significant family violence impacting on her contributions? (5) what are the extent of the parties’ respective earning capacities and whether there should be any adjustments under s90sf(3)?   what are the extent of the parties’ respective earning capacities and whether there should be any adjustments under s90sf(3)?
impressions of the witnesses and evidentiary issues
what weight should be given to dr f evidence?
legal principles
35. “it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.” 36. the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.” [footnotes omitted]
1. firstly, in order to ascertain whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order, it is necessary to identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. the high court emphasised the word ‘existing’. 2. secondly, although s.79 gives the court a broad power to make property settlement orders it may not be exercised in an unprincipled fashion. there must be no assumption that the parties’ interests are or should be different to their existing interests. 3. thirdly, when considering whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable the court must not assume that one or the other party has the right to a property adjustment order. the court must give separate consideration to s.79(2) in addition to the matters referred to in s.79(4).
the parties’ legal and equitable interests
asset
value
liability
equity
b street, suburb c property
$845,000
$158,205
$686,795
motor vehicle 1
$5,000
caravan
$3,000
super fund g
$435
net total
$8,435
assets
company e – including motor vehicle 4
$34,200
tools of trade
unregistered trailer
$500
super fund h
$19,639
total assets
$59,339
liabilities
company e – including motor vehicle 4 finance
-$24,794
nab personal loan
-$3,918
total liabilities
-$28,712
$30,627
length of relationship
the police also obtained a 5 year ivo for the applicant’s protection.
separation agreement - 9 may 2018
motorbike 2
$12,000
boat
motor vehicle 2
various tools
3 dirt bikes
$1,300
furniture and shed tools and machinery
$4,000
trailer
$2,000
$32,300
at the time of signing this settlement agreement 9 may 2018 i had not obtained legal advice, my mental health was poor and i do not remember signing this.
contributions
initial contributions to the purchase of the b street, suburb c property
deposit
$52,000.00
stamp duty[2]
$23,705.00
conveyancer costs
$1,050.50
proceeds of sale of applicant’s qld property
$295,239.00
total sum
$371,994.50
contributions to the improvement of the b street, suburb c property
homemaking and parenting contributions
post separation contributions
family violence
during the relationship, the applicant and i would have fiery arguments with each other we often had strong differing views on issues consequently we would each “give as good as we received” however, the applicant would also become physically violent towards me where i would have to protect/defend myself. at no time was i ever verbally or physically abusive towards the applicant’s children.
i did not have the skill set to deal with the applicant’s violence and harassing, coercive behaviour towards me.
january 2019 incident
section 90sf factors
closing submissions  that the respondent made substantial contributions from his income to the relationship. the evidence establishes that the payments he made towards the mortgage is a little less than half of what he would have paid for a similar rental property. whilst i accept that he made some other payments, contrary to his assertion, the evidence shows that the applicant contributed significant sums in addition to her capital for the purchase of the b street, suburb c property. in addition to the various lump-sum referred to during the course of the evidence, the applicant also established that she made payment for various utilities and household expenses from her bank l account. i am satisfied that the respondent has exaggerated the extent of his financial contributions. the applicant has been solely responsible for paying the mortgage from 2018 to date, apart from their three-month reconciliation. this has all been post separation. these contributions are significant. (2) the respondent has also failed to establish on the evidence that his work on the property significantly improved the value of the property. his advocate referred to the reference in the valuation to the bungalow. the valuation also referred to the property being of below average construction for its age with ongoing maintenance issues compared to other properties. the value also assumed that the improvements were legally constructed with the appropriate permits. (3) the respondent also failed to establish his claim that he made significant contributions to the care of the applicant’s children. counsel for the applicant referred to the case of robb v robb (1995) flc 92-555. robb recognised that parties have a legal duty to maintain their children from a previous relationship, but they do not have a legal duty towards step-children unless there are orders in place. rather, they volunteer in assisting the other party in maintaining their children. the applicant was not challenged about her contributions towards m’s care. i am not satisfied that the respondent bought bikes for the applicant’s children as he claimed and i am not satisfied that he was significantly involved in their care. i accept mr o’s evidence against the respondent and that he witnessed the respondent’s violence towards his mother.   the respondent has also failed to establish on the evidence that his work on the property significantly improved the value of the property. his advocate referred to the reference in the valuation to the bungalow. the valuation also referred to the property being of below average construction for its age with ongoing maintenance issues compared to other properties. the value also assumed that the improvements were legally constructed with the appropriate permits. (3) the respondent also failed to establish his claim that he made significant contributions to the care of the applicant’s children. counsel for the applicant referred to the case of robb v robb (1995) flc 92-555. robb recognised that parties have a legal duty to maintain their children from a previous relationship, but they do not have a legal duty towards step-children unless there are orders in place. rather, they volunteer in assisting the other party in maintaining their children. the applicant was not challenged about her contributions towards m’s care. i am not satisfied that the respondent bought bikes for the applicant’s children as he claimed and i am not satisfied that he was significantly involved in their care. i accept mr o’s evidence against the respondent and that he witnessed the respondent’s violence towards his mother.   the respondent also failed to establish his claim that he made significant contributions to the care of the applicant’s children. counsel for the applicant referred to the case of robb v robb (1995) flc 92-555. robb recognised that parties have a legal duty to maintain their children from a previous relationship, but they do not have a legal duty towards step-children unless there are orders in place. rather, they volunteer in assisting the other party in maintaining their children. the applicant was not challenged about her contributions towards m’s care. i am not satisfied that the respondent bought bikes for the applicant’s children as he claimed and i am not satisfied that he was significantly involved in their care. i accept mr o’s evidence against the respondent and that he witnessed the respondent’s violence towards his mother.
conclusion
associate: dated: 11 november 2022
dated: 11 november 2022
[1] see watson & ling [2013] famca 57; (2013) 49 fam lr 303.[2] the applicant received a refund of $11,000 from the stamp duty paid which she says she then put back into the b street, suburb c property and paid for the parties’ daily living expenses.[3] see, family court of australia and federal circuit court of australia, family violence best practice principles (4th edition, 2016); australian institute of judicial administration, national domestic family violence bench book (june 2022)