last updated: 13 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gilmartin & oates [2022] fedcfamc2f 1553
orders
the court orders:  during the new south wales (“nsw”) school terms one weekend in each term in the region b (save and except for the father’s day weekend), from after school friday until 5.00pm sunday, provided that the respondent notifies the applicant in writing no less than four (4) weeks prior of her availability to travel to spend time with x in the region b region and the applicant is to confirm within seven (7) days of that notice that x is available to spend time with the respondent that weekend, (b) during the nsw term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays from the first saturday of the holiday period until the second sunday of the holiday period, (c) during the term 4 christmas school holidays as follows: (i) in even number years from the first saturday of the holiday period until 7 january, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7 january until the last saturday of the school holiday period prior to the commencement of the school term.   during the nsw term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays from the first saturday of the holiday period until the second sunday of the holiday period, (c) during the term 4 christmas school holidays as follows: (i) in even number years from the first saturday of the holiday period until 7 january, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7 january until the last saturday of the school holiday period prior to the commencement of the school term.   during the term 4 christmas school holidays as follows: (i) in even number years from the first saturday of the holiday period until 7 january, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7 january until the last saturday of the school holiday period prior to the commencement of the school term.   in even number years from the first saturday of the holiday period until 7 january, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7 january until the last saturday of the school holiday period prior to the commencement of the school term.  ) in odd numbered years from 7 january until the last saturday of the school holiday period prior to the commencement of the school term.   that x will fly as an unaccompanied minor between the city c and brisbane airports, (b) that the applicant and respondent each be responsible for x’s transfer from their respective houses to and from the relevant airport, (c) that the parties share equally in the cost of x’s flights to and from queensland, (d) that the respondent is to provide the applicant with a copy of x’s flight tickets and itinerary at least four (4) weeks prior to x’s time with the respondent, (e) the applicant and respondent will sign and do all things necessary to obtain any border passes (if required) as may be available to allow x to travel between queensland and nsw.   that the applicant and respondent each be responsible for x’s transfer from their respective houses to and from the relevant airport, (c) that the parties share equally in the cost of x’s flights to and from queensland, (d) that the respondent is to provide the applicant with a copy of x’s flight tickets and itinerary at least four (4) weeks prior to x’s time with the respondent, (e) the applicant and respondent will sign and do all things necessary to obtain any border passes (if required) as may be available to allow x to travel between queensland and nsw.   that the parties share equally in the cost of x’s flights to and from queensland, (d) that the respondent is to provide the applicant with a copy of x’s flight tickets and itinerary at least four (4) weeks prior to x’s time with the respondent, (e) the applicant and respondent will sign and do all things necessary to obtain any border passes (if required) as may be available to allow x to travel between queensland and nsw.   that the respondent is to provide the applicant with a copy of x’s flight tickets and itinerary at least four (4) weeks prior to x’s time with the respondent, (e) the applicant and respondent will sign and do all things necessary to obtain any border passes (if required) as may be available to allow x to travel between queensland and nsw.   the applicant and respondent will sign and do all things necessary to obtain any border passes (if required) as may be available to allow x to travel between queensland and nsw.   their respective residential address, (b) any mobile telephone numbers and/or email addresses that each of them has available from time to time, (c) at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours, (d) the applicant and respondent must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 72 hours of change.   any mobile telephone numbers and/or email addresses that each of them has available from time to time, (c) at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours, (d) the applicant and respondent must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 72 hours of change.   at least one telephone number at which they can each be contacted at all hours, (d) the applicant and respondent must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 72 hours of change.   the applicant and respondent must notify the other in writing or by text message of any change of such particulars within 72 hours of change.   notify mr d (“mr d”) that she believes he may be x’s biological father (noting her only current means of contact is via social media and she is permitted to privately message him for this purpose), (b) inform mr d that final parenting orders have been made for x, (c) request an email address, street address or po box (“a postal address”) from mr d for the purposes of sending him a copy of these orders, (d) upon receiving a postal address send a copy of these orders to mr d at that address.   inform mr d that final parenting orders have been made for x, (c) request an email address, street address or po box (“a postal address”) from mr d for the purposes of sending him a copy of these orders, (d) upon receiving a postal address send a copy of these orders to mr d at that address.   request an email address, street address or po box (“a postal address”) from mr d for the purposes of sending him a copy of these orders, (d) upon receiving a postal address send a copy of these orders to mr d at that address.   upon receiving a postal address send a copy of these orders to mr d at that address.
and the court notes:
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
proposal of the applicant
proposal of the respondent
proposal of the independent children’s lawyer (“the icl”)
the evidence
credit   ms g who filed an affidavit on 1 august 2022. she is the applicant’s partner. she gave her evidence via microsoft teams. ms g impressed as a credible witness and gave her evidence in a straightforward and upfront manner, (b) ms m who filed an affidavit on 1 august 2022. she is the applicant’s mother. she also gave her evidence via microsoft teams. she too was a credible witness who impressed as honest and reliable.   ms m who filed an affidavit on 1 august 2022. she is the applicant’s mother. she also gave her evidence via microsoft teams. she too was a credible witness who impressed as honest and reliable.
i’ve been looking for you for 18 months. you are the father of our nine (9) month old daughter.
during the period of conception of [x] i was involved with multiple people during the period and [mr gilmartin] was only one occasion but was not near what conception date would date to. i don’t believe [mr gilmartin] is the biological father of [x] and would like this finally to be proven (as per the original, emphasis added)
it was around when [x] was 9 months old [mr gilmartin] messaged me on the dating app again and he found out i had two children at that point. [mr gilmartin] asked if [x] was his and i advised him there was a possibility but i was not 100% sure if he was [x]’s biological father. (as per the original, emphasis added)  phasis added)
when [x] was around 10 months old [mr gilmartin] contacted me and was asking me about my life when i informed him, i had another child. [mr gilmartin] asked if [x] was his and i advised i was not 100% sure but there was a possibility that she was. i facilitated a relationship between [x] and [mr gilmartin] the best i could and encouraged them to get to know each other because i always thought and believed he was her father. (as per the original, emphasis added)
the relevant legal principles
these rights, and the right of freedom of mobility of a parent, only defer to the paramount consideration of a child’s best interests where those interests would be so adversely affected as to justify such interference, and then the interference is legitimate only to the extent that it is necessary to avoid such adverse effects.   the best interests of the child are the paramount, but not the sole consideration, (b) the person seeking to move does not need to provide compelling reasons for the relocation sought, (c) the court must evaluate the competing proposals, giving consideration to how each proposal will provide advantages and disadvantages for the child’s best interests, (d) the question of whether there should be a relocation cannot be treated as a separate or discrete issue to that of the question of residence, (e) neither party bears an onus to establish that an order permitting or restraining relocation is in the children’s best interests, and (f) the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.   the person seeking to move does not need to provide compelling reasons for the relocation sought, (c) the court must evaluate the competing proposals, giving consideration to how each proposal will provide advantages and disadvantages for the child’s best interests, (d) the question of whether there should be a relocation cannot be treated as a separate or discrete issue to that of the question of residence, (e) neither party bears an onus to establish that an order permitting or restraining relocation is in the children’s best interests, and (f) the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.   the court must evaluate the competing proposals, giving consideration to how each proposal will provide advantages and disadvantages for the child’s best interests, (d) the question of whether there should be a relocation cannot be treated as a separate or discrete issue to that of the question of residence, (e) neither party bears an onus to establish that an order permitting or restraining relocation is in the children’s best interests, and (f) the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.   the question of whether there should be a relocation cannot be treated as a separate or discrete issue to that of the question of residence, (e) neither party bears an onus to establish that an order permitting or restraining relocation is in the children’s best interests, and (f) the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.   neither party bears an onus to establish that an order permitting or restraining relocation is in the children’s best interests, and (f) the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.   the court must weigh the competing proposals and consider all the relevant factors, including the right of freedom of movement of the party who wishes to relocate.
in some cases, the determination of “best interests” may well mean that one party’s choice is effectively outweighed in the balance. alternatively, proper balancing may result in the child’s “best interests” being served by orders which do not give one parent “optimal” arrangements or outcomes.
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
60b objects of part and principles underlying it   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
parental responsibility
section 65daa
the primary considerations pursuant to section 60cc of the act   the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents, and (b) the need to protect children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
...even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship”.
risks to x
the additional considerations pursuant to section 60cc
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views  described feeling confused because she felt both, “happy and sad,” living with her father because she loves him, but misses her mother very much. she said she would also feel, “happy and sad,” living with her mother because she would miss her father. it is noted that she used the same description during her child inclusive conference in september 2020. [x] said that she misses her brother [j] very much and was disappointed when she learned that he did not attend the interview because she had been looking forward to seeing him. [x] said she was excited about having a baby brother, but this did not appear to eclipse missing her brother or mother. [x] said she would prefer to live with her mother because she thinks she misses her the most. this did seem evident during the observation with some other where [x] was seen to be more comfortable in her mother's presence.
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives  attends [suburb o] public school and is in year 2. she initially had difficulties settling into school and exhibited some behavioural problems which included an inability to sit still and pay attention, however these have improved significantly with a behavioural chart implemented by her teacher. [x] also had some problems with social relationships with other children not wanting to play with her. the father said she makes friends easily now and it [sic] gets invited to birthday parties. [x]’s best subject is maths, although it is not her favourite subject. [x] struggles with reading but is improving with focused support from family in terms of reading at home. [x] enjoys out of school activities particularly dancing and singing. she performed in a christmas dance concert in 2020 which was a highlight for her.
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
if the children are aboriginal or torres strait islander children
attitude to the child, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
we are done. stay away from me and my daughter. i’m asking you to leave my daughter alone what your [sic] doing isn’t right at all. you are not to shower [x] anymore or being [sic] around her while she has no clothes on and she tells me i find out once and i will take it further, you are not her biological father and she is maturing as a girl and it is disgusting, i mean it. being with unbiological [sic] family is not in her best interest [mr gilmartin]. [x] is my daughter not yours. (as per the original)
why would i need your licence and medicare card to take [x] anywhere? she is my daughter and i don’t need your approval.
it seems unlikely but [that] she will encourage and/or facilitate an ongoing relationship between [x] and the father if [x] resides with her. in summary, it would seem the respondent has been willing to accept support from the father, stepmother, and paternal family whilst it suited her, and has not been too inconvenient. it is unfortunate the respondent demonstrated minimal insight into the importance [x]’s relationship with the father has been and will remain.
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
...must defer to the expressed paramount consideration, the welfare of the child if that were to be adversely affected by a movement of a parent.
you’re not planning on moving up there are you?
the respondent replied:
no i’m not moving there [mr gilmartin] what so ever i would never take her that far away from you and you should no [sic] that i would never in a million years take her away.
on 17 july 2020 the respondent sent the applicant a further text message:
i just need you to know 100% that i’m not taking [x] away from you and that i wouldn’t do that.
reasonable practicability
consideration of the competing proposals
x would live with her step-sibling h.
discussion   that the respondent not exercise her weekend time on the father’s day weekend as it would be in x’s interest to spend father’s day with the applicant, (2) that the respondent provide four weeks’ notice rather than 14 days’ notice. i do not accept on her evidence that she cannot give four weeks’ notice, and the applicant needs to be able to make plans for x as she will be in his primary care, however he should confirm within seven days of that notice that x is available to spend that time to enable the respondent to make arrangements and book flights.   that the respondent provide four weeks’ notice rather than 14 days’ notice. i do not accept on her evidence that she cannot give four weeks’ notice, and the applicant needs to be able to make plans for x as she will be in his primary care, however he should confirm within seven days of that notice that x is available to spend that time to enable the respondent to make arrangements and book flights.
associate: dated: 15 november 2022
dated: 15 november 2022