last updated: 29 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(division 2)
curmi & curmi [2021] fedcfamc2f 172
orders
the court orders until further order:  phone: ..., and (b) code: ...#   code: ...#
reasons for judgment
judge cassidy
introduction
a) affidavit of [ms curmi] made on 10 february 2014, b) affidavit of [mr b curmi] made on 19 march 2014, c) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] filed on 24 march 2014, d) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] on 17 october 2014 and filed on 20 october 2014, e) terms of settlement and attached balance sheet filed on or about 17 march 2015.
b) affidavit of [mr b curmi] made on 19 march 2014, c) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] filed on 24 march 2014, d) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] on 17 october 2014 and filed on 20 october 2014, e) terms of settlement and attached balance sheet filed on or about 17 march 2015.
c) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] filed on 24 march 2014, d) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] on 17 october 2014 and filed on 20 october 2014, e) terms of settlement and attached balance sheet filed on or about 17 march 2015.
d) affidavit and financial statement made by [mr b curmi] on 17 october 2014 and filed on 20 october 2014, e) terms of settlement and attached balance sheet filed on or about 17 march 2015.
e) terms of settlement and attached balance sheet filed on or about 17 march 2015.
the law
harman release: the legal principles a party may obtain an order to be released from the harman undertaking if appropriate special circumstances can be established. in springfield nominees pty ltd v bridgeland securities ltd (1992) 38 fcr 217 (springfield nominees) at [26] wilcox j2 said that for the required circumstances to exist justifying a release of the harman undertaking it is: “enough that there is a special feature of the case which affords a reason for modifying or releasing the undertaking and is not usually present”. in springfield nominees wilcox j then said that “the matter then becomes one of the proper exercise of the court's discretion, many factors being relevant”. those discretionary considerations include (springfield nominees at [26]): a) the nature of the document, the circumstances under which it came into existence, the attitude of the author of the document and any prejudice the author may sustain, b) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, c) the nature of the information in the document and the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, d) “perhaps most important of all”, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice in the second proceeding. further, the full federal court in liberty funding pty ltd v phoenix capital ltd (2005) alr 283 said at [31] (per branson, sundberg and allsop jj) “in order to be released from the implied undertaking it has been said that a party in the position of the appellants must show "special circumstances": see, for example, springfield nominees pty ltd v bridgelands securities ltd (1992) 38 fcr 217. it is unnecessary to examine the authorities in this area in any detail. the parties were not in disagreement as to the legal principles. the notion of "special circumstances" does not require that some extraordinary factors must bear on the question before the discretion will be exercised. it is sufficient to say that, in all the circumstances, good reason must be shown why, contrary to the usual position, documents produced or information obtained in one piece of litigation should be used for the advantage of a party in another piece of litigation or for other non-litigious purposes. the discretion is a broad one and all the circumstances of the case must be examined.” (my emphasis)
a) the nature of the document, the circumstances under which it came into existence, the attitude of the author of the document and any prejudice the author may sustain, b) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, c) the nature of the information in the document and the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, d) “perhaps most important of all”, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice in the second proceeding.
b) whether the document pre-existed litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the public domain, c) the nature of the information in the document and the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, d) “perhaps most important of all”, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice in the second proceeding.
c) the nature of the information in the document and the circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for leave, d) “perhaps most important of all”, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice in the second proceeding.
d) “perhaps most important of all”, the likely contribution of the document to achieving justice in the second proceeding.
the first respondent’s evidence .) i did not realise i was authorising my family court affidavit and other documents from the property proceedings with my former husband to be provided to [mr curmi] or his solicitor and apparently to be used in other proceedings. had i appreciated that was the situation, i would not have authorised the release of the documents. i did not want to become involved in a family dispute between my former husband and his brother. (...) all i can say in relation to the [motor vehicle 1] is, it was present at the family home when i separated and walked out of the house.
the second respondent’s evidence
the applicant’s evidence
i, [ms curmi] [redacted], in the state of new south wales, factory worker, make oath and say, i am the applicant wife herein. (...) the respondent husband will be hereinafter referred to as [mr b curmi]. [mr b curmi] was born [in] 1968 and he is currently 45 years old. (...) prior to our relationship commencing, [mr b curmi] owned a car [motor vehicle 2]. (...) [mr b curmi] has an interest in three businesses. he works as a sole trader in the business that he established when we were together called [company h]. as stated above, there is a bob cat, truck, and car parts as assets of this business. i am unaware as to their value. [mr b curmi] also opened up a business by the name of [company j]. the business has premises in [suburb k]. as far as i am aware, [mr b curmi's] brother [mr curmi] owns the building from which the business operates from. as far as i am aware, [mr b curmi] also has an interest in the business ran by him and his two other brothers, [company l]. as stated above this business engages in [car sales] (sic). [mr b curmi] has two classic vehicles as follows, · a) [motor vehicle 3]. this car was valued at $28,000 in the year 2000. b) [motor vehicle 4]. this car was valued at $30,000 in the year 2000. this car was purchased during our relationship. attached and marked "h" is an insurance report from [company m] for the year 2000. [mr b curmi] also has an [motor vehicle 5]. i cannot recall when the [vehicle] was purchased. however, it was purchased during the relationship. i do not know the current value for the [vehicle]. [mr b curmi] has another [vehicle], an [motor vehicle 6]. the [vehicle] was purchased when we were together.
a) [motor vehicle 3]. this car was valued at $28,000 in the year 2000. b) [motor vehicle 4]. this car was valued at $30,000 in the year 2000. this car was purchased during our relationship.
b) [motor vehicle 4]. this car was valued at $30,000 in the year 2000. this car was purchased during our relationship.  .) i have read the affidavit of [ms curmi] of the 10th february 2014 and reply as follows using the same numbering: the vehicle in question is a [motor vehicle 4]. (...) this is correct however i note that i owe money for the rent in that place. [mr curmi] and i usually determine our respective owings on a handshake basis. at present i believe i owe him approximately $15,000. 42a this vehicle was never actually mine although it was garaged at our premises. i note that the vehicle was actually registered in the name of [mr curmi] (my brother). that vehicle was sole (sic) years ago. 42b the current market value of this vehicle is between $5,500 and $8,700. the engine is not in it and it is not economical to repair. the [vehicle] was purchased by the business. it was depreciated through the business. it's (sic) current value is actually negative as if it was sold it would accrue tax. this [vehicle] was purchased for $1000.00 i did work on it from time to time to try and increase its value. i sold it on the 3rd march 2014 to help pay for the cost of electrical repairs on the house. the sale price was $3,800.00.
[images of personal details omitted] ages of personal details omitted]
the exercise of discretion
a) the documents sought to be released were created expressly for the purpose of litigation and readily expected by their authors, from their inception, to enter the public domain in court proceedings, b) in relation to the evidence of the first respondent, [ms curmi], [ms curmi] consents to the orders sought in the aic and takes no opposition, c) in relation second respondent, [mr b curmi], [mr b curmi] does not oppose the aic and the harman undertaking release in respect of the release material, d) neither respondent to the aic has asserted that they would sustain any prejudice in having an affidavit or other document sworn for the purposes court proceedings being tendered in a separate court dealing with (in part, at least) a similar subject matter (a dispute about an asset), e) perhaps most important of all, the release material is likely to make a significant contribution to achieving justice in the local court proceedings in that the release material is potentially highly probative and highly relevant to the outcome of the key factual dispute in the local court proceedings, and f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).
b) in relation to the evidence of the first respondent, [ms curmi], [ms curmi] consents to the orders sought in the aic and takes no opposition, c) in relation second respondent, [mr b curmi], [mr b curmi] does not oppose the aic and the harman undertaking release in respect of the release material, d) neither respondent to the aic has asserted that they would sustain any prejudice in having an affidavit or other document sworn for the purposes court proceedings being tendered in a separate court dealing with (in part, at least) a similar subject matter (a dispute about an asset), e) perhaps most important of all, the release material is likely to make a significant contribution to achieving justice in the local court proceedings in that the release material is potentially highly probative and highly relevant to the outcome of the key factual dispute in the local court proceedings, and f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).
c) in relation second respondent, [mr b curmi], [mr b curmi] does not oppose the aic and the harman undertaking release in respect of the release material, d) neither respondent to the aic has asserted that they would sustain any prejudice in having an affidavit or other document sworn for the purposes court proceedings being tendered in a separate court dealing with (in part, at least) a similar subject matter (a dispute about an asset), e) perhaps most important of all, the release material is likely to make a significant contribution to achieving justice in the local court proceedings in that the release material is potentially highly probative and highly relevant to the outcome of the key factual dispute in the local court proceedings, and f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).
d) neither respondent to the aic has asserted that they would sustain any prejudice in having an affidavit or other document sworn for the purposes court proceedings being tendered in a separate court dealing with (in part, at least) a similar subject matter (a dispute about an asset), e) perhaps most important of all, the release material is likely to make a significant contribution to achieving justice in the local court proceedings in that the release material is potentially highly probative and highly relevant to the outcome of the key factual dispute in the local court proceedings, and f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).
e) perhaps most important of all, the release material is likely to make a significant contribution to achieving justice in the local court proceedings in that the release material is potentially highly probative and highly relevant to the outcome of the key factual dispute in the local court proceedings, and f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).
f) the applicant contends that any substantive concern that may relate to a release of the entirety of the contents of the release material can be adequately accounted for by an alternative release of those portions of the release material only specifically referring or relating to motor vehicles or motor vehicle assets (see order 2 of the aic in the alternative).   the family court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this act, and any other court exercising jurisdiction under this act shall, in the exercise of that jurisdiction, have regard to: (a) the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage as the union of 2 people to the exclusion of all others voluntarily entered into for life, (b) the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children, (c) the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare, (ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.   the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage as the union of 2 people to the exclusion of all others voluntarily entered into for life, (b) the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children, (c) the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare, (ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.   the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children, (c) the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare, (ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.   the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare, (ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.  ) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.   the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.   paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.
this section requires the court to consider a number of general principles when making a decision in a family law matter. the principles apply to all proceedings under the family law act including proceedings continued under s 9(4): see in the marriage of deguara (1976) 8 alr 688, 1 fam lr 11, 103. this section is not a head of power, it is an exhortation to the court as to how it should exercise such power as it does have: see in the marriage of giammona [1985] famca 4, (1985) 10 fam lr 17, flc 91-600 (fogarty j).
associate: dated: 19 october 2021
dated: 19 october 2021
[1] application in a case filed by the applicant on 9 november 2020, at page 2.[2] written submissions filed by the applicant on 23 march 2021, at pages 6-9.[3] affidavit of ms curmi filed 5 may 2021, at page 4.[4] affidavit of mr b curmi filed 5 may 2021, at page 2.[5] written submissions filed by the applicant on 23 march 2021, at annexure a.[6] ibid.[7] ibid.[8] ibid.[9] ibid. [10] ibid, at page 8.[11] r chisholm, australian family law (lexisnexis butterworths, 4th ed, 2021).