last updated: 13 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
pinto & beringer [2022] fedcfamc2f 1572
orders
the court notes that:
the court orders that:
sole parental responsibility with consultation with the other parent   where practicable, inform the mother (by email or text message) at least 21 days before making decisions about any of the following matters: (i) any change in the child’s school(s), (ii) any non-emergency or serious medical treatment the child is to undergo, and (iii) any proposed relocation of the residence of the child that is more than 30 kilometres from their residence. (b) any response from the mother must be provided to the father in writing (by email or text message) within 14 days of receipt of the father’s information, (c) the father must consider the mother’s views in exercising his parental responsibility before making any such decision concerning the child.   any change in the child’s school(s), (ii) any non-emergency or serious medical treatment the child is to undergo, and (iii) any proposed relocation of the residence of the child that is more than 30 kilometres from their residence.  ) any non-emergency or serious medical treatment the child is to undergo, and (iii) any proposed relocation of the residence of the child that is more than 30 kilometres from their residence.  i) any proposed relocation of the residence of the child that is more than 30 kilometres from their residence.   any response from the mother must be provided to the father in writing (by email or text message) within 14 days of receipt of the father’s information, (c) the father must consider the mother’s views in exercising his parental responsibility before making any such decision concerning the child.   the father must consider the mother’s views in exercising his parental responsibility before making any such decision concerning the child.
living arrangements
school term   from 4.30pm friday until 4.30pm sunday, commencing the first friday following the date of these orders and continuing each alternate week thereafter, (b) that the time the child is to live with the father pursuant to order 4(a) shall be suspended during all school holiday periods and the time arrangements set by order 4(a) shall recommence from the first day of each new school term as defined by these orders. upon the commencement of each new school term, the week 1 and week 2 cycles shall recommence in the same sequence as it existed and applied prior to the commencement of the school holiday period and as if the sequence had not been interrupted or suspended by the school holiday period (ie the sequence had been continuous throughout the school holiday period).   that the time the child is to live with the father pursuant to order 4(a) shall be suspended during all school holiday periods and the time arrangements set by order 4(a) shall recommence from the first day of each new school term as defined by these orders. upon the commencement of each new school term, the week 1 and week 2 cycles shall recommence in the same sequence as it existed and applied prior to the commencement of the school holiday period and as if the sequence had not been interrupted or suspended by the school holiday period (ie the sequence had been continuous throughout the school holiday period).
school holidays   for one half of the school holiday periods as agreed between the parties and failing agreement the child shall spend time with the mother for the second half in odd numbered years and the first half in even numbered years, (d) for the purposes of this order: (i) the school holiday periods will be those that apply at the school the child is attending at the relevant time, (ii) for the purposes of calculating the changeover day in school holidays, the last day of the school term will be the first day of the school holiday period and the last full day before the new term recommences (including pupil free days) will be the last day. the midpoint of the school holidays will be 5.00pm on the middle day. if there are an even number of days in the school holiday period, the middle day will be the first of the middle days.   for the purposes of this order: (i) the school holiday periods will be those that apply at the school the child is attending at the relevant time, (ii) for the purposes of calculating the changeover day in school holidays, the last day of the school term will be the first day of the school holiday period and the last full day before the new term recommences (including pupil free days) will be the last day. the midpoint of the school holidays will be 5.00pm on the middle day. if there are an even number of days in the school holiday period, the middle day will be the first of the middle days.   the school holiday periods will be those that apply at the school the child is attending at the relevant time, (ii) for the purposes of calculating the changeover day in school holidays, the last day of the school term will be the first day of the school holiday period and the last full day before the new term recommences (including pupil free days) will be the last day. the midpoint of the school holidays will be 5.00pm on the middle day. if there are an even number of days in the school holiday period, the middle day will be the first of the middle days.  ) for the purposes of calculating the changeover day in school holidays, the last day of the school term will be the first day of the school holiday period and the last full day before the new term recommences (including pupil free days) will be the last day. the midpoint of the school holidays will be 5.00pm on the middle day. if there are an even number of days in the school holiday period, the middle day will be the first of the middle days.
special occasions  the child shall spend time with the mother on the following special occasions if the child is not already in the mother’s care: (i) from 9.00am until 5.00pm mother’s day, (ii) from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in even number years, (iii) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (iv) from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (v) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (f) at any other time agreed between the parties.   from 9.00am until 5.00pm mother’s day, (ii) from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in even number years, (iii) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (iv) from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (v) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,  ) from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in even number years, (iii) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (iv) from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (v) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,  i) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in odd numbered years, (iv) from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (v) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,  ) from 9.00am on good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years, (v) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,   from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in even numbered years, (vi) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,  ) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years, (vii) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,  i) from 1.00pm to 5.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years,   at any other time agreed between the parties.   from 9.00am until 5.00pm father’s day, (b) from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in odd number years, (c) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) from 5.00pm good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, (e) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (f) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 12.00pm on christmas eve until 12.00pm christmas day in odd number years, (c) from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) from 5.00pm good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, (e) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (f) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 12.00pm christmas day until 12.00pm boxing day in even numbered years, (d) from 5.00pm good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, (e) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (f) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 5.00pm good friday until 5.00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years, (e) from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (f) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 5.00pm easter saturday until 5.00pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (f) from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 9.00am to 1.00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years, (g) from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.   from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.
changeover
communication
phone time   each wednesday from 7.00pm to 7.30pm, (b) in the weeks that the mother does not spend time with the child on tuesday and thursday from 7.00pm until 7.30pm, and (c) when the child wishes to speak with the mother.   in the weeks that the mother does not spend time with the child on tuesday and thursday from 7.00pm until 7.30pm, and (c) when the child wishes to speak with the mother.   when the child wishes to speak with the mother.   the parties shall ensure that the device which the other parent uses to call the child is on, charged and placed in an area with reception, (b) the parties shall ensure that the child is afforded privacy during the phone call, (c) the telephone calls not occur by way of speaker phone, (d) should the child be unavailable during this time the parties shall ensure the child return the other parent’s phone call later that evening or if not reasonably practicable the following evening.   the parties shall ensure that the child is afforded privacy during the phone call, (c) the telephone calls not occur by way of speaker phone, (d) should the child be unavailable during this time the parties shall ensure the child return the other parent’s phone call later that evening or if not reasonably practicable the following evening.   the telephone calls not occur by way of speaker phone, (d) should the child be unavailable during this time the parties shall ensure the child return the other parent’s phone call later that evening or if not reasonably practicable the following evening.   should the child be unavailable during this time the parties shall ensure the child return the other parent’s phone call later that evening or if not reasonably practicable the following evening.
communication between the parties  by telephone in the case of emergency or pressing but non-emergency issues, (b) by short factual text message for day-to-day issues.   by short factual text message for day-to-day issues.
exchange of information  any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the child while in their care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed for the child and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the child is in the other party’s care, (c) any social, school, or religious functions which the child is to attend.   any medication that has been prescribed for the child and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the child is in the other party’s care, (c) any social, school, or religious functions which the child is to attend.   any social, school, or religious functions which the child is to attend.
restraints
non-denigration
discipline
drugs/prescription mediation
alcohol
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
1. the mother have sole parental responsibility of the child. 2. the child live with the mother. 3. the child shall spend time with the father as follows: each alternate weekend from friday at 4:30pm until sunday at 4:30pm, the parties shall notify the other party with plenty of notice if they wish to change contact times or days, but failing agreement, then as orders state. for the nsw school holiday period following terms 1, 2 and 3 for the first half or as agreed between the parties in writing failing agreement then as orders state. for the nsw school holiday period following term 4 as agreed between the parties in writing but failing agreement: in odd numbered years - for the second half, commencing at 2pm 10 january and concluding 3pm on 26 january, in even years - for the first half commencing at 4:30pm on the sunday following the child s last day of school attendance for the term and concludes at 2pm on 10 january.
e. christmas: in even numbered years - from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on 27 december. in odd numbered years - from christmas eve from 12 noon until 12 noon on christmas day. f. child’s birthday - in accordance with order 3(d)(i) above, as follows: in even numbered years, until 2pm on 10 january, in odd years, from 2pm on io january. for a period of 3 hours on the child’s birthday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement from 3pm until 6pm. on father’s day from 9am until 5pm, easter - as agreed between the parties but failing agreement: in odd numbered years, from 9am on good friday until 5pm easter sunday in odd numbered years, and in even numbered years, from 5pm easter sunday until 5pm easter monday. at any other times as agreed between the mother and father in writing. child’s half-brother z’s birthday - the child is to spend time with her brother on his birthday. in the event that z’s birthday falls after the finishing of term 4, the child is to remain in the mother’s care until after z’s birthday.
4. mother’s time over christmas - in even numbered years - from christmas eve from 12 noon until 12 noon on christmas day. in odd numbered years - from 12 noon on christmas day until 12 noon on 27 december. for the purpose of changeover, the father shall collect the child from suburb i mcdonalds at the commencement of his time and the mother shall collect the child from suburb i mcdonalds at the conclusion of the father’s time. the father shall be restrained from approaching the home including any time outside the changeover. 6. the father shall have video chat with the child as follows: each wednesday from 7pm until 7:30pm. ln the weeks he does not spend time with the child in accordance with order 3(a), on tuesday and thursday from 7pm until 7:30pm or when the child wishes to speak with her father. the parties shall not consume alcohol to such level above 0.05 during the 12-hour period prior to the child coming into their care and for the duration of the time that the child is spending ·with them. the parties are prohibited from using any illicit substances during the 72 hours prior to the child coming into their care and for the duration of the time that the child is spending with them. 9. each of the parties are restrained from using physical discipline on the child. the mother shall authorise any school that the child may attend to provide information to the father about the child’s progress at school, including copies of school reports, photographs, newsletters, and other general information about the child’s attendance at school. the father is responsible for obtaining the information and records from the school following the mother authorising the father to access this information. 11. the father is not to pick the child up from school. the mother shall use her best endeavours to communicate with the father before making any major decisions in relation to the child’s education or health. the parties shall ensure that the other is kept informed of the following information in relation to the child: any serious medical problems or severe illnesses suffered by the child whilst they are in their care. any medication that has been prescribed to the child, and the reason for such medication. any treatment that is required to be undertaken for the child. any social, school or religious functions that the child is to attend from time to time. the residential address and any changes to such details within 24 hours. for the purposes of communicating information between the parties, parties shall communicate by way of facebook messenger about matters relating strictly to the child. that each party refrain from making critical and derogatory remarks in relation to the other parties in the presence of hearing of the child and that each party shall do all things necessary to ensure that no third party makes any such critical or derogatory remarks about the other parties in the presence or hearing of the child. parties are to engage and complete a parenting orders program, such as the [al counselling] “parenting orders program”.
recitals and definitions: a. “father” means [mr beringer] born [in] 1992. b. “mother” means [ms pinto] born [in] 1992. c. “child” means [x] born [in] 2013. the mother and father commenced cohabitation in june 2011. final separation occurred 1 march 2013. the parties consent to the making of the following orders and to those orders being of the same force and validity as if they had been made after a hearing by the court. by consent it is ordered that: parenting the father shall have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2013. sole parental responsibility with consultation with the other parent 2. notwithstanding order 1, the father shall:
2.1. where practicable, inform the mother (by email or text message) at least 21 days before making decisions about any of the following matters:
2.1.1. any change in the child’s school(s), 2.1.2. any non-emergency or serious medical treatment the child is to undergo, and 2.1.3. any proposed relocation of the residence of the child that is more than 30 kilometres from their residence.
2.2. any response from the mother must be provided to the father in writing (by email or text message) within 14 days of receipt of the father’s information, 2.3. the father must consider the mother’s views in exercising his parental responsibility before making any such decision concerning the child.
living arrangements 3. the child live with the father. 4. the child spend time with the mother as follows:
school term 4.1. from the 4.30pm friday until 4.30pm sunday, commencing the first friday following the date of these orders and continuing each alternate week thereafter. 4.2. that the time the child is to live with the father pursuant to order 4.1 shall be suspended during all school holiday periods and the time arrangements set by order 4.1 shall recommence from the 1st day of each new school term as defined by these orders. upon the commencement of each new school term, the week 1 and week 2 cycles shall recommence in the same sequence as it existed and applied prior to the commencement of the school holiday period and as if the sequence had not been interrupted or suspended by the school holiday period (i.e. the sequence had been continuous throughout the school holiday period). school holidays 4.3. for one half of the school holiday periods as agreed between the parties and failing agreement the child shall spend time with the mother for the second half in odd numbered years and the first half in even numbered years 4.4. for the purposes of this order:
4.4.1. the school holidays periods will be those that apply at the school the child is attending at the relevant time. 4.4.2. for the purposes of calculating the changeover day in school holidays, the last day of the school term will be the first day of the school holiday period (day 1) and the last full day before the new term recommences (including pupil free days) will be the last day (last day). the midpoint of the school holidays will be 5.00pm on the middle day. if there are an even number of days in the school holiday period, the middle day will be the first of the middle days.
special occasions 4.5. the child shall spend time with the mother on the following special occasions if the child is not already in the mother’s care:
4.5.1. from 9:00am until 5:00pm mother’s day. 4.5.2. from 12:00pm on christmas eve until 12:00pm christmas day in even number years. 4.5.3. from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm boxing day in odd numbered years. 4.5.4. from 9:00am on good friday until 5:00pm on easter saturday in odd numbered years. 4.5.5. from 5:00pm easter saturday until 5:00pm easter monday in even numbered years. 4.5.6. from 9:00am to 1:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years. 4.5.7. from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years. 4.6. at any other time agreed between the parties. the child shall spend time with the father on the following special occasions if the child is not already in the father’s care:
5.1. from 9:00am until 5:00pm father’s day. 5.2. from 12:00pm on christmas eve until 12:00pm christmas day in odd number years. 5.3. from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm boxing day in even numbered years. 5.4. from 5:00pm good friday until 5:00pm on easter saturday in even numbered years. 5.5. from 5:00pm easter saturday until 5:00pm easter monday in odd numbered years. 5.6. from 9:00am to 1:00pm on the child’s birthday in odd numbered years. 5.7. from 1:00pm to 5:00pm on the child’s birthday in even numbered years.
changeover for the purposes of this order, the mother shall collect the child from [suburb i] mcdonalds at the commencement of her time and the father shall collect the child from [suburb i] mcdonalds at the conclusion of the mother’s time. communication phone time the parties are at liberty to communicate with the child at all reasonable times and failing agreement each wednesday from 7:00pm to 7:30pm. both parties shall facilitate any request by the child to telephone the parent with whom they are not currently spending time. 9. for the purposes of orders 7 and 8 herein:
9.1. the parties shall ensure that the device which the other parent uses to call the child is on, charged and placed in an area with reception. 9.2. the parties shall ensure that the child is afforded privacy during the phone call. 9.3. the telephone calls not occur by way of speaker phone. 9.4. should the child be unavailable during this time the parties shall ensure the child return the other parent’s phone call later that evening or if not reasonably practicable the following evening.
communication between the parties the parties are to communicate matters pertaining to the care, welfare or development of the child as follows:
10.1. by telephone in the case of emergency or pressing but non-emergency issues, 10.2. by short factual text message for day-to-day issues.
exchange of information each party advise the other party and keep the other party advised of their current address and contact numbers (including both landline and mobile phone numbers if applicable) and advised the other party of any changes to these details within seven days of such change occurring. 12. the parties shall ensure that the other is kept informed of:
12.1. any medical problems or illnesses suffered by the child while in their care, 12.2. any medication that has been prescribed for the child and shall ensure the other party is provided with this medication while the child is in the other party’s care. 12.3. any social, school, or religious functions which the child is to attend. the parties shall each inform the other party in writing as soon as practicable of any specialist medical appointments with any medical consultant, psychologist, psychiatrist, counsellor, or therapist (hereinafter referred to as ‘consultant’) in relation to the child. each party shall do all acts and all things to ensure that the other party is provided with all reports by any such consultant. the other party be permitted to attend on such appointments, such attendance or attendance to be at the sole discretion of any such consultant. within fourteen (14) days of the child’s subsequent enrolment at any school the parties do all acts and things and sign all irrevocable authorities necessary to ensure that whichever school the child may attend from time to time, that school forward directly to the mother copies of all of each child’s school reports and merit cards, any written material pertaining to each child’s academic and extra-curricular activities. within fourteen (14) days of the child’s subsequent enrolment at any school the parties do all acts and things and sign all irrevocable authorities necessary to ensure that whichever school the child may attend from time to time, that school forward directly to the mother copies of the child’s school photos at the mother’s own cost. during any periods referred to in these orders, in the event of the child being hospitalised or receiving medical attention, the parent spending time with the child shall notify the other parent as soon as practicable after the first contact with either the medical practitioner, medical centre or hospital and that both parents shall be permitted to attend upon the medical facility the child is attending as a result of her medical condition irrespective whether the child is in their care pursuant to these orders.
restraints non-denigration the mother is restrained from denigrating the father or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the child and shall ensure that no other person denigrates the father or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the child. the father is restrained from denigrating the mother or the maternal family in the presence or hearing of the child and shall ensure that no other person denigrates the mother or the paternal family in the presence or hearing of the child. discipline the parties be restrained from physically disciplining the child or allowing or authorising any third party to physically discipline the child. drugs/prescription mediation the parties are restrained from consuming any prescription medication not prescribed to them whilst the child are in their care or for 12 hours prior the child coming into their care, and will remove the child from any place where a third party is under the influence of illicit substances/prescription medication not prescribed to them. alcohol the parties are restrained from consuming alcohol 12 hours prior to the child coming into their care and at all times the child are in their care. the parties are restrained from consuming alcohol whilst the child is in their care to an extent that they would not legally be able to drive a motor vehicle, and will remove the child from any place where a third party has consumed alcohol to an extent where they would not legally be able to drive a motor vehicle.  phasis in original)
material relied upon   her amended case outline filed 28 october 2022, (b) her affidavit filed 18 march 2022.   her affidavit filed 18 march 2022.   his case outline filed 28 october 2022, (b) his affidavits filed 31 march 2022 and 17 october 2022.   his affidavits filed 31 march 2022 and 17 october 2022.   family report of ms j dated 23 august 2021.   exhibit a: family report dated 23 august 2021 and child inclusive conference memorandum dated 14 may 2020, (b) exhibit b: semester 1 2022 school report, (c) exhibit c: mother’s residential tenancy agreement, (d) exhibit d: father’s tender bundle (i) mother’s criminal history, pages 1–2, (ii) pathology test results, page 15, (e) exhibit e: mother’s tender bundle, (i) father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.   exhibit b: semester 1 2022 school report, (c) exhibit c: mother’s residential tenancy agreement, (d) exhibit d: father’s tender bundle (i) mother’s criminal history, pages 1–2, (ii) pathology test results, page 15, (e) exhibit e: mother’s tender bundle, (i) father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.   exhibit c: mother’s residential tenancy agreement, (d) exhibit d: father’s tender bundle (i) mother’s criminal history, pages 1–2, (ii) pathology test results, page 15, (e) exhibit e: mother’s tender bundle, (i) father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.   exhibit d: father’s tender bundle (i) mother’s criminal history, pages 1–2, (ii) pathology test results, page 15, (e) exhibit e: mother’s tender bundle, (i) father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.   mother’s criminal history, pages 1–2, (ii) pathology test results, page 15,  ) pathology test results, page 15,   exhibit e: mother’s tender bundle, (i) father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.   father’s criminal history, pages 1–8, (ii) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.  ) text message from the father to the mother regarding the child not living with her, pages 22–23, (iii) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.  i) text message from the father to the mother regarding her contacting the child’s school, pages 24–27.
evidence
the mother’s affidavit
the father’s affidavits
the mother’s oral evidence
the father’s oral evidence
child inclusive conference memorandum
family report
ms stolier: and the father says – of course, that’s consistent with the father’s evidence that she has, generally, he thinks, improved? [ms j]: well, one of the things that the teacher and principal talked about to me was the fact that the school had made conscientious efforts, having identified some gaps for [x], to put extra – additional care and additional specialist teaching in to boost [x] in – in that area, and that, obviously, has provided some results, and if she is, in fact, more socially engaged, then that would be very pleasing to hear as well.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the child
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  the father denied the mother’s allegations of family violence (whilst acknowledging the 2013 advo and his adverse behaviour in april 2019 that led to the 2019 advo), (b) the father’s criminal history does not include crimes of physical violence. his criminal history since separation in about march 2013 is a larceny offence in 2013, a breach of advo in september 2013, driving offences in 2014, and adverse communicative behaviour by him towards the mother leading to an advo in april 2019, with the court observing that there was no breach of that 2019 advo over a period of two years, (c) the father’s mental health has been satisfactory, apart from: an episode of adverse mental health at about the time of the parties’ separation in march 2013, an episode of adverse communicative behaviour by the father towards the mother in april 2019, and an episode in early july 2019 discussed below, (d) the father’s care of the child since final parenting orders were made in august 2016 to date has been quite satisfactory. the court does not accept that the father has physically abused the child. the court refers to the father’s evidence in relation to brushing the child’s care which it accepts.   the father’s criminal history does not include crimes of physical violence. his criminal history since separation in about march 2013 is a larceny offence in 2013, a breach of advo in september 2013, driving offences in 2014, and adverse communicative behaviour by him towards the mother leading to an advo in april 2019, with the court observing that there was no breach of that 2019 advo over a period of two years, (c) the father’s mental health has been satisfactory, apart from: an episode of adverse mental health at about the time of the parties’ separation in march 2013, an episode of adverse communicative behaviour by the father towards the mother in april 2019, and an episode in early july 2019 discussed below, (d) the father’s care of the child since final parenting orders were made in august 2016 to date has been quite satisfactory. the court does not accept that the father has physically abused the child. the court refers to the father’s evidence in relation to brushing the child’s care which it accepts.   the father’s mental health has been satisfactory, apart from: an episode of adverse mental health at about the time of the parties’ separation in march 2013, an episode of adverse communicative behaviour by the father towards the mother in april 2019, and an episode in early july 2019 discussed below, (d) the father’s care of the child since final parenting orders were made in august 2016 to date has been quite satisfactory. the court does not accept that the father has physically abused the child. the court refers to the father’s evidence in relation to brushing the child’s care which it accepts.   the father’s care of the child since final parenting orders were made in august 2016 to date has been quite satisfactory. the court does not accept that the father has physically abused the child. the court refers to the father’s evidence in relation to brushing the child’s care which it accepts.   despite the court’s above finding in relation to family violence, there is a significant suggestion that the family report writer has assumed that the father perpetrated family violence against the mother as alleged by her and/or that there is presently a current risk of family violence, namely a pattern of indirect coercive control directed by the father towards the mother (eg see paragraphs 28, 43, 82, 87, 106, 341(b), 369, 374, 377, 378, 389, 393, 400, 405, of the family report), (b) in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the length of time between alleged family violence in early 2013 and the father’s adverse communicative behaviour towards the mother in early 2019, nor the absence of any alleged family violence by him from early 2019 to date, (c) the family report writer’s comments to the effect that the father is insufficiently emotionally available to the child is inconsistent with her positive observations of the child and father at the family report observation sessions in may 2021, (d) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the likely psychological harm that would be experienced by the child in being uprooted from the primary care of the father and being placed in the primary care of the mother (see above), inter alia, the court observes that the child has not been in the mother’s primary care since about august 2013 and has been in the father’s positive primary care since about august 2016 to date (the family report writer had herself stated that the father has been the child’s most consistently available adult attachment figure since she was four years old), (e) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the child’s positive progression in her schooling and social life since the family report interviews in may and june 2021, including the absence of adverse school incidents relating to the child, and her accumulated social capital living with the father in suburb c. indeed the family report writer commented in her family report that the child had not made a settled transition since relocating to suburb c being contrary to the present more contemporary evidence in this context, (f) the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the length of time between alleged family violence in early 2013 and the father’s adverse communicative behaviour towards the mother in early 2019, nor the absence of any alleged family violence by him from early 2019 to date, (c) the family report writer’s comments to the effect that the father is insufficiently emotionally available to the child is inconsistent with her positive observations of the child and father at the family report observation sessions in may 2021, (d) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the likely psychological harm that would be experienced by the child in being uprooted from the primary care of the father and being placed in the primary care of the mother (see above), inter alia, the court observes that the child has not been in the mother’s primary care since about august 2013 and has been in the father’s positive primary care since about august 2016 to date (the family report writer had herself stated that the father has been the child’s most consistently available adult attachment figure since she was four years old), (e) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the child’s positive progression in her schooling and social life since the family report interviews in may and june 2021, including the absence of adverse school incidents relating to the child, and her accumulated social capital living with the father in suburb c. indeed the family report writer commented in her family report that the child had not made a settled transition since relocating to suburb c being contrary to the present more contemporary evidence in this context, (f) the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s comments to the effect that the father is insufficiently emotionally available to the child is inconsistent with her positive observations of the child and father at the family report observation sessions in may 2021, (d) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the likely psychological harm that would be experienced by the child in being uprooted from the primary care of the father and being placed in the primary care of the mother (see above), inter alia, the court observes that the child has not been in the mother’s primary care since about august 2013 and has been in the father’s positive primary care since about august 2016 to date (the family report writer had herself stated that the father has been the child’s most consistently available adult attachment figure since she was four years old), (e) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the child’s positive progression in her schooling and social life since the family report interviews in may and june 2021, including the absence of adverse school incidents relating to the child, and her accumulated social capital living with the father in suburb c. indeed the family report writer commented in her family report that the child had not made a settled transition since relocating to suburb c being contrary to the present more contemporary evidence in this context, (f) the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the likely psychological harm that would be experienced by the child in being uprooted from the primary care of the father and being placed in the primary care of the mother (see above), inter alia, the court observes that the child has not been in the mother’s primary care since about august 2013 and has been in the father’s positive primary care since about august 2016 to date (the family report writer had herself stated that the father has been the child’s most consistently available adult attachment figure since she was four years old), (e) the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the child’s positive progression in her schooling and social life since the family report interviews in may and june 2021, including the absence of adverse school incidents relating to the child, and her accumulated social capital living with the father in suburb c. indeed the family report writer commented in her family report that the child had not made a settled transition since relocating to suburb c being contrary to the present more contemporary evidence in this context, (f) the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the child’s positive progression in her schooling and social life since the family report interviews in may and june 2021, including the absence of adverse school incidents relating to the child, and her accumulated social capital living with the father in suburb c. indeed the family report writer commented in her family report that the child had not made a settled transition since relocating to suburb c being contrary to the present more contemporary evidence in this context, (f) the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s concern that a pattern of coercive control by the father upon the mother and child may be continuing to impact the quality of relationship between the child and the father and the child and the mother is not consistent with the evidence, (g) in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   in relation to the family report writer’s criticisms of the father for relocating the child’s residence to the area b in early 2020, the family report writer has not given sufficient consideration to the father’s reasons for so relocating including his desire to take up better work opportunities outside of sydney and his desire to reside close to his extended paternal family with the child (so as to receive support with child-care), particularly noting the father had the benefit of a final parenting live-with order and an order for sole parental responsibility (from final parenting orders made in august 2016). in any event, the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent that even if the father had not relocated the child’s residence, the interim consent parenting orders of 18 december 2019 still only provided for the child to spend time with the mother, inter alia, each alternate weekend from friday afternoon to sunday afternoon, (h) the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s suggestion that the father’s practice of dropping off the child with the paternal grandmother early each school morning (prior to school commencing) and later collection of the child from after-school care at about 4.30pm would impact the child’s access to optimum participation in learning and positive educational outcomes, both academically and socially, lacks evidential foundation, (i) the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer, in relation to her comments that there was a current elevated parental risk in respect of alcohol and substance use in relation to the father, did not take into account the father’s negative toxicology report and drug hair test on 19 april 2022, and nor did it take into account his oral evidence relating to his modest alcohol consumption which the court accepts, (j) the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s comments that the father’s presentation during the assessment for the family report identified some concerns regarding the father’s reactivity, emotional regulation and anger management under pressure was not factually particularised and was inconsistent both with the father’s interaction with the child during the family report observation session and with the court’s own observations of the father during his cross examinations (during those cross examinations the father was noticeably and consistently particularly calm), (k) the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s comments that the father appeared to minimise the seriousness of his actions relating to the 2019 advo and appeared to deflect blame and rationalise his adverse conduct in that context did not take into account the father’s deep regret for such behaviour, (l) the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s comments that the father appears to perceive the child as an extension of himself and shows a poor level of insight or understanding of the child’s need for individual agency and autonomy, capable of having her own independent thoughts and feelings, and appears to struggle to understand a child’s need for a relationship with the mother, is inconsistent with her observations of the child with the father at the family report interviews, is inconsistent with the child’s usual day-to-day life involving regular encounters with members of the paternal extended family, school friends, and extracurricular activities including music lessons, is inconsistent with the child’s positive school reports to date, and is inconsistent with the usual time spent between the child and the mother including regular communications, (m) the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer has not taken into account that each morning of the school week the child, after being dropped off by the father at the home of the paternal grandmother at about 6.10am, is put to bed by the father and then is awoken at about 8.00am in readiness for school attendance, (n) the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer expressed concern in relation to the father’s allegedly poorly treated mental health problems which is contrary to the courts finding that the father’s mental health has been (subject to certain exceptions) satisfactory, (o) the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer’s comments that the father has not demonstrated positive engagement or communication with x’s teacher’s or the school is inaccurate, and the court accepts the father’s evidence relating to his communications with the child’s school, (p) the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.   the family report writer did not consider to any adequate extent the real possibility that the mother will take up employment, consistent with her present intentions to re-enter the workforce, and thereby, like the father, will have her own time constraints in being physically available for the child.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living  the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
associate:
dated: 16 november 2022