last updated: 13 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hickman & hickman [2022] fedcfamc2f 1557
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
background
principles  the principal object of this division is to ensure that children receive a proper level of financial support from their parents.   particular objects of this division include ensuring: (a) that children have their proper needs met from reasonable and adequate shares in the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of both of their parents, and   that children have their proper needs met from reasonable and adequate shares in the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of both of their parents, and   that parents share equitably in the support of their children.   the parents of a child have, subject to this division, the primary duty to maintain the child. (2) without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the duty of a parent to maintain a child: (a) is not of lower priority than the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person, and (b) has priority over all commitments of the parent other than commitments necessary to enable the parent to support:   without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the duty of a parent to maintain a child: (a) is not of lower priority than the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person, and (b) has priority over all commitments of the parent other than commitments necessary to enable the parent to support:   is not of lower priority than the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person, and (b) has priority over all commitments of the parent other than commitments necessary to enable the parent to support:   has priority over all commitments of the parent other than commitments necessary to enable the parent to support:  himself or herself, or (ii) any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, and  ) any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain, and   is not affected by:  the duty of any other person to maintain the child, or (ii) any entitlement of the child or another person to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.  ) any entitlement of the child or another person to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   a court must not make a child maintenance order in relation to a child who is 18 or over unless the court is satisfied that the provision of the maintenance is necessary:   to enable the child to complete his or her education, or (b) because of a mental or physical disability of the child. the court may make such a child maintenance order, in relation to a child who is 17, to take effect when or after the child turns 18.  ] the provision of maintenance for a child over the age of 18 is necessary in the relevant sense if the child reasonably needs it because he or she is handicapped in some way. [75] the word 'disability' in s 66l(1)(b) refers more to consequences than causes. a disabled person lacks mental power or a physical faculty (or both) and is restricted in the way he or she lives or moves.  4] the language of s 66l is plain and unambiguous. there is no express age based limitation and none should or needs to be implied. the section does not refer to a ‘childhood’ disability. if such restrictions were intended it could and should have been made clear as crystal. equally, there is no reason for believing that ‘temporary’ disabilities are within the ambit of the section while ‘permanent’ ones are outside its confines. no distinction is apparently drawn between ‘partial’ or ‘total’ disabilities either.  ] the construction of the word “necessary” has been well settled in this court for many years. in tuck at 76,227 evatt cj and murray j said:
to define “necessary” as meaning “absolutely essential” is to give the adjective a most stringent definition. that stringency, in our view, is not warranted by the concept expressed very strongly by the act that the court shall regard the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration. “necessary” in this context means that the maintenance is needed by the child and that it is reasonable to require the parent to contribute, having regard to the parties’ financial circumstances and other relevant factors.
consideration
to whom it may concern re: [ms b] dob: [2000] this is to certify that [ms b] has been diagnosed with: left temporal lobe focal epilepsy related to encephalocele. intracranial resection/lobectomy surgery 2019 and 2020 [ms b] has been suffering from ongoing focal partial seizure events comes in cluster around 4 events on a day with few days in between cluster, since age 12 years the frequent almost daily cluster seizure events prevent her to engage any academic and paid employment activities, and significant adverse impact on her quality of life. the two brain intracranial surgeries unable to cure or improve her seizure events. the epilepsy is resistant to multiple combination anticonvulsant medications. currently she is on singular anticonvulsant medication, that has no significant effect to control her seizure. her frequent epileptic events cause secondary depression symptoms, she has been treated with psychocouncelling therapy she has been under regular follow up by term care at f hospital neurology and by me as her regular gp. please contact me for any further information with her consent thank you. yours sincerely, dr [d]
associate: dated: 17 november 2022
dated: 17 november 2022