last updated: 20 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
neely & neely [2022] fedcfamc2f 1590
orders
the court orders that:  the applicant shall indemnify and discharge the respondent absolutely against all payments and liabilities of any encumbrances over the home together with all rates, taxes and outgoings of or with respect of the home of whatsoever nature and kind, (b) the respondent and the applicant shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to close the bank d cash management account # ...59 and divide the proceeds in the following manner:- (i) to the respondent the sum of $150,779.80, and (ii) to the applicant the balance then remaining.   the respondent and the applicant shall do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to close the bank d cash management account # ...59 and divide the proceeds in the following manner:- (i) to the respondent the sum of $150,779.80, and (ii) to the applicant the balance then remaining.   to the respondent the sum of $150,779.80, and (ii) to the applicant the balance then remaining.  ) to the applicant the balance then remaining.   bank accounts are deemed to be in the possession of the person whose name appears on the bank’s record thereof, (b) insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the beneficiary thereof, (c) superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlements, and (d) the chattels in the home are deemed to be in the possession of the applicant.   insurance policies are deemed to be in the possession of the beneficiary thereof, (c) superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlements, and (d) the chattels in the home are deemed to be in the possession of the applicant.   superannuation entitlements are deemed to be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose age or working future provides the conditions for payment out of such entitlements, and (d) the chattels in the home are deemed to be in the possession of the applicant.   the chattels in the home are deemed to be in the possession of the applicant.
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
part 1: introduction
orders sought
part 2: legal principles
...the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applied, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79.
part 3: the evidence
documents
the witnesses
the husband  prior to obtaining full time work in 2014, the wife made some financial contributions by way of austudy, educator income and homestays – noting that the extent of homestay guests was in dispute, (b) the wife was the primary homemaker, (c) the wife provided care for him when he had his knee reconstructions, (d) he did not work for about a year while he was building their home at b street, suburb c, and was in receipt of an age pension at that time. he conceded that there would have been a shortfall between his income and their joint living expenses, (e) in relation to the suburb e property he conceded that there would have been net proceeds of sale of about $325,000 after expenses and mortgage payout. he was unable to advise into what account those funds were placed however his evidence, which i accept, was that those funds were used to build the property at b street, suburb c. the parties had no other resources to meet the expense of the build which he estimated at approximately $300,000, and (f) he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.   the wife was the primary homemaker, (c) the wife provided care for him when he had his knee reconstructions, (d) he did not work for about a year while he was building their home at b street, suburb c, and was in receipt of an age pension at that time. he conceded that there would have been a shortfall between his income and their joint living expenses, (e) in relation to the suburb e property he conceded that there would have been net proceeds of sale of about $325,000 after expenses and mortgage payout. he was unable to advise into what account those funds were placed however his evidence, which i accept, was that those funds were used to build the property at b street, suburb c. the parties had no other resources to meet the expense of the build which he estimated at approximately $300,000, and (f) he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.   the wife provided care for him when he had his knee reconstructions, (d) he did not work for about a year while he was building their home at b street, suburb c, and was in receipt of an age pension at that time. he conceded that there would have been a shortfall between his income and their joint living expenses, (e) in relation to the suburb e property he conceded that there would have been net proceeds of sale of about $325,000 after expenses and mortgage payout. he was unable to advise into what account those funds were placed however his evidence, which i accept, was that those funds were used to build the property at b street, suburb c. the parties had no other resources to meet the expense of the build which he estimated at approximately $300,000, and (f) he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.   he did not work for about a year while he was building their home at b street, suburb c, and was in receipt of an age pension at that time. he conceded that there would have been a shortfall between his income and their joint living expenses, (e) in relation to the suburb e property he conceded that there would have been net proceeds of sale of about $325,000 after expenses and mortgage payout. he was unable to advise into what account those funds were placed however his evidence, which i accept, was that those funds were used to build the property at b street, suburb c. the parties had no other resources to meet the expense of the build which he estimated at approximately $300,000, and (f) he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.   in relation to the suburb e property he conceded that there would have been net proceeds of sale of about $325,000 after expenses and mortgage payout. he was unable to advise into what account those funds were placed however his evidence, which i accept, was that those funds were used to build the property at b street, suburb c. the parties had no other resources to meet the expense of the build which he estimated at approximately $300,000, and (f) he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.   he conceded the shortfall of about $25,000 between sale proceeds and build costs of the b street, suburb c home.
the wife
findings of fact
initial contributions  the husband made sensible concessions during the trial, and (b) he reduced the estimated value of the joint investment held with his former wife, even though that reduced his own initial contributions to this relationship.   he reduced the estimated value of the joint investment held with his former wife, even though that reduced his own initial contributions to this relationship.
the husband’s health and related capacity to work
family violence
the husband’s attitude towards the wife  the wife’s own evidence that her initial contribution was not paid into the joint account but retained by her in a separate account and used at her discretion, (b) the husband opened a joint account very early in the relationship and the wife had an atm card through which she was able to access that joint account, though she says she did not, (c) he provided the wife with a credit card early in the relationship, (d) the husband met the majority of household expenses pending the wife obtaining full time employment in 2013, (e) when his home was sold in 2011, the property at b street, suburb c was purchased in joint names, (f) good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   the husband opened a joint account very early in the relationship and the wife had an atm card through which she was able to access that joint account, though she says she did not, (c) he provided the wife with a credit card early in the relationship, (d) the husband met the majority of household expenses pending the wife obtaining full time employment in 2013, (e) when his home was sold in 2011, the property at b street, suburb c was purchased in joint names, (f) good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   he provided the wife with a credit card early in the relationship, (d) the husband met the majority of household expenses pending the wife obtaining full time employment in 2013, (e) when his home was sold in 2011, the property at b street, suburb c was purchased in joint names, (f) good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   the husband met the majority of household expenses pending the wife obtaining full time employment in 2013, (e) when his home was sold in 2011, the property at b street, suburb c was purchased in joint names, (f) good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   when his home was sold in 2011, the property at b street, suburb c was purchased in joint names, (f) good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   good quality vehicles were purchased for both parties from joint funds, with the wife driving a motor vehicle 1, (g) whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   whilst the parties agreed that they were frugal in their spending, they went on what was referred to as nice holidays, and (h) the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).   the parties discussed and agreed various financial matters during the relationship including the distribution of the joint account at separation (save for the payment to the husband’s daughter which was discussed but not agreed).
rental income  my earlier finding that i do not accept the wife’s evidence that she operated without any cash for the 14 years of the relationship aside from her initial contribution which was used to pay her university fees, and (b) my findings as regards the husband’s attitude towards the wife.   my findings as regards the husband’s attitude towards the wife.
payment to the husband’s former wife
gift to the husband’s daughter
homestay guests
part 4: determination
determining the assets and liabilities
description
ownership
valuer
assets
b street, suburb c
joint
h street, suburb g
wife
bank d accnt ###...59
anz savings accnt ###...44
anz savings accnt ###...61
anz savings accnt ###...96
husband
motor vehicle 1
motor vehicle 2
subtotal of assets:
liabilities
mortgage (anz)
mastercard
subtotal of liabilities:
superannuation
super fund j - accumulation
super fund j – accumulation
subtotal of superannuation:
total:
determining the approach
determining whether it is just and equitable to make orders  the parties were in a 14 year relationship, (b) they were married, (c) they had a joint bank account and consulted about financial matters, (d) they purchased land in joint names on which they built the former matrimonial home, and (e) they planned and went on holidays together.   they were married, (c) they had a joint bank account and consulted about financial matters, (d) they purchased land in joint names on which they built the former matrimonial home, and (e) they planned and went on holidays together.   they had a joint bank account and consulted about financial matters, (d) they purchased land in joint names on which they built the former matrimonial home, and (e) they planned and went on holidays together.   they purchased land in joint names on which they built the former matrimonial home, and (e) they planned and went on holidays together.   they planned and went on holidays together.
evaluation of s 79(4) - contribution issues  this is a medium to long term relationship of 14 years, (b) the husband made the initial contribution of almost 90% of assets valued overall at about $535,750, (c) of the husband’s initial contributions, one asset was real property then valued at about $665,000 and sold in 2011 for $800,000, noting the mortgage of $200,000. in considering this asset i also took into account that the parties lived together in this property and the wife therefore made contributions in that time. i also considered that the increase in value appears to be due to market forces as no evidence was led of any improvements having been made to that property prior to sale, (d) the wife’s initial contribution of cash together with the husband’s support allowed her to re-train and to attain her current level of income, (e) the proceeds of sale of the husband’s property were used to buy land in joint names and to build a home on that land, (f) the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the husband made the initial contribution of almost 90% of assets valued overall at about $535,750, (c) of the husband’s initial contributions, one asset was real property then valued at about $665,000 and sold in 2011 for $800,000, noting the mortgage of $200,000. in considering this asset i also took into account that the parties lived together in this property and the wife therefore made contributions in that time. i also considered that the increase in value appears to be due to market forces as no evidence was led of any improvements having been made to that property prior to sale, (d) the wife’s initial contribution of cash together with the husband’s support allowed her to re-train and to attain her current level of income, (e) the proceeds of sale of the husband’s property were used to buy land in joint names and to build a home on that land, (f) the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   of the husband’s initial contributions, one asset was real property then valued at about $665,000 and sold in 2011 for $800,000, noting the mortgage of $200,000. in considering this asset i also took into account that the parties lived together in this property and the wife therefore made contributions in that time. i also considered that the increase in value appears to be due to market forces as no evidence was led of any improvements having been made to that property prior to sale, (d) the wife’s initial contribution of cash together with the husband’s support allowed her to re-train and to attain her current level of income, (e) the proceeds of sale of the husband’s property were used to buy land in joint names and to build a home on that land, (f) the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the wife’s initial contribution of cash together with the husband’s support allowed her to re-train and to attain her current level of income, (e) the proceeds of sale of the husband’s property were used to buy land in joint names and to build a home on that land, (f) the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the proceeds of sale of the husband’s property were used to buy land in joint names and to build a home on that land, (f) the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the husband did not work for a period of about a year whilst he built the former matrimonial home. in that time he did however contribute the age pension and the excess funds from the sale of his home, (g) the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the husband made the greater financial contributions by way of income until the wife started working at a professional level in or about 2015. whilst she commenced work for employer f in 2013 this was for two years at a professional level, (h) the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the wife made some financial contributions prior to commencing full time work through austudy, educator and homestay arrangements, noting the extent and use of those contributions is in dispute, (i) from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   from about 2015 the parties made roughly equal financial contributions by way of income. as the husband was self-employed he had to pay tax and expenses from his gross income, (j) it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   it is non-controversial that the parties lived frugally aside from nice holidays, (k) the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the parties both contributed to the savings in the bank d investment account as funds were transferred from the joint account where the income for both parties was deposited, (l) the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the wife made the greater contributions as a home maker, (m) the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the husband’s gift to his daughter from a joint account of funds in the sum of $20,000 which was made contrary to the wife’s wishes, and (n) the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.   the distribution of funds from the joint account into the parties’ individual accounts reflecting their contributions and which take into account the husband’s obligation to pay tax and other business expenses.
evaluation of section 75(2) factors - future needs  the husband’s age – he is 78 years of age, as compared to the wife who is 61 years of age. this means the wife has a longer time in the work force at a not insignificant salary and on a professional super plan, (b) it was submitted that the husband’s age was a double edged sword in that whatever the wife receives must last longer. i am not so persuaded because she has the far greater opportunity to add to her share of the property settlement, (c) whilst he describes himself as a consultant and at the time of his stroke had plans to return to work, the husband’s ability to work is likely limited not only because of his age but also his health. his evidence is that he has ceased work and sold his contact list. he provides a letter for his accountant confirming the business closure. this was unchallenged evidence and in the context of my findings about his evidence, his age and his health i have no reason to doubt and in fact i do accept that evidence, (d) the parties agree that the husband is to retain the former matrimonial home which is mortgage free and which is an income producing asset, garnering rental income in the sum of $290 per week, (e) the wife is in secure employment with a good income. the wife has an ongoing capacity to earn and to increase the value of her super, (f) although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   it was submitted that the husband’s age was a double edged sword in that whatever the wife receives must last longer. i am not so persuaded because she has the far greater opportunity to add to her share of the property settlement, (c) whilst he describes himself as a consultant and at the time of his stroke had plans to return to work, the husband’s ability to work is likely limited not only because of his age but also his health. his evidence is that he has ceased work and sold his contact list. he provides a letter for his accountant confirming the business closure. this was unchallenged evidence and in the context of my findings about his evidence, his age and his health i have no reason to doubt and in fact i do accept that evidence, (d) the parties agree that the husband is to retain the former matrimonial home which is mortgage free and which is an income producing asset, garnering rental income in the sum of $290 per week, (e) the wife is in secure employment with a good income. the wife has an ongoing capacity to earn and to increase the value of her super, (f) although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   whilst he describes himself as a consultant and at the time of his stroke had plans to return to work, the husband’s ability to work is likely limited not only because of his age but also his health. his evidence is that he has ceased work and sold his contact list. he provides a letter for his accountant confirming the business closure. this was unchallenged evidence and in the context of my findings about his evidence, his age and his health i have no reason to doubt and in fact i do accept that evidence, (d) the parties agree that the husband is to retain the former matrimonial home which is mortgage free and which is an income producing asset, garnering rental income in the sum of $290 per week, (e) the wife is in secure employment with a good income. the wife has an ongoing capacity to earn and to increase the value of her super, (f) although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   the parties agree that the husband is to retain the former matrimonial home which is mortgage free and which is an income producing asset, garnering rental income in the sum of $290 per week, (e) the wife is in secure employment with a good income. the wife has an ongoing capacity to earn and to increase the value of her super, (f) although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   the wife is in secure employment with a good income. the wife has an ongoing capacity to earn and to increase the value of her super, (f) although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   although she is 61 years of age no evidence was led that the wife would be required to retire or intended to retire any time in the near future. the very fact that she has obtained a mortgage in order to purchase land with an intent to build a home argues against that, and (g) the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.   the husband has had a stroke and is 78 years of age. there will likely be medical expenses in the foreseeable future.
just and equitable
associate: dated: 22 november 2022
dated: 22 november 2022