last updated: 13 december 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
white & kenney [2022] fedcfamc2f 1633
orders
upon noting:
the court orders that:  from the date of these orders until the child commences primary school in 2024: (i) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of childcare/kindergarten (or 4:30pm if a non-childcare/kindergarten day) on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, to continue in the same cycle as the arrangements in place immediately prior to the making of these orders, and (ii) each other week from the conclusion of childcare/kindergarten (or 4:30pm if a non-childcare/kindergarten day) on wednesday until the commencement of childcare/kindergarten (or 9:00am if a non‑childcare/kindergarten day) on thursday. (b) from the time the child commences primary school in 2024 until the commencement of the 2025 school year: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on monday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays. (c) from the commencement of the 2025 school year: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on tuesday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays. (d) such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   each alternate weekend from the conclusion of childcare/kindergarten (or 4:30pm if a non-childcare/kindergarten day) on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, to continue in the same cycle as the arrangements in place immediately prior to the making of these orders, and (ii) each other week from the conclusion of childcare/kindergarten (or 4:30pm if a non-childcare/kindergarten day) on wednesday until the commencement of childcare/kindergarten (or 9:00am if a non‑childcare/kindergarten day) on thursday.  ) each other week from the conclusion of childcare/kindergarten (or 4:30pm if a non-childcare/kindergarten day) on wednesday until the commencement of childcare/kindergarten (or 9:00am if a non‑childcare/kindergarten day) on thursday.   from the time the child commences primary school in 2024 until the commencement of the 2025 school year: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on monday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays. (c) from the commencement of the 2025 school year: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on tuesday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays. (d) such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on monday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays.  ) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays.   from the commencement of the 2025 school year: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on tuesday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays. (d) such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school (or 4:30pm if a non-school day) on thursday until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) on tuesday, to commence on the first thursday of each school term, and (ii) half of each school holiday period at times to be agreed, and failing agreement, on a week-about basis commencing on the last day of the school term, with the child to spend the first week of the holidays with the parent in whose care he would otherwise have been for the first weekend of the school holidays.   such further and other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
reasons for judgment
judge parker
introduction  the living and time spending arrangements for x during school terms and school holidays from the time of his fourth birthday in 2018, (b) which school x should attend from the commencement of his primary school education in 2024 and the related question of which kindergarten he should attend in 2023, and (c) whether there should be an injunction restraining the parties from allowing x’s image to be used for commercial purposes.   which school x should attend from the commencement of his primary school education in 2024 and the related question of which kindergarten he should attend in 2023, and (c) whether there should be an injunction restraining the parties from allowing x’s image to be used for commercial purposes.   whether there should be an injunction restraining the parties from allowing x’s image to be used for commercial purposes.   amended initiating application filed 28 september 2022, (b) trial affidavit of mr white filed 9 september 2022, (c) affidavit of ms e filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.   trial affidavit of mr white filed 9 september 2022, (c) affidavit of ms e filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.   affidavit of ms e filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.   case outline filed 4 october 2022.   in the 2022/2023 summer school holidays from 12pm on 28 december 2022 until 12pm on 1 january 2023 and from 12pm on 5 january 2022 until 5pm on 8 january 2022, (b) in the term 2 school holidays in 2023 from the conclusion of kindergarten or 4pm if kindergarten attendance is not required on 6 july 2023 until 9am or the commencement of kindergarten on 13 july 2023, and (c) from the child’s fifth birthday in 2023, on a week about basis with each of his parents during each school holiday period.   in the term 2 school holidays in 2023 from the conclusion of kindergarten or 4pm if kindergarten attendance is not required on 6 july 2023 until 9am or the commencement of kindergarten on 13 july 2023, and (c) from the child’s fifth birthday in 2023, on a week about basis with each of his parents during each school holiday period.   from the child’s fifth birthday in 2023, on a week about basis with each of his parents during each school holiday period.   amended response to initiating application filed 20 september 2022, (b) trial affidavit of ms kenney filed 9 september 2022, (c) affidavit of mr h filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.   trial affidavit of ms kenney filed 9 september 2022, (c) affidavit of mr h filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.   affidavit of mr h filed 9 september 2022, and (d) case outline filed 4 october 2022.
the father
the mother
the court child expert  the question of whether a build up to equal time would ultimately be in x’s best interests was conditional upon a number of as yet unknown factors, including how he handled the transition to school and how he coped with any increase in time with his father, (b) if the court made a finding that the father denigrates the mother to x, this was a risk factor, (c) if the court made a finding that the father was controlling of the mother, that would be indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and would be a risk factor, and (d) regardless of whether the court finds that one or both parties is in fact controlling, the existence of competing allegations of controlling behaviour indicates that the parties have a poor co-parenting relationship.   if the court made a finding that the father denigrates the mother to x, this was a risk factor, (c) if the court made a finding that the father was controlling of the mother, that would be indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and would be a risk factor, and (d) regardless of whether the court finds that one or both parties is in fact controlling, the existence of competing allegations of controlling behaviour indicates that the parties have a poor co-parenting relationship.   if the court made a finding that the father was controlling of the mother, that would be indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and would be a risk factor, and (d) regardless of whether the court finds that one or both parties is in fact controlling, the existence of competing allegations of controlling behaviour indicates that the parties have a poor co-parenting relationship.   regardless of whether the court finds that one or both parties is in fact controlling, the existence of competing allegations of controlling behaviour indicates that the parties have a poor co-parenting relationship.
other witnesses
parental conflict
the mother’s partner
“i want to see [x] [sic] sleeping arrangements. if i [sic] find out he is sharing a bed with [mr h] look out. i also don't allow [x] to be looked after by [mr h] tomorrow while you work, so you will have to drop him to childcare. i look forward to seeing the notification when he arrives. if i don't see a notification i'm driving to [town m].”
maternity hospital incident
tracking device
‘barrage’ of text messages
daily video calls
extracurricular activity
facilitation of relationship with father
father’s treatment of mother   a message to the mother in 2018 (during her pregnancy) saying ‘don’t you ever threaten me with an abortion again, you hear me,’[73] which was followed by a message two days later instructing her to terminate her pregnancy so ‘we can all move on and have a nice life’.[74] (b) a facebook message sent to the mother in 2018 (when she was pregnant with x) berating her for having taken her phone into the bathroom with her, saying ‘ive [sic] repeatedly asked you not to do that, ive [sic] told you why. last night you get a snapchat message from "[...]" who the fuck is that? then you do what you always do and take your phone into the bathroom so what the fuck do you want me to think? if you weren't pregnant i wouldn't be with you you're a fuckin bitch.’[75] (c) a threat in mid-2021 to ‘alert the authorities’ in relation to bruising he alleges he observed on x.[76] (d) filming handovers.[77] (e) threats to tell x about the parties’ toxic relationship and the father’s views of the mother should he ask in the future. in this regard: (i) in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion. (f) a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   a facebook message sent to the mother in 2018 (when she was pregnant with x) berating her for having taken her phone into the bathroom with her, saying ‘ive [sic] repeatedly asked you not to do that, ive [sic] told you why. last night you get a snapchat message from "[...]" who the fuck is that? then you do what you always do and take your phone into the bathroom so what the fuck do you want me to think? if you weren't pregnant i wouldn't be with you you're a fuckin bitch.’[75] (c) a threat in mid-2021 to ‘alert the authorities’ in relation to bruising he alleges he observed on x.[76] (d) filming handovers.[77] (e) threats to tell x about the parties’ toxic relationship and the father’s views of the mother should he ask in the future. in this regard: (i) in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion. (f) a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   a threat in mid-2021 to ‘alert the authorities’ in relation to bruising he alleges he observed on x.[76] (d) filming handovers.[77] (e) threats to tell x about the parties’ toxic relationship and the father’s views of the mother should he ask in the future. in this regard: (i) in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion. (f) a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   filming handovers.[77] (e) threats to tell x about the parties’ toxic relationship and the father’s views of the mother should he ask in the future. in this regard: (i) in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion. (f) a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   threats to tell x about the parties’ toxic relationship and the father’s views of the mother should he ask in the future. in this regard: (i) in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion. (f) a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   in a message dated 10 september 2021, the father sent a message to the mother saying ‘the more you stand between us the better it looks for me so do whatever you want but i'll always tell [x] the truth and won't hide what you have done and are trying to do with his and my relationship.’[78] (ii) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion.  ) on 13 september 2021, in the context of an argument about daily phone calls, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...we both know you're a compulsive liar who uses [x] to punish me, which is sad and makes you a bad parent. i will tell him about it when he's older and you'll have to suffer those consequences, not me.’ (iii) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion.  i) under cross-examination, when asked whether this was appropriate, the father said ‘i will never lie to my son. if he asks me questions, i will tell him the truth’ and ‘i’ve never called [ms kenney] a bad parent in front of [x] and i never will, but when things happen ... i’ve got no reason to lie to [x]. i’ve never done anything wrong by him, and if he asks me the questions, i will tell him the honest answer.’ when asked ‘when you say i will tell him about it when he’s older, you’re talking about her being a bad parent, aren’t you?’ the father responded ‘i’m talking about everything that goes on, everything that happened around that period of time...’ asked what he meant by ‘suffer those consequences’, the father replied ‘if [x] asked the question and got told an answer and it affected how he felt about the situation, that’s not on me. i’m just going to tell him the truth.’ (iv) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion.  ) the father conceded his message was threatening and that it may have induced a sense of fear in the mother, but he could not see that it was manipulative. the father did not appear to appreciate the irony that this was in fact him using x to punish the mother. he also did not appear concerned about the likely significant emotional harm that he was threatening to inflict on x by exposing him to his father’s negative views about his mother or details of the dispute between his parents, despite the express acknowledgment in his message that his proposed actions would lead to ‘consequences’ for x’s relationship with his mother. his view that if he acted as he had threatened to do, the consequences would not be ‘on him’ reflected a very limited capacity to reflect on his own choices and behaviour. the father’s evidence in relation to this issue gives rise to significant concern as to his parenting capacity in addition to his ability to co-parenting with the mother in a respectful fashion.   a message sent to the mother on 17 september 2021 saying ‘pick up sunday will be here at 6.30.’ after she said that she had not been given enough notice and that pick up would be 3:30 like normal, the father responded ‘[w]e don't have an agreed handover time. you've robbed me of phone calls so go fuck your self’ and ‘[t]old you if you fuck with me i’ll give you the same in return’.[79] this argument continued, with the father engaging in many communications which were antagonistic and not child focused, demonstrating his anger about no longer having daily telephone calls with x. the father acknowledged under cross-examination that his conduct was not appropriate and was controlling. (g) text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   text messages to the mother on 5 october 2022 (the day before the trial commenced) in which he told her ‘i don’t appreciate the attitude around this’ and ‘you’re being overbearing’, the latter of which was sent in response to a reasonable request for the details of a doctor who had been consulted about x.[80]   facebook messages to her on 13 january 2018[81] in the context of an argument between the parties while they were away in region r with the mother’s family and the father had left to spend some time by himself at the pub. the father perceived the mother’s objection to this as controlling. this perspective is understandable. however, he appeared completely lacking in insight into his own role in the incident, which included sending taunting and antagonistic messages to the mother including (but not limited to) ‘you are a controlling hen pecker’, ‘oh no, [mr white] isn’t allowed to fucking make any of his own decisions,’ ‘you always have a sook when i’m having a good time...’ ‘[g]o find some fuckwit that will be your little perfect boyfriend that has no life or hobbies and wont ever leave your side and will always say "yes princess [ms kenney] [sic]"’, ‘[y]ou're so high maintenance i cannot deal with it’, ‘you need to grow up a bit, stop being so precious and realize you dont [sic] own me’ and ‘[f]uck me dead you’re a manipulative lying nightmare’. many of the messages sent by the father were sent consecutively without any response from the mother and in one instance in the face of the mother expressly stating that she did not wish to continue the argument. the father’s description of this incident in his trial affidavit was that the mother ‘was irate and began verbally abusing’ him. that is not a balanced description of what the messages demonstrate. the father’s lack of insight into or minimisation of his own role in the conflict of that day is a matter of concern.[82] (b) messages to her on 22 march 2018 in which he says ‘you’re being a right bitch today’[83] and calls her a ‘spiteful disgrace’[84] and a ‘psycho’[85] but then despite this conduct, tells her to ‘stop this arguing name calling crap’.[86] (c) messages he sent her in 2018, when she was pregnant with x, saying ‘if you weren’t pregnant, i wouldn’t be with you you’re a fucking bitch’, ‘it’s my baby, you whore’ and ‘i honestly wish you never got pregnant hey i can't bare [sic] the thought of single parent life and dealing with your fucking shit for the rest of my life, id [sic] rather hang my self [sic]’[87] this conduct stands in stark contrast with the father’s evidence of the care and attention he provided to the mother while she was pregnant.[88] (d) a message to her on 7 july 2018 saying ‘you’re controlling, cruel and spiteful...’[89] (e) messages sent to her on 10 july 2019 saying ‘i'm not even at work yet and you're already on my back leave me alone i don't need it right now’,‘[i]t's not even seven o'clock yet and you've managed already to ruin my fucking day so well done’, ‘[s]hut the fuck up you control freak go pick on someone else,’ and ‘[y]ou're the most inconsiderate selfish piece of shit ever it's 7am and you've already been nagging me for 20 minutes get a fucking life’.[90] these messages were sent in the context of an entirely reasonable request from the mother that he tell his family of the parties’ separation, which he admitted under cross-examination that he had been refusing to do, resulting in the mother being required to pretend their relationship was continuing. (f) messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   messages to her on 22 march 2018 in which he says ‘you’re being a right bitch today’[83] and calls her a ‘spiteful disgrace’[84] and a ‘psycho’[85] but then despite this conduct, tells her to ‘stop this arguing name calling crap’.[86] (c) messages he sent her in 2018, when she was pregnant with x, saying ‘if you weren’t pregnant, i wouldn’t be with you you’re a fucking bitch’, ‘it’s my baby, you whore’ and ‘i honestly wish you never got pregnant hey i can't bare [sic] the thought of single parent life and dealing with your fucking shit for the rest of my life, id [sic] rather hang my self [sic]’[87] this conduct stands in stark contrast with the father’s evidence of the care and attention he provided to the mother while she was pregnant.[88] (d) a message to her on 7 july 2018 saying ‘you’re controlling, cruel and spiteful...’[89] (e) messages sent to her on 10 july 2019 saying ‘i'm not even at work yet and you're already on my back leave me alone i don't need it right now’,‘[i]t's not even seven o'clock yet and you've managed already to ruin my fucking day so well done’, ‘[s]hut the fuck up you control freak go pick on someone else,’ and ‘[y]ou're the most inconsiderate selfish piece of shit ever it's 7am and you've already been nagging me for 20 minutes get a fucking life’.[90] these messages were sent in the context of an entirely reasonable request from the mother that he tell his family of the parties’ separation, which he admitted under cross-examination that he had been refusing to do, resulting in the mother being required to pretend their relationship was continuing. (f) messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   messages he sent her in 2018, when she was pregnant with x, saying ‘if you weren’t pregnant, i wouldn’t be with you you’re a fucking bitch’, ‘it’s my baby, you whore’ and ‘i honestly wish you never got pregnant hey i can't bare [sic] the thought of single parent life and dealing with your fucking shit for the rest of my life, id [sic] rather hang my self [sic]’[87] this conduct stands in stark contrast with the father’s evidence of the care and attention he provided to the mother while she was pregnant.[88] (d) a message to her on 7 july 2018 saying ‘you’re controlling, cruel and spiteful...’[89] (e) messages sent to her on 10 july 2019 saying ‘i'm not even at work yet and you're already on my back leave me alone i don't need it right now’,‘[i]t's not even seven o'clock yet and you've managed already to ruin my fucking day so well done’, ‘[s]hut the fuck up you control freak go pick on someone else,’ and ‘[y]ou're the most inconsiderate selfish piece of shit ever it's 7am and you've already been nagging me for 20 minutes get a fucking life’.[90] these messages were sent in the context of an entirely reasonable request from the mother that he tell his family of the parties’ separation, which he admitted under cross-examination that he had been refusing to do, resulting in the mother being required to pretend their relationship was continuing. (f) messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   a message to her on 7 july 2018 saying ‘you’re controlling, cruel and spiteful...’[89] (e) messages sent to her on 10 july 2019 saying ‘i'm not even at work yet and you're already on my back leave me alone i don't need it right now’,‘[i]t's not even seven o'clock yet and you've managed already to ruin my fucking day so well done’, ‘[s]hut the fuck up you control freak go pick on someone else,’ and ‘[y]ou're the most inconsiderate selfish piece of shit ever it's 7am and you've already been nagging me for 20 minutes get a fucking life’.[90] these messages were sent in the context of an entirely reasonable request from the mother that he tell his family of the parties’ separation, which he admitted under cross-examination that he had been refusing to do, resulting in the mother being required to pretend their relationship was continuing. (f) messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   messages sent to her on 10 july 2019 saying ‘i'm not even at work yet and you're already on my back leave me alone i don't need it right now’,‘[i]t's not even seven o'clock yet and you've managed already to ruin my fucking day so well done’, ‘[s]hut the fuck up you control freak go pick on someone else,’ and ‘[y]ou're the most inconsiderate selfish piece of shit ever it's 7am and you've already been nagging me for 20 minutes get a fucking life’.[90] these messages were sent in the context of an entirely reasonable request from the mother that he tell his family of the parties’ separation, which he admitted under cross-examination that he had been refusing to do, resulting in the mother being required to pretend their relationship was continuing. (f) messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   messages sent to her in 2018 saying ‘[w]e would be a loving happy family if you weren't such a selfish piece of shit that expects me to be a mind reader,’ and ‘i wish we never met you're a horrible human.’ these messages were sent in the context of an argument less than three weeks after x was born about whether the mother would drive the father to collect his car, where he had left it after attending a function.[91] the father’s lack of insight into his conduct on this occasion is demonstrated by a message he sent later the same day claiming ‘i want to be there for you but you keep pushing me away’.[92] (g) messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   messages from the father to the mother in 2019[93] (when x was an infant) in the context of an argument about the father going out for a drink after work (again, a context in which the father’s feeling of being controlled is understandable but his reaction was disproportionate and abusive) including ‘how dare i have 2 beers on a friday’, ‘i work my arse off while you sit around and go [to workouts] and mums group’ and despite that message, only minutes later ‘i don't tell you how to spend your time. i don't tell you what you can or can't do or make you feel guilty if you're doing something fun’. on that occasion, the father sent a further message saying ‘[y]ou wonder why i make you feel like you are the biggest burden in my life, fact is not a single other person on this plant [sic] gives me as much shit as you, so yeah i guess that's why it feels that way. you get whatever you want all the time and hate being told no.’ during this exchange, the father asked the mother ‘[w]hy can't you ever just see my point of view? you always revert to being the victim’. the mother (correctly, in my view) responded ‘we’re both victims of each other’, following which the father continued to criticise her. (h) a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   a message he sent her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘...[y]our parenting the last few weeks has slipped and i'm pulling you up on it...’[94] despite this message, and one on 13 september 2021 in which he called her a ‘bad parent’[95], on 23 september 2021 he claimed he had been ‘actively telling you you’re a good parent for years’[96] and his evidence under cross-examination was that prior to the commencement of the mother’s relationship with mr h, he ‘always praised her parenting, always.’ (i) a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   a further message he sent to her on 27 april 2021 in which he said ‘i don’t think you understand how selfish and obnoxious you are’.[97] (j) an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   an email sent to her on 20 february 2022 saying ‘your attitude and demeanour is not setting a good example for our son.’[98] (k) his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   his descriptions of the mother as controlling, vindictive, manipulative, a narcissist and a compulsive liar,[99] which he expressly maintained under cross-examination. (l) his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   his evidence given under cross-examination that the mother has ‘traits of...lying and just bullying.’   the importance for x of a successful co-parenting relationship in which the parties communicate in a friendly manner, demonstrate flexibility and prioritise x’s needs, and (b) the risk that if the father undermines the mother, this could impact upon her parenting of x and was an indicator of the existence of a poor co-parenting relationship.   the risk that if the father undermines the mother, this could impact upon her parenting of x and was an indicator of the existence of a poor co-parenting relationship.   on 22 december 2018, the father sent the mother a message saying ‘...if i come home can i be there for him or are my bags packed’.[103] (b) messages exchanged between the parties on 10 may 2019[104] demonstrate that, during the course of one of their many arguments, the father said to the mother ‘i get home at 7 o’clock, you fucking control freak’, ‘all i do in [town m] is sit at home ... i come straight home ... what more do you want?’ and ‘i'm just going to find somewhere to live i'm sick of you and your family making me feel like a fucking leech even though i pay all our rent.’ in response to a question from the mother ‘so when are you moving out then?’, the father replied ‘whenever you want.’ when the mother said she would pack up his things for him, the father responded ‘don’t touch my things you miserable piece of shit’. (c) the parties both listed the same residential address on x’s birth registration statement.[105]   messages exchanged between the parties on 10 may 2019[104] demonstrate that, during the course of one of their many arguments, the father said to the mother ‘i get home at 7 o’clock, you fucking control freak’, ‘all i do in [town m] is sit at home ... i come straight home ... what more do you want?’ and ‘i'm just going to find somewhere to live i'm sick of you and your family making me feel like a fucking leech even though i pay all our rent.’ in response to a question from the mother ‘so when are you moving out then?’, the father replied ‘whenever you want.’ when the mother said she would pack up his things for him, the father responded ‘don’t touch my things you miserable piece of shit’. (c) the parties both listed the same residential address on x’s birth registration statement.[105]   the parties both listed the same residential address on x’s birth registration statement.[105]
“if you want to be the primary carer, but you’re not there to provide the primary care, then why can’t we have shared time, because it’s one thing to call yourself the primary carer, but when you’re not providing the primary care, particularly in the evenings, is that accurate?”   in 2018, at which time the mother was in the early stages of her pregnancy with x, she changed the father’s nickname in their chat to ‘will never see his child’. the father is rightly critical of the mother for this, but minimises the fact that immediately prior to this occurring, he had changed the mother’s nickname to ‘bitch.’[121] (b) there have been numerous messages between the parties in which they each say ‘fuck you’ or express similar sentiments.[122] (c) even discussions about simple matters such as handover arrangements can cause extensive bickering between the parties.[123]   there have been numerous messages between the parties in which they each say ‘fuck you’ or express similar sentiments.[122] (c) even discussions about simple matters such as handover arrangements can cause extensive bickering between the parties.[123]   even discussions about simple matters such as handover arrangements can cause extensive bickering between the parties.[123]
parties’ ability to cooperate
“more often than not he [and] the mother were able to co-parent effectively, and that indeed there had been an incident of that on the very weekend before the trial, but that the mother blew hot [and] cold and would abruptly withdraw cordial co-parenting as a reflection, seemingly, of nothing more than her own variable moods.”   his complaint that in early 2020, the mother commenced a weekend course but did not allow him to care for x while she attended it.[126] (b) his complaint that in early 2020, the mother ‘disregarded’ his relationship with his then partner and tried to ‘throw as many roadblocks in our path as she possibly could.’[127] (c) his allegation that on easter sunday in 2020, the mother called him a ‘bad father’ in front of x.[128] (d) his evidence that ‘during the course of 2020 ... [ms kenney] began to disregard [my] position in [x’s] life and would not let me speak to him on the phone’[129] (e) his evidence that in late 2020, he was required to seek psychological assistance because ‘[d]ue to years of being the victim of emotional blackmail, physical, verbal, financial and emotional abuse by [ms kenney] and due to our strained and extended mediation process, my mental health was at a point where i needed to seek professional support.’[130] (f) abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.   his complaint that in early 2020, the mother ‘disregarded’ his relationship with his then partner and tried to ‘throw as many roadblocks in our path as she possibly could.’[127] (c) his allegation that on easter sunday in 2020, the mother called him a ‘bad father’ in front of x.[128] (d) his evidence that ‘during the course of 2020 ... [ms kenney] began to disregard [my] position in [x’s] life and would not let me speak to him on the phone’[129] (e) his evidence that in late 2020, he was required to seek psychological assistance because ‘[d]ue to years of being the victim of emotional blackmail, physical, verbal, financial and emotional abuse by [ms kenney] and due to our strained and extended mediation process, my mental health was at a point where i needed to seek professional support.’[130] (f) abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.   his allegation that on easter sunday in 2020, the mother called him a ‘bad father’ in front of x.[128] (d) his evidence that ‘during the course of 2020 ... [ms kenney] began to disregard [my] position in [x’s] life and would not let me speak to him on the phone’[129] (e) his evidence that in late 2020, he was required to seek psychological assistance because ‘[d]ue to years of being the victim of emotional blackmail, physical, verbal, financial and emotional abuse by [ms kenney] and due to our strained and extended mediation process, my mental health was at a point where i needed to seek professional support.’[130] (f) abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.   his evidence that ‘during the course of 2020 ... [ms kenney] began to disregard [my] position in [x’s] life and would not let me speak to him on the phone’[129] (e) his evidence that in late 2020, he was required to seek psychological assistance because ‘[d]ue to years of being the victim of emotional blackmail, physical, verbal, financial and emotional abuse by [ms kenney] and due to our strained and extended mediation process, my mental health was at a point where i needed to seek professional support.’[130] (f) abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.   his evidence that in late 2020, he was required to seek psychological assistance because ‘[d]ue to years of being the victim of emotional blackmail, physical, verbal, financial and emotional abuse by [ms kenney] and due to our strained and extended mediation process, my mental health was at a point where i needed to seek professional support.’[130] (f) abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.   abusive messages and emails sent by the father in the context of high conflict communications during the period he claims the parties were co-parenting well, as outlined elsewhere in these reasons, including communications on 10 july 2019, 11 july 2019, 31 march 2021, 22 april 2021 and 27 april 2021.
“there have been occasions when the father has not expressed or conducted himself in the way that with hindsight he would have wished, but every relationship has such misunderstandings and incidences, and the father has invariably apologised promptly to the mother on such occasions, such that the parties have then resumed co-parenting’ and that ‘whilst the father may not have handled all situations as well as he might, the mother is equally guilty, [and] indeed more so, of over-reacting and of generally exaggerating the sense of threat that she claims to feel.”   his evidence that the relationship between the parties was characterised by family violence inflicted upon him by the mother, (b) his description of the parties’ pre-separation relationship as ‘toxic’[132] and ‘the worst period of [his] life’, which left him ‘broken down emotionally’ and feeling like ‘a shell of a human being’,[133] (c) the litany of criticisms he makes of the mother and her parenting throughout his evidence, as outlined earlier in these reasons, and (d) his poor conduct towards the mother demonstrated in many of the text messages contained within his own tender book, as outlined earlier in this judgment.   his description of the parties’ pre-separation relationship as ‘toxic’[132] and ‘the worst period of [his] life’, which left him ‘broken down emotionally’ and feeling like ‘a shell of a human being’,[133] (c) the litany of criticisms he makes of the mother and her parenting throughout his evidence, as outlined earlier in these reasons, and (d) his poor conduct towards the mother demonstrated in many of the text messages contained within his own tender book, as outlined earlier in this judgment.   the litany of criticisms he makes of the mother and her parenting throughout his evidence, as outlined earlier in these reasons, and (d) his poor conduct towards the mother demonstrated in many of the text messages contained within his own tender book, as outlined earlier in this judgment.   his poor conduct towards the mother demonstrated in many of the text messages contained within his own tender book, as outlined earlier in this judgment.
“still managed to find a way to communicate in a friendly manner and prioritise [x's] needs, particularly when it comes to his health and wellbeing’ and that they have ‘negotiated alternate handover times should [they] need to alter them, as well as extended weekends or time with [x] to suit [their] personal lives.”[134]
the relevant legal principles
the legislation   the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:   the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
“is, prima facie, in the child's best interest as it maximises the input to his life from each of his two parents, unless there is some good reason why this cannot work in a particular situation, which is not the same at all as fabricated reasons brought about by deliberate, repeated refusals of a parent to co-parent.”
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
risk issues
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
the nature of the child’s relationships with each of his parents and other significant persons in his life
the extent to which the child’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the child and to spend time and communicate with the child
the extent to which each of the child’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of a change in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
the capacity of the child’s parents and any other significant person to provide for the child’s needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs
the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
time
“since the mother can cope with co-parenting for four overnights per fortnight on her own proposal, she can continue to do so building up to 7 such overnights a year later, if she cannot co-parent at all then her position would surely be alternate weekends only plus half of school holidays, being the minimum time spending needed for any child to have a meaningful relationship with its non-custodial parent.”   as ms n indicated, an equal time arrangement being in x’s best interests would be conditional upon a number of unknown factors, including how he transitions to school and how he transitions between his parents as he gets older, (b) i have made findings that the father is controlling towards the mother, which, as ms n indicated, is a risk factor for x, (c) the parties each allege that the other behaves in a controlling manner towards them, which, as ms n indicated, is in itself suggestive of a poor co-parenting relationship, (d) i have found that the father treats the mother in an abusive and disrespectful manner and undermines her as a parent, which is indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and makes it unlikely that he could work effectively with her in the context of an equal time arrangement, (e) the father has made and continues to make a litany of complaints against the mother which demonstrate that he does not trust or respect her as a parent, which is a strong indication of the absence of a sufficiently workable co-parenting relationship to support a successful equal time arrangement, (f) i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   i have made findings that the father is controlling towards the mother, which, as ms n indicated, is a risk factor for x, (c) the parties each allege that the other behaves in a controlling manner towards them, which, as ms n indicated, is in itself suggestive of a poor co-parenting relationship, (d) i have found that the father treats the mother in an abusive and disrespectful manner and undermines her as a parent, which is indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and makes it unlikely that he could work effectively with her in the context of an equal time arrangement, (e) the father has made and continues to make a litany of complaints against the mother which demonstrate that he does not trust or respect her as a parent, which is a strong indication of the absence of a sufficiently workable co-parenting relationship to support a successful equal time arrangement, (f) i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   the parties each allege that the other behaves in a controlling manner towards them, which, as ms n indicated, is in itself suggestive of a poor co-parenting relationship, (d) i have found that the father treats the mother in an abusive and disrespectful manner and undermines her as a parent, which is indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and makes it unlikely that he could work effectively with her in the context of an equal time arrangement, (e) the father has made and continues to make a litany of complaints against the mother which demonstrate that he does not trust or respect her as a parent, which is a strong indication of the absence of a sufficiently workable co-parenting relationship to support a successful equal time arrangement, (f) i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   i have found that the father treats the mother in an abusive and disrespectful manner and undermines her as a parent, which is indicative of a poor co-parenting relationship and makes it unlikely that he could work effectively with her in the context of an equal time arrangement, (e) the father has made and continues to make a litany of complaints against the mother which demonstrate that he does not trust or respect her as a parent, which is a strong indication of the absence of a sufficiently workable co-parenting relationship to support a successful equal time arrangement, (f) i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   the father has made and continues to make a litany of complaints against the mother which demonstrate that he does not trust or respect her as a parent, which is a strong indication of the absence of a sufficiently workable co-parenting relationship to support a successful equal time arrangement, (f) i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   i have found that notwithstanding some periods where they have communicated well from time to time, overall, the parties have an extremely high conflict relationship and lack the mutual respect, trust, friendly communication, flexibility or ability to cooperate that ms n indicated would suggest that an equal time arrangement is in x’s best interests, and (g) i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.   i am satisfied that requiring x to live equally between the parties’ two households in circumstances in which the parties lack a consistently cooperative and flexible co‑parenting relationship would expose him to a risk of harm from being exposed to and caught up in the parties’ conflict.
schooling
injunction regarding photographs
costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 28 november 2022
dated: 28 november 2022
[1] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [4].[2] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraphs [21]-[22].[3] at paragraph [25].[4] at paragraph [25].[5] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraphs [13], [16].[6] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [20].[7] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [213].[8] as the father has done, according to the unchallenged evidence of the mother: mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [84.13].[9] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [17].[10] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [82]-[83].[11] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [13].[12] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [157].[13] affidavit of ms e filed 9 september 2022, paragraphs [8], [10].[14] affidavit of ms e filed 9 september 2022, paragraph [8].[15] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [19].[16] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [207].[17] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [161].[18] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [157], [174]-[179].[19] the email appears at the father’s trial book, p 133.[20] exhibit m5.[21] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [13].[22] such as the threat to ‘knock his head off his shoulders,’ which appears at p 107 of the father’s tender book.[23] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [103].[24] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [111].[25] affidavit of ms e, paragraph [26].[26] mother’s tender book, p 199.[27] father’s tender book, pp 128-129.[28] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [159]-[160].[29] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [168].[30] mother’s tender book, p 200.[31] father’s tender book, p 107.[32] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [16].[33] mother’s tender book, p 203.[34] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [59]-[62].[35] for example, the messages at pp 10-15 and 31-32 of the father’s tender book and those at p 105 of the mother’s tender book.[36] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [22]-[25], together with his evidence under cross-examination.[37] exhibit m6.[38] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [54].[39] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [41]-[42].[40] father’s trial book, pp 10-15.[41] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [101].[42] mother’s tender book, p 132.[43] mother’s tender book, p 125.[44] mother’s tender book, pp 132-133.[45] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [101].[46] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [102].[47] mother’s tender book, p 139.[48] mother’s tender book, p 133.[49] mother’s tender book, p 141.[50] mother’s tender book, p 141.[51] mother’s tender book, p 143.[52] mother’s tender book, p 143.[53] mother’s tender book, p 144.[54] mother’s tender book, p 144.[55] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [23].[56] father’s written submissions, p 1.[57] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [76], [139].[58] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [84].[59] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [246].[60] for example, the allegation in his notice of child abuse, family violence or risk that she has been using x as a weapon against him since 2019 and the evidence at paragraphs [82]-[83] of his trial affidavit that the mother dictated the time he could spend with x, that he was required to beg for time and that he was ‘never allowed regular, consistent time with [x]’ and ‘got barely any time with him at all.’[61] for example, father’s trial affidavit paragraphs [126]-[131], [237]-[239].[62] examples include the messages between the parties on 30 december 2021 in exhibit f3, and pp 74-101 of the father’s tender book.[63] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [115].[64] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [122].[65] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [164].[66] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [47].[67] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [111].[68] father’s tender book, pp 124-126.[69] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [165].[70] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [213].[71] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [241]-[242].[72] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [123].[73] father’s tender book, p 24.[74] exhibit m1.[75] exhibit m1.[76] mother’s tender book, p 200.[77] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [182].[78] mother’s tender book, p 132.[79] mother’s tender book p 136.[80] exhibit f3.[81] exhibit m2.[82] objection was taken on behalf of the father to the messages in exhibit m2 on the basis that there were some messages which appeared to be missing and therefore the full context, including any provocative messages sent by the mother, could not be gleaned. it subsequently emerged that the missing messages were likely photographs, but i have taken into account the possibility that exhibit m2 is not a complete record of the communications between the parties on the day.[83] father’s tender book, p 21.[84] father’s tender book, p 23.[85] father’s tender book, p 24.[86] father’s tender book, p 24.[87] mother’s tender book, p 97.[88] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [43], [55].[89] father’s tender book, p 2.[90] mother’s tender book pp 121-122.[91] mother’s tender book, p 105.[92] mother’s tender book, p 111.[93] exhibit m4.[94] mother’s tender book, p 124.[95] mother’s tender book, p 133.[96] mother’s tender book, p 144.[97] mother’s tender book p 126.[98] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [84.13].[99] in notice of child abuse, family violence or risk.[100] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [70].[101] mother’s tender book, p 121.[102] mother’s tender book, p 142.[103] mother’s tender book, p 112.[104] exhibit m4.[105] father’s tender book, p 122.[106] father’s tender book, p 17.[107] for example, father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [106]-[110], [118].[108] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [107].[109] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [112]; also at paragraph [148].[110] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [82], [84.5]; mother’s tender book p 199.[111] mother’s tender book, p 200.[112] child impact report dated 25 november paragraph [18].[113] quoting from willmore & menendez [2022] fedcfamc1a 73 at [33].[114] exhibit m4.[115] father’s tender book, p 3.[116] father’s tender book, p 124.[117] father’s tender book, p 13.[118] father’s tender book, p 23.[119] father’s tender book, p 114.[120] father’s tender book, p 116.[121] exhibit m1.[122] exhibit m1.[123] for example, mother’s tender book pp 145-148.[124] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [252].[125] exhibit f3.[126] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [104].[127] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [137].[128] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [138].[129] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [101].[130] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [147].[131] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [103].[132] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [40], [73].[133] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [33].[134] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [250].[135] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [256].[136] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [197].[137] korban & korban [2009] famcafc 143 at [83]- [86].[138] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 52; mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405; sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22.[139] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [27].[140] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [71].[141] mother’s tender book, p 105.[142] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [147].[143] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [31].[144] father’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [169]-[170].[145] mother’s tender book, p 199.[146] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [12].[147] child impact report dated 25 november 2021, paragraph [17]. [148] [2000] famca 462; (2000) flc 93-025.[149] father’s tender book, pp 161-162.[150] as outlined in exhibit f4.[151] re g: children’s schooling [2000] famca 462; (2000) flc 93-025 at [91]- [92].[152] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraph [100]. [153] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [235].[154] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [230].[155] mother’s tender book, pp 187-192.[156] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [233].[157] mother’s tender book, p 188.[158] mother’s tender book, p 190.[159] mother’s tender book, pp 189-190.[160] father’s tender book, p 159.[161] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [220].[162] exhibit f3.[163] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [220].[164] father’s trial affidavit, paragraph [133].[165] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [111]-[112].[166] mother’s trial affidavit, paragraphs [114].[167] bennett & bennett [2001] famca 462; (2001) flc 93-088; flanagan & handcock [2001] hca 32; (2002) flc 93-102.