last updated: 14 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
george & dixon [2022] fedcfamc2f 1647
orders
the court orders that:  with the father from the conclusion of school each: (i) alternate monday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day) until the conclusion of school on tuesday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day), (ii) alternate friday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day) until the conclusion of school on tuesday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day), (iii) at other times as agreed. (b) with the mother at all other times.   alternate monday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day) until the conclusion of school on tuesday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day), (ii) alternate friday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day) until the conclusion of school on tuesday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day), (iii) at other times as agreed.  ) alternate friday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day) until the conclusion of school on tuesday (or 3:30pm if x is not at school that day), (iii) at other times as agreed.  i) at other times as agreed.   with the mother at all other times.
the court orders by consent that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland:
background
what are the parties’ proposals?
why the mother seeks to relocate?
the mother’s mental health
the co-parenting relationship
the coparenting relationship between the parties can best be described as exemplary. these are two loving, invested, and dedicated parents, who have worked extremely hard to ensure that their separation has not impacted adversely on their daughter. they communicate readily and respectfully. they attend events together conjointly. they facilitate changeover of the child in a direct way, and not via some third party in a neutral location. they have assisted one another where required, shown flexibility, and spoken in a positive way about the other party directly to the child. in almost 20 years of working with families in complex family law matters, this is one of the most functional coparenting relationships that i have ever seen. as noted above, [ms george] and [mr dixon] have always demonstrated civil and respectful interactions in the presence of their daughter. [x] herself perceives her mother and father as a united front. although the parties do not always agree, they have never allowed any points of divergence to burden their child. [x] does not feel a divided sense of loyalties. there are not messages of restraint within either household. she does not feel the need to inhibit conversation about her life with one parent, out of fear of offending or betraying the other. she is a girl who has been raised without the pernicious influence of ambient conflict, distrust, and ill will - truly a credit to these parents.
notwithstanding the strong relationship that [x] has with her mother and father, it is evident that there are slightly different approaches to the care and upbringing within each household. [x] perceives her mother as more nurturing and understanding, particularly when she is unwell. she may even taken advantage of her mother’s cautiousness and solicitude, as no doubt all children do from time to time, potentially feigning illness when she is unmotivated to attend school. with her father, there are myriad of activities, outings and events, which [x] relishes in. she does appear mindful that her father will be inclined to scrutinise any claims of being unwell, and will certainly not indulge her when she does have a day off school citing illness.
the mother’s comparison with her potential life in adelaide
x’s difficulties at changeovers and school
x’s relationship with her parents and her views
having now consulted with the parents and [x], it is obvious that this child enjoys a positive, immersive, and reciprocal relationship with both her mother and father. [x] adores both of her parents. they have both been involved in her care and upbringing to the maximum percent possible. there is no evidence of compromised attachment, anxiety, wariness, or lack of familiarity. given the entirely close connection that this child enjoys with each of her parents, there is no reason that she should not spend significant time with both of them. the fact that she is reluctant to leave each of their care, despite how settled she is with the other, is entirely age appropriate, and shows the warm bond she experiences with both [ms george] and [mr dixon]. i would particularly commend [mr dixon] in having established such a secure attachment with this child, given some of the obstacles that have ensued by him not being the residential parent for the early years of her life. he has clearly made a considerable effort, becoming a consistent and dependable care figure for [x], allowing her now to live with each parent to whatever extent is possible.
expert evidence
legal principles
we agree that when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, as least in so far as that approach is possible (see u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, (2002) flc 93-112 and kb & tc [2005] famca 458, (2005) flc 93-224). however consistently with what the full court said in goode, the options of the child spending “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” with each parent must now be given separate and real consideration, notwithstanding that a relocation proposal may also have to be given subsequent consideration, with the advantages and disadvantages of that proposal then being balanced against the advantages and disadvantages of an” equal time” or “substantial and significant time” arrangement. not to approach a case involving a relocation proposal in this way, would devalue the imperative imposed by the act to consider whether it is in the best interests of a child in a case to spend “equal time” or “substantial and significant time” with each parents.
... ...a statutory instruction to treat the welfare or best interests of the child as the paramount consideration does not oblige a court, making the decision, to ignore the legitimate interests and desires of the parents. if there is conflict between these considerations, priority must be accorded to the child’s welfare and rights. however, the latter cannot be viewed in the abstract, separate from the circumstances of the parent with whom the child resides.
section 65daa(1) is concerned with the reality of the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in s 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under s 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible.
conclusion
associate: dated: 1 december 2022
dated: 1 december 2022