last updated: 14 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
solghi & danwar [2022] fedcfamc2f 1654
orders
the court orders that:
giving effect to these orders — email addresses  open an email address, referred to as the father’s email address, for the purpose of communications necessary for both parties to comply with these orders, and (b) provide the father’s email address to the mother’s solicitors, who shall provide the father’s email address to the mother.   provide the father’s email address to the mother’s solicitors, who shall provide the father’s email address to the mother.   open an email address, referred to as the mother’s email address, for the purpose of communications necessary for both parties to comply with these orders, and (b) provide the mother’s email address to the mother’s solicitors, who shall provide the mother’s email address to the father.   provide the mother’s email address to the mother’s solicitors, who shall provide the mother’s email address to the father.
giving effect to these orders — the father’s po box  advise the mother, via the mother’s email address, of the full details of the father’s po box, including the po box number and location, and (b) provide to the mother’s solicitors all keys and/or codes necessary to enable the mother to access the father’s po box.   provide to the mother’s solicitors all keys and/or codes necessary to enable the mother to access the father’s po box.
provision of cards, letters, and/or presents  by 4:00pm on the day prior to each of the children’s birthdays in each year, (b) by 1:00pm on 24 december in each year, and (c) commencing in january 2023, by 4:00pm on the seventh (7th) day of each calendar month,   by 1:00pm on 24 december in each year, and (c) commencing in january 2023, by 4:00pm on the seventh (7th) day of each calendar month,   commencing in january 2023, by 4:00pm on the seventh (7th) day of each calendar month,
noting notation a with respect to time.   denigrate, in any way, the mother, the children, or any person related to the children, including using abusive or belittling language, (b) seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (c) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (d) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (e) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   seek to find out any location at which either child, together or separately, is going to be situated, including but not limited to the children’s residence, school/s, extra-curricular activities, or any childcare facility at which they attend, (c) mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (d) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (e) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   mention, to either child, anything concerning any family law proceedings relating to the children or either child, (d) pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (e) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   pressure either child to spend time or communicate with him, or (e) pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   pressure the mother, through either child or directly, to have either or both children spend time or communicate with him.   within 24 hours after each of the father’s po box deadlines, retrieve any cards, letters, and/or presents from the father’s po box, (b) as soon as is reasonably practicable, provide any cards, letters, and/or presents to the child or children, unopened, (c) upon providing any card, letter, and/or present to the child or children, encourage them to open and read any cards or letters and accept any present provided by the father, and (d) encourage the child or children to provide the father, through the father’s po box, a card and/or letter in response to any cards, letters, and/or presents provided to them by the father.   as soon as is reasonably practicable, provide any cards, letters, and/or presents to the child or children, unopened, (c) upon providing any card, letter, and/or present to the child or children, encourage them to open and read any cards or letters and accept any present provided by the father, and (d) encourage the child or children to provide the father, through the father’s po box, a card and/or letter in response to any cards, letters, and/or presents provided to them by the father.   upon providing any card, letter, and/or present to the child or children, encourage them to open and read any cards or letters and accept any present provided by the father, and (d) encourage the child or children to provide the father, through the father’s po box, a card and/or letter in response to any cards, letters, and/or presents provided to them by the father.   encourage the child or children to provide the father, through the father’s po box, a card and/or letter in response to any cards, letters, and/or presents provided to them by the father.
accommodating time or further communication if the children express a view
educational and medical information  each child’s end of term and/or end of year school reports, (b) results of any examinations administered by the new south wales educational standards authority, or any subsequent equivalent body, taken by each of the children in grades 11 and 12, or (c) results of any national assessment program — literacy and numeracy (‘naplan’) tests undertaken by either child,   results of any examinations administered by the new south wales educational standards authority, or any subsequent equivalent body, taken by each of the children in grades 11 and 12, or (c) results of any national assessment program — literacy and numeracy (‘naplan’) tests undertaken by either child,   results of any national assessment program — literacy and numeracy (‘naplan’) tests undertaken by either child,
deliver or forward a copy of the document/s to the father’s po box or the father’s email address, with the mother to be at liberty to redact any documents listed at order 15(a)–(c) above so as to remove any potential identification of the children’s residence or the school/s or places at which they attend.  a description of the illness or injury, and (b) any treatment prescribed,   any treatment prescribed,
with the mother at liberty to omit or redact any information which may potentially identify the child or children’s residence, school, usual places of attendance, or places which they will attend in future.
injunctions  if the mother emails the father, to the father’s email address, requesting a response from the father with respect to the subject matter or questions raised in her email, the father may send an email to the mother’s email address in response to the matters raised by the mother, (b) as foreshadowed at orders 13 and 14, if either child expresses to the father in writing that they wish to communicate or spend time with him outside the scope of these orders, the father may email the mother’s email address notifying her of the child or children’s wishes as expressed, attaching evidence of the same, and putting a proposal for such time or communication to occur.   as foreshadowed at orders 13 and 14, if either child expresses to the father in writing that they wish to communicate or spend time with him outside the scope of these orders, the father may email the mother’s email address notifying her of the child or children’s wishes as expressed, attaching evidence of the same, and putting a proposal for such time or communication to occur.
travel documents
other
the court notes that:  the father’s written consent in accordance with s 65y(1)(c)(i), or (b) an order of a court permitting such travel.   an order of a court permitting such travel.
if the mother intends to travel internationally with the children she will need to make an appropriate application to this court.
reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
overview
plainly it is a serious matter to order that a child neither spend time with nor communicate with a parent. such orders properly ought be restricted to cases where that outcome is plainly mandated in the best interests of the child, and no other regime of orders is appropriate or workable. such orders are commonly employed where the court is satisfied that a parent poses an unacceptable risk of harm to a child, which cannot be ameliorated by supervision of time and communication between that parent and the child. ...[1]
facts
a regular evening occurrence would involve [mr danwar] coming home from work and trying to do homework with the children. when he would do this, he would continually belittle them, compare them to other children, threaten to beat them up and yell at the children and call [y] '[...]' (little bitch) and '...' (whore) and would call [x] "[...]' (sister-fucker), '[...]' (dog). i did not correct [mr danwar] about the way he used to speak to the children for fear of how he would react with me. the children would go quiet when [mr danwar] spoke to them this way. i believe the children were scared of [mr danwar] because before he arrived home in the evening, the children would watch tv and play with one another. when the children could hear [mr danwar] arriving home, they would become quiet and sit down in the lounge room.[10]
the father denies that the children were scared of him prior to final separation. he says that, while the mother was the primary carer, he had a good relationship with them and was actively involved in their lives. he says he did all he could to assist with the children, played with them before and after work, and helped them with reading and other activities.[11]
... i do not speak english well at all, though [mr danwar] does. [mr danwar] was speaking to the doctor in english and i could not understand what he was saying. i am worried by what he may have told the doctor about the injury i suffered. i was prescribed eye drops for the inflammation and pain. the doctor did not say anything directly to me and i did not understand what was being said. at that time, i didn’t feel i could speak up, as i feared when i returned home he could harm me more and my english was very poor.[13]
... he said that “in the old times” [mr danwar] used to hit [ms solghi], and he pointed to his face, neck and shoulder. [x] said that [ms solghi] had required an x-ray because of something [mr danwar] had done, but gave no further details of this. he described witnessing [y] trying to pull [mr danwar] away from [ms solghi].[20] ... [y] said that she wishes [ms solghi’s] back would stop hurting, and said that she is worried that she will be similarly injured if she spends time with [mr danwar]. she recounted an occasion on which [mr danwar] hit [ms solghi] and [[y]] said that it was “lucky” that she was present or [mr danwar] would have hit [ms solghi] more.[21]
ms murphy referred to the children’s recollections of seemingly the same incident as ‘striking’ — the children were interviews separately, and they independently corroborate the other’s account. as such, ms murphy and mr blank both urged a finding of family violence from the evidence with respect to 29 april 2017. under cross-examination the father denied the physical assault, and said that he could not remember this attendance upon the medical centre. in his 2020 affidavit, however, he specifically refers to the allegation of 29 april 2017 and denies the argument, the assault, or that the children heard the incident as there was ‘nothing for them to hear’.[22] he was shown exhibit m1 at trial and denied that he caused the injury described by the radiologist.
i will smash your legs if you tell anyone about this. i will send you back to india and get your visa cancelled. i can do whatever i want.
the father denies making any aspect of this threat to the mother. the mother says that she then threatened to call police and, upon picking up the ringing phone, the father allegedly pushed her on her right shoulder and slapped her face with an open palm. she says she then ran out of their home with the father pursuing her and, while attempting to hide, called the temple in suburb n because she could not speak to emergency services in english. the father denies preventing her from picking up the phone, hitting her, or pursuing her out of the house. the temple called the police for her and the mother says that, when they arrived, she tried to answer their questions but was ‘very scared’.[27] ms murphy specifically referred to the contemporaneous accounts from police attendances and j hospital records. the first police record of the period between 24 and 31 october 2017 is extracted below:  te/time created: 25/10/2017, 02:49] the vic and the poi resides with their two young children at ... about 7:00pm on the 24th of october 2017 the vic has contacted her local church counsellor and stated that she has been involved in a[n] incident with her husband and mentioned that she had been assaulted. as a result of being informed of this the vic’s church counsellor has contacted police. police have arrived at the location where they have been met by the vic. in speaking with the vic, police have noticed that english was not her first language and therefore spoke with her via the services of a telephone interpreter. police were able to ascertain from the vic via the interpreter that two parties were involved in a verbal argument earlier in the night regarding the poi controlling the vic. the vic has then mentioned that the poi had previously assaulted her however did not supply any further information regarding this when pressed by police. once police had finished speaking with the vic they have spoken with the poi. the poi has agreed that an argument took place between the two parties however claimed that the vic was the instigator. the poi claimed that the vic became angry as he was eating meat, which is against their religion. police have then spoke[n] to both parties children who have stated that no assault incident occurred between the poi and the vic. the children confirmed that their parents were involved in a verbal argument however stated that was all. police have not observed any injuries on either party and not been supplied any further information to indicate such.[28]
this is, on the evidence before me, the first time the mother discloses actual physical violence allegations to the police. further, the mother discloses that this was not the first incident of violence, evidencing her account of the high degree of dispute between the parents. the children do not report witnessing any physical violence, but they confirmed that their parents were engaged in a verbal argument.  te/time created: 26/10/2017, 20:03] ... police attended the location 2 days prior [24 october 2017] with a similar cad message. upon that interaction the informant disclosed no assaults or threats to police ... the informant brought up again previous history of historical assaults however was unable to provide police with times, dates and details. this information was stated to police two days prior. police asked the informant what has occurred in the past two days. the informant stated that she has not been assaulted or threatened since last speaking with police. the informant stated the poi has taken the children’s passports and refused to return them. the informant still has access to her own passport ... police also spoke with the children who were also at the location, in a separate room. the children stated that they have not seen mum and dad fight physically. one child stated they have argued and yelled in the past. both children deny ever being hit by either the informant or the poi ... the poi completely denies any allegation of assault or threats made towards the informant. the poi stated that the informant is suffering from a mental condition and it’s not the first time she has made false allegations. the poi is not in the process of speaking with family law court in order for the pair to separate. the poi stated he would be staying at his brother property until the issues are finalised. the poi stated that he has custody of his children’s passports so that the informant cannot flee the country with the children.[30] ...
38 yo lady from indian background, living with 2 kids aged 7 and 8 and husband in rental property, ... called by school with behaviour disturbances patient was interview[ed] in her native language as author speaks the same patient cant [speak] english need interpreter in [region k] language she reported she was upset because her husband picked the kids from school without informing her. reports domestic violence and [marital] problem since 2013. husband threaten to give divorce many time. last tuesday husband came home from work ([transport worker]) and start shouting at her, later punched her and slap her. she was upset she went outside and ask for help from community centre ([[o centre]]) who called the police. she is unsure whether there is any avo in place against her husband. reports dv social worker contact her and provided support, she also applied for fvag in centrelink today. further reports husband left home yesterday and start living with his brother in [suburb p]. she is calm and reactive during interview, good eye contact, mood reports fine, denies anhedonia, lack of energy, denies hopelessness. sleep disturb b/c dv and argument with husband but appetite fine. reports her plan is to take her kids from husband and went back to india. reports she would never harm herself as she want to raise her children and she loved them a lot. ... currently she don’t have any concerned for her kids safety, she reports he is not abusive towards kids, however she would like to have kids with her as husband don’t know what to feed them and how to look after them. reports school contacted the husband and issued a letter to him to bring kids in school on monday and if he won’t turn up they will informed police. ... reports over the weekend she is going to stay with her friend [mr q]...[31] ... progress note
- 38f alleged dv ... - reports that her husband has been physically abusing her - otherwise well, nil recent fevers/dysuria/flu-like illness - reports intermittent midline headache after being hit in the head by husband twice within the last 6 months - denies thoughts of self-harm or others, only protective measures - [denies] sig medical background/regular meds[32]  te/time created: 31/10/2017, 03:45] about 18:00 hours on monday the 30th of october 2017 the victim [ms solghi] has attended [suburb j] police station where a statement was obtained in relation to an incident that occurred on tuesday the 24th of [october] 2017. the victim advised that about 18:00 hours her husband [mr danwar] has returned home when he started to abuse the victim. [mr danwar] has [yelled] “i’ll smash your legs if you tell anyone about this’ and ‘i’ll send you back to india and get your visa cancelled’. the victim has become scared and advised [mr danwar] she would call police. the victim has picked up the phone when [mr danwar] has pushed the victim to the shoulder region and slapped her across the face. the victim has managed to run away from [mr danwar] who had chased her outside the premises before the victim managed to call police through a [[region k]] temple committee member due to the victim speaking little english. police have attended on the night of this incident however due to the language barrier and being scared the victim did not disclose the full nature of the incident. the victim claims to have fears for her safety. the victim made mention of other assaults claiming [mr danwar] had split her lip when he hit her however could not go into specifics in terms of dates, times or where these incidents took place. ... ... [date/time created: 31/10/2017, 16:31] ... about 12:15pm on tuesday the 31st october 2017, the vic [ms solghi] and a case worker form the icsa (indian sub continent crisis & support agency) who was also acting as the vic’s interpreter ... attended [suburb j] police station to enquire about emergency accommodation for the vic due to fearing for her safety at her current address. it was after hearing several versions from the vic in relation to unreported dv incidents, involving the vic sustaining serious injuries and from reading past events, that police believed that the vic would benefit from being placed into alternate accommodation for her safety and the safety of her children. police gave the vic advice and guidance, contacting the dv hotline ... to arrange alternative emergency accommodation. it was whilst police were speaking with the vic via interpreter, that the vic received several phone calls, that was later explained to be various family members who were advising the vic to ‘withdraw the complaint’, ‘don’t charge your husband’ and ‘deal with this within the family, don’t do this through police’. these calls made from various family members whilst talking to police ...[34]
the icsa case worker to which the report refers is ms g. ms g continued to supervise the children until 28 september 2018 and, after that point, appears to have continued engaging with the mother. the police returned both children to the mother’s care and, on 31 october 2017, the mother and the children commenced living in a refuge. they remained at the refuge until 21 december 2017 and thereafter obtained a rental property. the mother agrees that, from 31 october until supervised visits commenced on 11 june 2018, the children did not see the father save for on one occasion (supervised by ms g). ms blank submitted that, while this may well have disrupted the children’s relationship with the father, the family violence (if found) made the mother’s life ‘unbearable’, as shown by her relocation to the refuge. this was, in mr blank’s submission, not an accommodation option for which one would ‘readily volunteer’, indicating that she had no choice but to flee. ms murphy also pointed to the mother’s recourse to a refuge, and the involvement of ms g, as indicative of the mother’s vulnerability to the father. the father, however, does not accept that the mother went to the refuge with the children because she was scared. he says that her evidence of her fear at this time, alongside most of her evidence about 24–31 october, is false. he referred to the statement of constable mr r, dated 20 january 2018 with respect to their attendance on 26 october 2017, to corroborate his position:
i then spoke with [the] children located in a separate room, who disclosed no physical assaults at home or any issues besides on-going arguments.[35]
the father was charged with offences of stalking/intimidation and common assault, which were dismissed on 19 april 2018. i foreshadow at this point that, while summary or criminal offences may not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, it remains possible for this court to make a positive finding of family violence on the balance of probabilities.
on wednesday 7 march 2018 during a conversation i had with [x] because he was fighting with [y], i asked him 'why are you behaving like this?' [x] told me words to the effect of 'it's not my fault. why are you blaming me? i'm only doing what my uncle told me to do’. [x] went on to say words to the effect of, 'uncle told me that when i am on the escalator, i can fall and kill myself when i am at the park, i can fall off and something will happen to me' and 'i can hurt myself and mum will get into trouble'. [x] presented with risk-taking behaviour including turning the gas on in the kitchen and sitting on the stove top and placing his feet against the heater or kick it. the incident was reported to the nsw police. [x] stated his father requested for him to do these things to be used as evidence in court and stated "if you get hurt we will get it treated." on 8 march 2018 [x] told me words to the effect of, 'dad said to give your mother a hard time and if she says anything, i can call the police. dad said do not tell the truth and i will buy you anything you want'. ... during the first week of [mr danwar] and my separation, [x] said words to the effect of 'daddy told me that if you do not let me see him, then i should threaten to kill myself'. [x] did as a result of this threaten multiple times to kill himself if i did not take him to spend time with [mr danwar] saying 'i will kill myself if i cannot see dad'.[37]
the father agrees that the children have spent time with him and their paternal uncle, but denied ever saying or witnessing any suggestion that either of the children should attempt to hurt or kill themselves. the mother also alleges stalking and threatening behaviour by the father post-separation in various ways.[38] the father denies that he ever acted in a way that could be described as intimidating, abusive or violent, either before or after separation.[39]
‘won’t kill you so quickly, so don’t worry just yet bitch’ ‘the old horse has lost its use’ ‘by the grace of the almighty, i have won the case’
the father was shown copies of these photographs under cross-examination.[40] he said that he could not decipher those words and therefore would not concede that they translated to the phrases alleged by the mother. i then asked the interpreter assisting the mother to re-enter the witness box and interpret the text in those photographs. the interpreter confirmed that the first two lines stated, in effect: ‘won’t die or kill you that quick — don’t worry’ or ‘don’t get into tension’, ‘you mad girl’. the balance of the photographs could not be deciphered by the interpreter, although one aspect had something to do with ‘kids’. the father re-entered the witness box and, after hearing the interpreter’s evidence, maintained his denial that he had written those words, made the images, or posted them to his whatsapp profile.   july 2018] at 4:39pm, [x] told the father in [k language], ‘if you don’t get married, i will live with you,’ but translated it to english after the father asked him to tell me.[41] [30 july 2018] we walked into [store t]. the children played the keyboard and the father told them, ‘when you come to my house i will buy for you definitely’.[42] [13 august 2018] ... whilst [y] was playing on the phone, the father whispered to [x] that as soon as the court case is finished, [x] can live with him and he could help him with his homework and take him to play sport. ...[43]
... at 4:07pm, i reminded the father and children to speak english as they had begun to speak [region k language]. ... at 4:35pm, the father began to talk about his wife saying that ‘every single time she lied to the police.’ he then noticed his children getting agitated and said, ‘okay, i don’t want to open the topic here, my kids don’t like it.’
the father agreed that, on 16 july 2018, they spoke with the paternal grandparents in region k over the telephone despite the supervisor’s reminder to speak english. he says that the children had a good relationship with their grandparents at this time and wished to speak to them, which they could only do in region k. the mother raised concerns as to the veracity of the supervisor’s reports, given they could not understand region k.[45] i appreciate the mother’s apprehension in this respect but i cannot speculate as to the content of any ‘unsupervised’ remarks or conversations. importantly, the father also acknowledged that he told the supervisor that the mother lied to police, and did not deny that he said the remarks extracted above in front of the children. he said that he should not have said it in front of the children, but qualified that the mother also teaches the children ‘bad things’ to turn them against him.
... the children waved goodbye to the mother when she left. the mother complained that [x] had been behaving badly regularly at home, calling her bad names and swearing at her. [y] was translating everything. [x] claimed the father instructed him to swear and behave badly towards the mother. [y] also whispered to me to keep an eye on her brother because he had been bad to her and the mother.[46]
i find it extremely worrying that y has, on this occasion and others, acted as the mother’s interpreter, which has directly exposed y to her parents’ disputes about herself and x. the mother’s police report that the father was ‘making eyes’ at her during changeover on 13 august 2018, and that members of the father’s family were trying to influence the children, may indicate a level of heightened anxiety on this date. no further action was taken by police on this complaint.[47] the father agreed that he lacked control over the children during the 13 august visit, since they spent considerable time fighting over his mobile phone. in my view the children’s unruliness on this occasion may have been caused, at least in part, by the conflict to which they were exposed at the initial changeover. the father also discussed this litigation on 3 september 2018, in telling the children that he had to leave 30 minutes early for an appointment with his lawyer. he agreed that he should not have eluded to these proceedings but explained, somewhat sensibly, that the children had already witnessed reports to police by this time, and knew their parents did not get along. he further explained that he again told x that he could live with him when the court case was over in an effort to explain that, if he were to live with the father, the court would have to grant permission first. the father could have obfuscated the true nature of the parents’ dispute to the children and did not do so, although he acknowledged his conduct to some extent.  te/time created: 10/09/2018, 23:18] the pr in this matter is the father of the alleged victim. there is currently an advo and charges before the court relating to dv assault committed by the pr upon his wife (the victim’s mother). the pr and his wife have separated and the pr is permitted to see his children on supervised visits once a week for 2 hours. this time has recently been spent at [s shopping centre], [suburb j]. the person named is an employee of an organisation named (indian continent crisis support agency). the icsa’s role is to provide support to victims of domestic violence from an indian background. the pn has been visiting the mother of the victim about 1 time per week and had have a number of telephone conversations with her regarding the domestic violence situation she was victim to. on the 10/9/18, the pr met with his children for the 2 hour supervised visitation at [s shopping centre]. at this time, he pr states the vic disclosed an incident that occurred on the 4/9/18 at his home in [suburb v] in which the pn attended his home in [suburb v] and became angered at him for not attending school. the vic claimed the pn slapped him 5 times to his face before pushing him around and swearing at him. the pr subsequently contacted police after hearing this. police attended [s shopping centre] to take the report. police spoke to the pr and the vic and confirmed the above information. at the time, another case worker was present, supervising the visit, however she had not been witness to the alleged assault and only knew of it from hearing the vic explain it to his father. police spoke to the vic, who gave the above version. the vic stated his mother had been present at the time, however did nothing to stop the pn from hitting him. the vic confirmed that he suffered no injuries as a result of this incident. police obtained the pn details, including a phone number and contacted her to confirm information. the pn explained her role in providing support to the pr’s wife following the dv offences. the pn confirmed she had attended the vic’s home on the date of the incident and had spoken to the pr’s wife. the pr’s wife had explained to her that the victim had been swearing at her during the day and had refused to attend school. the pn stated she told the vic to shower and get ready for school, which he complied with without argument. the pn stated to police that the pr had previously made false reports about his wife and stated she was not surprised about this recent report and that it had only occurred when the pr had met with the vic. the pr stated to police that he intended to report the matter to his solicitor as he was in the process of defending his court matter and other family court proceedings. the pr claimed that the pn was a friend of his wife’s and that he was unhappy with her attending the house and disciplining his son. ...[48]
with respect to the children’s behavioural changes at this time (particularly those of x) the father said that any misbehaviour stemmed from the children not being permitted to see him. this is contrary to the mother’s allegation that the children misbehaved because of the father’s bad influence. the supervisor again reported discussions of lying on 12 november 2018. under cross-examination the father admitted that he did in fact say the words emphasised below, as reported by the supervisor: the father spoke to [x] that he was ve1y upset when he read the report from last week's supervised visit where [x] had lied. the father said to [x], ‘[x], first you lied to the police and now you made up lies about me again’. the father talked about how he had other things to do but he had prioritized his time to see them eve1y week. he also said to the children that they must respect their mother but they must always tell the truth. whilst the father was talking to both children, [y] kept telling the father to listen to [x] and stop talking, blah, blah & blah. the father said to [x] and [y] that it was very important for him as their father to discuss how upset he was with all the lies and would appreciate if the lies would stop.[51]  te/time created: 12/04/2019, 15:12] ... the person reporting reported to police that on 07/04/2019 during the usual sunday child changeover, the poi was making angry face gestures towards the person reporting and was making hand gestures. the person reporting demonstrated the hand gestures which appear to be similar to signalling someone to come towards them. police determined that this was not a breach of the avo as it is likely the poi was signalling his children to come towards him during the change over and making an angry face gesture ... would not constitute a breach of the avo. the person reporting also told police that the poi said to the victim “i’m going to do to india and have your mum killed because nothing can happen to me there”. the poi also said “now that ......... is gone we can do anything to mum ......... is a reference to a previous case worker for the person reporting. the threats regarding the person reporting, made by the poi could constitute intimidation depending on the victim’s version of what happened. ... the victim [[x]] was coherent and showed a clear understanding of the truth and what is right and wrong. in his version the victim said that his father didn’t say he was going to kill the person reporting. police have determined that upon the victim’s reflection of previous physical altercations between the poi and the person reporting the victim has developed concerns for the welfare of the person reporting. consequently the victim has told the person reporting that he thinks the poi is going to kill the person reporting. the person reporting has misinterpreted this as the poi saying he wanted to kill her, likely due to speaking very limited english, whereas in actual fact the poi has made no mention of such intentions. it is clear to police that the person reporting has suffered a great deal of domestic violence related abuse and as such is fearful of any and all actions conducted by the poi. police understand that the person reporting has suffered a great deal however in this situation there is no evidence to substantiate the allegations made by the person reporting against the poi. no further action due to police not detecting any offences occurring.[52]
the mother’s claims of threatening or intimidating conduct were found to be baseless on this occasion. the reporting officer expresses the opinion that the mother has suffered a ‘great deal’ of family violence. the officer was not called to give evidence and nothing before me demonstrates that the officer had specialised knowledge based on their training, study or experience, or that their opinion is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge.[53] i will not give this opinion any weight towards proving the existence of the fact about which the opinion was expressed.[54] this does not mean that the mother never felt genuine fear resulting from the father’s past behaviour towards her.  te/time created: 20/08/2019, 12:42] ... the vic approached the poi at the above mentioned location, the vic overheard poi speaking on the mobile phone with an unknown person saying “i’ll will see him, i’m not gonna let him go”. poi’s presence made the vic feel scared, the vic also felt scared looking at the poi’s face. ... the vic told police that the poi was making a reference to her brother who lives overseas when he said, “i will see him. i’m not gonna let him go”. the vic believes that the poi is going to india in near future and fears that he is going to get her brother killed. the vic has these fears due to the threats made by the poi against vic’s family members in the past when the vic and poi were still married. the vic also fears that the poi is going to get someone to harm her based on the threats made by the poi in the past. ... the vic and the poi do not contact each other over the phone, social media or any other medium. the vic and the poi do not speak directly with each [other] even during the kids’ hand over on sundays. no verbal argument, assault or threats occurred between the vic and the poi. police advised the vic that she can organise for the children’s handover to take place in the j police station to avoid any tensions between herself and the poi. police spoke with the poi over the phone a short time later who denied making the above comment about vic’s brother. the poi stated that the vic is lying and she is only doing this to harass him.[58]
both the children and [ms solghi] reported that [mr danwar] denigrates [ms solghi] to the children. the children appeared to suggest that this was their main concern in continuing their relationship with [mr danwar]. [mr danwar] denied this. if the court finds that [mr danwar] continues to denigrate [ms solghi] to the children, and to use his time with the children to further his conflict with [ms solghi], then it is likely that [mr danwar’s] relationship with the children will continue to deteriorate over time. it may also be, as suggested by [ms solghi], that this interaction may lead to increased conflict between the children, particularly [x], and [ms solghi]. given that [mr danwar] has already experienced periods of having his contact with the children limited and supervised without altering this behaviour, and given [mr danwar’s] denials of such behaviour, it may be unlikely that [mr danwar] will cease to behave in such a manner in the future. if this is the case, it is likely that the benefits that the children may receive from a relationship with [mr danwar] will be outweighed by the damage that is caused to the children’s mental health and their relationship with [ms solghi].[61]
ms d also refers to the adverse effects of children’s exposure to coercive and controlling family violence, and the indications in x’s account that ‘not only have the children been exposed to a controlling dynamic from mr danwar towards ms solghi, but they have also been witness to physical violence’.[62] the report also references the father’s allegations that the mother denigrates him, causing the children’s ambivalence towards him, and the continuing parental conflict to which the children were, on either account, exposed. the tone of ms d’s warning is that, if some or all of the mother’s allegations against the father are found, and if the father continues to expose the children to parental conflict or violence (either in the specific form of denigrating the other parent or generally), their relationship with him will degrade as a result.  te/time created: 05/04/2020, 17:41] the victim in the matter is [y] who is the biological daughter of the pn, [mr danwar] and the pr, [ms solghi]. [ms solghi] and [mr danwar] are currently separated and the victim spends scheduled visits with the pn at his residence as per parental agreements through family law court. on sunday 5th april 2020 about 2.30pm the victim was in the car with the pn when she began questioning the pn about dating his current girlfriend. the pn allegedly became enraged by the victim’s belligerent attitude and sarcasm and began to admonish the child about speaking to him in that tone calling her a "bitch" and "dumb" in [region k]. a short time later the pr picked up the victim from the pn residence and the victim has informed the pr of the argument that escalated in the car. the pr immediately attended [suburb j] police station to report the matter requesting an avo. police spoke to the child about the incident and asked her if it was possible her father had gotten upset by the way she was speaking with him and she agreed she was being a smart alec. police explained to the pr that whilst the incident was an argument between the father and daughter and is reportable, that in the future perhaps dealing with the chastisement of the child between the two parental parties is a more reasonable approach. police asked the car2 (younger brother) about the incident, and he stated that the vic was being "naughty". police are satisfied that no offence was committed and that the request for an avo was not warranted.
the mother further alleged that y told her that the father pulled her arm and that, in response to y saying she would ‘tell the court’, the father said: ‘i don’t care you can tell the court, don’t come and show me your face, stay with your mum’.[63] the mother says that y was very upset. the father agrees that y asked him about his new girlfriend, but denied assaulting her, calling her a ‘bitch’ or ‘dumb’, or in any way ‘admonishing’ her. the march 2022 family report sheds more light on the events of 5 april 2020 and the reasons why y stopped seeing the father at that time. this includes y’s own account of her reasons which in effect indicate physical violence and inequitable treatment between herself and x:   said that [mr danwar] does not treat her and [x] equally, and that he has sworn at her in [region k language] and has told her that he does not wish to see her. she explained he had told her this because she had been watching television loudly, whilst he was trying to talk with his wife and the paternal grandparents. she said that she had believed him when he had told her that he did not wish to see her, and that he had sworn at her previously as well. she said that she has been told by many people that [mr danwar] wished she was a boy, rather than a girl, and that he did not even like her. ... [y] said that when they were still in india, [mr danwar] had hit her on the face. she said that later on he no longer hit her, but instead just swore at her. she contrasted this with [ms solghi], who she said does not try to force her to do anything.[64]
ms d also reported similar concerns from the mother in the march 2022 family report:   solghi] said that she is particularly concerned for [y’s] wellbeing in [mr danwar’s] care, after [mr danwar] told [y] that he did not want to see her face anymore. she said that [mr danwar] often humiliated [y] and that this is what caused [y] to refuse to spend time with [mr danwar]. she said that if she mentioned [mr danwar], [y] would hold a hand to her mouth to stop her. [ms solghi] said that [mr danwar] also swore in [region k language] and said demeaning things regarding [y]. she said that [x] had also reported that [mr danwar] was yelling at his partner.[65]
under cross-examination the father disputed that y stopped spending time with him because of how he treated her. he also denied ever yelling at his current wife, swearing at y, hitting her in the face when they lived in india, or that he ever treated the children inequitably. he told the court in this respect that he just told the children ‘what is good for them’, and maintained that he always treated the children equally when he was with them.
... [x] came back from the [14 june 2020] visit with a new phone that his father brought him and came back angry, aggressive and violent. he was yelling at me and when i asked [y] to do some things such as taking a shower and to stop watching tv, [x] threatened me by saying he would go to his dad’s home if he wasn’t allowed to do what he wanted. he was even telling me that his dad could easily kill me if he wanted to.[69]  te/time created: 04/10/2020, 16:52] ... on sunday 4th october 2020 about 12:35pm the victim and her two children attended level four of [s shopping centre] to meet with the poi [mr danwar] . the children both stated to the victim that they did not want to see their father as he does not listen to them. when they arrived the victim was met with the poi to hand over the children. the children both refused to go with the poi. this aggravated the poi and started a verbal argument. the victim attempted to leave the location with the children but the poi began to follow them. the poi attempted to take the son by grabbing his arm. the verbal argument continued and the poi said in [region k language] , “you will be beaten with shoes”. a short time later the poi left the location and the victim attended [suburb j] police station to report the incident. ... [t]he victim stated that she interpreted what the poi said as a threat directed towards her. the victim stated she was scared the poi may act upon that threat. police obtained video recorded statements from both children who witnessed the verbal altercation. the children’s statements correlated with the victim’s statements. [mr danwar] recalled ... the poi stating “i will hit you with shoes” and [y] recalled the poi stating “i’m going to take my shoes out and hit them on you”. police then attended ... in attempt to arrest and interview the poi. ... ... [date/time created: 04/10/2020, 17:13] ... police believe that if further arguments occur, this could escalate to physical assaults. as such, police hold immediate concerns for the welfare of the pinop, hence the urgent application for an apprehended domestic violence order.
the father was charged and served with a copy of the interim avo. his account of the incident, however, is that the mother was verbally abusing him, calling him ‘dog’ and ‘bastard’.[71] he explained under cross-examination that x wanted to come with him on 4 october 2020, but the mother would not allow him to do so. he agreed that he grabbed x by the hand but denied threatening the mother at all. the accounts given to police by the mother and the children are, in the father’s view, all lies. he acknowledged that all three accounts refer to ‘shoes’ but maintained that he made no such threat. the mother’s account, contrarily, is that the children did not wish to see the father. she says that the children tried to follow her and that, as a result, the father also pursued her while verbally abusing her in region k language, ‘saying things like it was ‘[her] fault the children did not want to see him’ and threatening to hit her with a shoe.[72]
... observations were previously carried out during the previous family report assessment and whilst some concerns regarding [mr danwar’s] relationship with the children appear to have escalated, the fundamental issues raised regarding the children’s relationships do not appear to have significantly changed, and as such it is not considered that the lack of observations presents a significant limitation to the assessment.[76]
issues identified by the parents whether, or not, [mr danwar] has perpetrated family violence and continues to use his time with the children to maintain a coercive dynamic, issues identified by court child expert [mr danwar’s] capacity to consider the children’s experiences and repair his relationship with them, [ms solghi’s] willingness to support the children to maintain a relationship with [mr danwar].[79]
the report also unfortunately reflects that ms d’s 2019 prediction with respect to the father’s behaviour around the children came to pass:
in the previous family report, recommendations were made that the children’s time with [mr danwar] be increased, in the event that the court finds that [mr danwar] has not perpetrated family violence. however, given the ongoing deterioration of the children’s relationship with [mr danwar], such an arrangement would no longer be recommended.[80]
ms d ultimately recommended that the children spend no time with the father. she opined that, as of early 2022, the children’s views were entrenched. they had not spent time with the father in nearly two years and had been, and continue to be, deeply impacted by parental conflict. ms d’s concern was that forcing the children to spend time with the father would cause them emotional damage.
facts in issue and the standard of proof  ... violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.[81]   the alleged incident of 30 december 2016 in which the father threatened to break the mother’s legs, threw various items at the mother (including one which hit her right eye), and misrepresented the mother’s injury to m medical centre staff the following day, (b) the father’s allegedly controlling conduct between 28 april 2017 until late october 2017, by lying to the mother about her immigration status and leveraging her ‘dependency’ upon him, threatening to cancel her visa, and send her back to india, (c) the alleged incident of 29 april 2017 in which the father assaulted the mother, caused blunt trauma, haematoma, and severe headaches, and thereafter threatened the mother not to call police because they ‘could not help her’, (d) the alleged incident of 23 september 2017 in which the father punched the mother, splitting her lip, (e) the alleged incident of 24 october 2017 in which the father threatened the mother, pushed her shoulder and slapped her face, chased her out of her home, after which the father’s family members pressured her to retract her statements to police, (f) whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the father’s allegedly controlling conduct between 28 april 2017 until late october 2017, by lying to the mother about her immigration status and leveraging her ‘dependency’ upon him, threatening to cancel her visa, and send her back to india, (c) the alleged incident of 29 april 2017 in which the father assaulted the mother, caused blunt trauma, haematoma, and severe headaches, and thereafter threatened the mother not to call police because they ‘could not help her’, (d) the alleged incident of 23 september 2017 in which the father punched the mother, splitting her lip, (e) the alleged incident of 24 october 2017 in which the father threatened the mother, pushed her shoulder and slapped her face, chased her out of her home, after which the father’s family members pressured her to retract her statements to police, (f) whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 29 april 2017 in which the father assaulted the mother, caused blunt trauma, haematoma, and severe headaches, and thereafter threatened the mother not to call police because they ‘could not help her’, (d) the alleged incident of 23 september 2017 in which the father punched the mother, splitting her lip, (e) the alleged incident of 24 october 2017 in which the father threatened the mother, pushed her shoulder and slapped her face, chased her out of her home, after which the father’s family members pressured her to retract her statements to police, (f) whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 23 september 2017 in which the father punched the mother, splitting her lip, (e) the alleged incident of 24 october 2017 in which the father threatened the mother, pushed her shoulder and slapped her face, chased her out of her home, after which the father’s family members pressured her to retract her statements to police, (f) whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 24 october 2017 in which the father threatened the mother, pushed her shoulder and slapped her face, chased her out of her home, after which the father’s family members pressured her to retract her statements to police, (f) whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   whether the father representing to the children’s school that the mother had a ‘mental problem’ on 27 october 2017 constitutes family violence, (g) whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   whether the father leaving the family home on 27 october 2017 was, as he alleges, out of fear of the mother raising further false allegations against him, (h) the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged whatsapp posts made by the father in april 2018, (i) the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 4 september 2018 in which the mother did nothing to stop the assault upon x by ms g, (j) the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 9 june 2019 in which the father was angry at the children and twisted x’s arm, (k) the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the father allegedly telling y that he does not wish to see her anymore and swearing at her in region k language, including the alleged incident of 5 april 2020 in which the father admonished y, calling her a ‘bitch’ and ‘dumb’, (l) the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the father allegedly saying to x words to the effect that he should ‘not to tell [his] mother anything, that bitch will bark’, as disclosed by x to the mother on 25 april 2020 (m) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the father threatened to hit the mother with shoes, (n) the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the alleged incident of 4 october 2020 in which the mother allegedly called the father a ‘dog’ and a ‘bastard’, and (o) the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.   the father’s alleged requests for photographs of the mother, details of her home address, or details of the children’s school, causing the children to be fearful of him.
matters agreed
issues for determination, the parties’ proposals, and submissions
issue 1: parental responsibility
it is established that in considering the factors in s 64(1), in particular the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the parents ... the custodial parent's caregiving capacity ... and "the need to protect the child from abuse, ill treatment, or exposure or subjection to behaviour which psychologically harms the child" ... an appropriate consideration is the custodial parent's belief that the child or children have been sexually abused whilst on access and the effect of that belief on them as the primary caregiver. ... in taking into account the belief of the custodial parent of abuse by the non-custodial parent of the children and the effect of such belief on that parent as primary caregiver of the children, and consequent harm to the children, a subjective test is employed. however, it must be shown that such belief on the part of the custodial parent is genuinely held. where it appears on the whole of the evidence that such belief is entirely irrational and baseless, the genuineness of the subjective belief of the custodial parent will clearly be open to doubt.[86]
issue 2: the children’s time with the father  facilitate the children’s attendance and participation at such times, dates and places as may be advised, and (b) pay such fees as may be charged.   pay such fees as may be charged.
issue 3: the children’s communication with the father
issue 4: communication between the mother and the father
issue 5: international travel
parenting orders, unacceptable risk, and ‘no contact’ cases
unacceptable risk
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary. ... sometimes it can be difficult to discern the difference between the exercise of discretion and an evaluative judgment ..., though a discretionary decision is one in which no single factor or combination of considerations will necessarily dictate the result .... the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.[103]
‘no contact’ cases
the act recognises that, as long as it is in their best interests, a child has the right to spend time and communicate with their parents, and other people important to them, such as grandparents, relatives and members of extended families (see section 60b(2)(b)).[106]
in the context of a case where the trial judge ordered that there be no contact between [a child and their parent], it should also be noted that s 60b(2) of the family law act 1975 speaks of the right of the child to contact on a regular basis with both parents, not the rights of parents. moreover, the provision is qualified by the phrase “except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests”. in b and b ... the full court said:
“at a late stage of the legislative process ... the words ‘except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best interests’ were inserted by amendment into s 60b(2), apparently as a consequence of a recommendation in the second report of the senate legal and constitutional legislation committee. it also appears from the debates that a government amendment along similar lines had already been proposed .... it was inserted at the commencement of s 60b(2) rather than qualifying the section as a whole. but it is clear that s 65e ensures that the children’s best interests apply to the whole of the section ...” (emphasis added).[107]
“no contact” orders plainly it is a serious matter to order that a child neither spend time with nor communicate with a parent. such orders properly ought be restricted to cases where that outcome is plainly mandated in the best interests of the child, and no other regime of orders is appropriate or workable. such orders are commonly employed where the court is satisfied that a parent poses an unacceptable risk of harm to a child, which cannot be ameliorated by supervision of time and communication between that parent and the child. the authorities germane to that situation were reviewed by the full court in re andrew [1996] famca 43, (1996) flc 92-692. re andrew also discussed a further line of authorities, which upheld “no contact“ orders being grounded, not upon a proved unacceptable risk of harm posed to the child by the parent, but rather where the other parent entertained a genuine, but not necessarily reasonable, belief that such a risk of harm existed. the basis for such orders was not to protect the parent from the consequences of their belief, but rather to protect the child from those consequences, where doing so was in the child’s bests interests. thus in russell v close [cited above at paragraph 65 of these reasons]... the full court held that where such parental anxiety was likely to impact adversely on that parent’s care-giving ability, the court needed to take that into account. ...[108]
his honour further discussed ‘no contact’ cases in theophane & hunt:
that approach [in re andrew and russell & close] was taken one step further by the full court in sedgley & sedgley [1995] famca 154, (1995) flc 92-623, in the context of the husband who had for many years intimidated the wife, failed to return the child at end of access periods and otherwise behaved in an intimidating and bullying way with no regard to compliance with court orders. at 82,259 the court said:
whilst the welfare of the child might require some continuity of contact with a non-custodial parent, the need for peace and tranquillity in the custodial parent’s household may be a more compelling need for the child.
plainly however as adverted to by the court in sedgley itself, a court would only cut the relationship between the child and parent on such a ground with considerable hesitation.[109]
although the family consultant gave evidence that the parenting capacity of the mother would probably be impinged by her having to deal with orders requiring the children to spend time with the father, the mother made only passing reference to the need for peace and tranquillity in her household. she did not overtly submit that the probable impingement of her parenting capacity necessitated, of itself, an order precluding any interaction between the children and the father consonant with established principles ... those authorities establish that even when a non-residential parent does not constitute an unacceptable risk of abuse to a child, the genuine fears of the residential parent about such a risk may so impinge upon that parent’s capacity, and cause such disturbance in the residential household, that interaction between the child and the non-residential parent should be curtailed in any event. the need to accommodate the child’s best interests overrides any sense of injustice between the parties ... in all probability, there was no need for the mother to resort to those principles in this case, because the evidence establishes that the father does constitute an unacceptable risk of emotional and physical abuse to the children. the genuineness of the mother’s fears simply compounds the strength of the evidence. her fears are not only honestly held, but are objectively valid.[110]
the children’s best interests
the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents (s 60cc(2)(a))
what these definitions convey is that "meaningful", when used in the context of "meaningful relationship", is synonymous with "significant" which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for "important" or "of consequence". i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.[111]
it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.[112]
... the children presented as ambivalent in regards to their parenting arrangements, they each now expressed clear views, stating that they wish to live with [ms solghi] and spend no time with [mr danwar] ... ... it is recommended, based on the children’s ages, their apparent maturity and understanding of their circumstances, that the children’s views be given significant weight.[114]
these circumstances are quite apart from those immediately following final separation. the supervised contact reports often evidence a deep, connected, and loving relationship. the children would on most occasions hug and kiss the father at the start and end of their visits with him. the father regularly behaved calmly towards the children and dealt with any parenting issues in a consistently child-focussed way.[115] the mother recognised positive instances of supervised time in 2018 and that the children were often happy to see the father. there is no evidence before me that the children’s enthusiasm at the supervised visits in any way reflected their anxiety or inability to relax in the father’s presence, as observed by ms d in the first family report.[116] the supervised time in 2018 was not without hiccup but, overall, the evidence indicates that the children felt an important and valuable bond with the father at that time.
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence (s 60cc(2)(b))
whilst as a general principle it is important to identify a core consistency in the evidence of an alleged victim of family violence rather than concentrating on supposed inconsistencies in the evidence, this does not permit a court to ignore or otherwise dismiss inconsistencies in that evidence ... however the reference to the importance of identifying a core consistency, while important in cases involving family violence, must not obscure the reality that there cannot be a finding of family violence otherwise than in accordance with s 140 of the evidence act and having regard to all relevant matters ... where allegations of family violence are made it is necessary for the court to make findings where the evidence enables that to be done ...[127]
... with the help of [y] who translated, the mother claimed that the father had influenced [x] to lie about her and the social worker. i intervened and told the mother that it was unfair and not right for [y] to translate anything abou [x] and the father. the mother ignored this and kept on talking and mentioned that the father’s family or friends were not allowed to have contact with both [x] and [y] including a phone call to the grandparents in india. the mother was very anxious and repeatedly said that she was scared of the father and his family ...[130]   said that when [mr danwar] and [ms solghi] separated, it was "strange and sad”, but that he had adjusted to this. he said that "in the old times" [mr danwar] used to hit [ms solghi], and he pointed to his face, neck and shoulder. [x] said that [ms solghi] had required an x-ray because of something [mr danwar] had done, but gave no further details of this. he described witnessing [y] trying to pull [mr danwar] away from [ms solghi].[139]
the mother referred to exhibit m1 to corroborate her allegation. while that document proves that the mother suffered from blunt trauma and haematoma, it does not reveal the cause of those injuries. the representations made at the hospital on 27 october 2017 (that she had been hit in the head twice in the past six months) may corroborate the incident of 29 april 2017, but upon reporting past incidents to police the mother did not specify any incident except for her split lip as found above. the documentation also reveals a possible third allegation — that the father broke the mother’s jaw and teeth — for which i have no other evidence or detail.[140] this allegation may be exaggerated in stressful circumstances or, at worst, fabricated due to the father removing the children from her care, although i cannot conclude either way. the alleged assault of 29 april 2017 may well have been in the mother’s mind upon reporting to police on 24 october. it appears she did not raise it with police at that time, perhaps due to the elevated stress of the allegations of that date and the circumstances of final separation. the mother’s account of 29 april 2017 and the months thereafter is also not inconsistent with her representations to medical staff on 27 october 2017. at that time the mother reported physical abuse from the father, and that she experienced an ‘intermittent midline headache after being hit in the head by [the father] ... hit head twice within last 6 months’.[141] her further allegation that the father ‘hit, slapped or pushed her five out of seven days’ per week from april 2017 onwards does not disrupt her evidence about being hit twice in the head between april and october 2017.[142] there is, however, some inconsistent evidence from x with respect to this incident. he recounts his memory of physical assaults to the mother’s face, neck and shoulders to ms d, and describes witnessing y try to pull the father away from the mother. when interviewed by police on 24 and 26 october 2017, both children instead reported that they had not witnessed any physical violence, and that their parents’ conflict was limited to verbal arguments.[143] the children were younger at this time, aged eight and seven years, and their accounts of the time do not necessarily mean that such violence did not occur or that they did not witness it.   said that [ms solghi] does not like him and [y] spending time with [mr danwar] because [mr danwar] keeps telling him bad things about [ms solghi]. he said that he wishes that [mr danwar] would stop saying bad things about [ms solghi]. [x] said he is trying to work out if [ms solghi] is wrong or [mr danwar] is wrong, and that this is very confusing. he said that he has told [ms solghi] about his confusion. he said that [ms solghi] has told him to “pick one side", but that she has expressed that he can "pick any side" he wants to. [x] said that it would be a relief to have the court choose what is good for him.[144]
the father said during cross-examination that he did not say anything about the mother to the children but, upon being asked whether he said that the mother was lying, he said that yes, he had said that the mother was lying. his evidence was that he did this because the mother was, in fact, lying. he disagreed that he said this ‘many times’, and qualified that he never said ‘bad words’, but had ‘one or two times’ said that the mother was lying. the father therefore admitted to saying ‘bad things’ about the mother.   said that spending time with [mr danwar] is “pretty good” but “sometimes a little bad”. she said that he says bad words to the children and pulls their arms. however, she also said that he agrees to do whatever the children request. when asked if she wanted to continue spending time with [mr danwar], [y] said no. she said that she might be sad if she had no contact with [mr danwar], but that she does not want to leave her mother, because she and [ms solghi] have never left each other. she said that she would like to spend time with [mr danwar] if he stopped saying “bad words” and “behaves good”. she said that she and [x] would keep reporting back to [ms solghi] the things [mr danwar] has said.[145]   said that [mr danwar] had forced [x] to eat chicken, which is against their culture. she said that despite being hungry, she refused to eat the chicken, and instead waited until returning to [ms solghi] to eat. she also complained that [mr danwar] would play cards with his wife and ignore the children, or would leave the children with the paternal grandparents.[146]
the father denied these allegations.   said that she wishes that [ms solghi’s] back would stop hurting, and said that she is worried that she will be similarly injured if she spends time with [mr danwar]. she recounted an occasion on which [mr danwar] hit [ms solghi] and said that it was “lucky” that she was present or [mr danwar] would have hit [ms solghi] more.[148]
i again note that, on 24 and 26 october 2017, both children told police that they had not at that time witnessed any physical altercations between their parents. as stated earlier, although their accounts to ms d contradict this position to some extent, this does not necessarily mean that their statements to police represent the truth.
... [mr danwar’s] ongoing denial of the occurrence of all alleged family violence, and the ongoing nature of the alleged violence raises concerns that [mr danwar] is likely to continue to perpetrate abusive and intimidating behaviours, towards [ms solghi] and towards the children. these concerns are exacerbated by allegations that the children have witnessed [mr danwar] yelling at his current partner. if the court finds veracity to allegations of family violence perpetrated by [mr danwar], this may indicate that there is a high risk that the children will be exposed to further family violence in [mr danwar’s] care, and it is recommended that the children spend no time with [mr danwar].[156] ... ... as discussed above, in the event that the court finds veracity to allegations that [mr danwar] has perpetrated family violence, residing with [mr danwar] will also lead to a high likelihood that the children will be exposed to further family violence. in the previous family report, recommendations were made that the children’s time with [mr danwar] be increased, in the event that the court finds that [mr danwar] has not perpetrated family violence. however, given the ongoing deterioration of the children’s relationship with [mr danwar], such an arrangement would no longer be recommended.[157]
any views expressed by the children, and the weight to be accorded to those views given their age and level of maturity (s 60cc(3)(a))
the terms of s 60cc(3)(a) itself may be taken to recognise that, whilst a child’s views ought to be given proper consideration, their importance in a given case may depend upon factors such as the child’s age or maturity and level of understanding of what is involved in the choice they have expressed. children may not, for example, appreciate the long term implications of separation from one parent or the child’s siblings. section 60cc requires that attention be given by the court to these matters.[160]
ms d’s reports — particularly the report of march 2022 — reveal that the children’s views are considered and grounded in their experiences. both x and y presented as ‘confident and articulate’ and ‘cited specific behaviours by [the father], occurring during unsupervised time with him, that [led] them to [their] views’. each child’s view that they wish to live with the mother and spend no time with the father was expressed clearly. ms d also reports that, even if time with the father is ordered, ‘[e]ach child stated that they would not abide by orders to spend time with [the father]’. x and y had both clearly considered the possibility of the father not being involved in their lives and, while they discussed feelings of sadness, they maintained their views and appeared to have processed these feelings to some extent.[161] the children no longer say that they will be ‘kind of’ sad, or that they ‘might be’ sad, if they do not see the father.[162] the following extracts report their wishes to not see the father at all:   said that if the court made orders for him to spend time with [mr danwar], he would respectfully disagree. he pointed out that he has not been attending, as per court orders. he acknowledged that he had previously stated that he would like to see [mr danwar], if [mr danwar] was not disrespectful, but that he feels that [mr danwar] has now shown that he has not changed. [x] said that the most important things for the court to know are that he wants to remain living with [ms solghi] and that he would like to visit the maternal family in india. he said that he has some memories from when he lived in india, prior to coming to australia at 6 and a half years old.[163] ... [y] said that she does not wish to see [mr danwar] ever again. she reflected that she has been sad at times not to see him, but that now she has grown up just wants to live with [ms solghi], because [ms solghi] is nice to the children. she said that if the court made orders for her to spend time with [mr danwar] she just will not go, even if [ms solghi] told her to.[164]
it appears likely that the children’s view have been formed by a combination of their own experiences and by influence from [ms solghi]. ... it is recommended, based on the children’s ages, their apparent maturity and understanding of their circumstances, that the children’s views be given significant weight. ... it is likely that as the children’s primary carer, [ms solghi] has influenced the children’s views somewhat. however, this does not appear to be overwhelming or undue influence, given that [the] children’s accounts appear to be nuanced and to reflect their first-hand experiences.[165]
i accept ms d’s expert evidence in this respect.
... his views, that the difficulties in his relationship with the children are due to [ms solghi’s] influence, does not appear to acknowledge ways in which his own behaviours may have contributed to this deterioration, and he was unable to anticipate that there may be difficulties in resuming these relationships.[166]  ]] stated that he does not wish to spend time with him, because [mr danwar] was disrespectful to him and his sister. he stated that [mr danwar] swore at him and his sister, and that [mr danwar] and his partner had left him and [y] alone. [x] said that when a supervisor was present, it was more fun for the children, and that they would visit playtime and [mr danwar] was nice to them. [[x]] recalled [mr danwar] slapping him and throwing shoes at him, prior to court orders being made. he said that [mr danwar] used to hit [ms solghi], leading to her current back pain, meaning that she cannot work. he said that when this occurred he would worry that he also would be hit.[167] ... [y] said that [mr danwar] does not treat her and [x] equally, and that he has sworn at her in [region k language] and has told her that he does not wish to see her. she explained he had told her this because she had been watching television loudly, whilst he was trying to talk with his wife and the paternal grandparents. she said that she had believed him when he had told her that he did not wish to see her, and that he had sworn at her previously as well. she said that she has been told by many people that [mr danwar] wished she was a boy, rather than a girl, and that he did not even like her. [y] said that [mr danwar] had forced [x] to eat chicken, which is against their culture. she said that despite being hungry, she refused to eat the chicken, and instead waited until returning to [ms solghi] to eat. she also complained that [mr danwar] would play cards with his wife and ignore the children, or would leave the children with the paternal grandparents. [y] said that when they were still in india, [mr danwar] had hit her on the face. she said that later on he no longer hit her, but instead just swore at her. she contrasted this with [ms solghi], who she said does not try to force her to do anything.[168]
the father denied that he had ever left the children alone with their grandparents while they were in australia. he also denied that he ever ignored either of the children.   solghi] presented as appropriate and generally child-focussed. it appears that she has considered feedback made in the previous family report, that the children appeared to crave her time and attention, and based on her account and the children’s accounts, she has begun to spend more recreational time with the children. while she said that it should be the children’s choice whether, or not, they spend time with [mr danwar], she does not appear to believe that maintaining this relationship is in the children’s best interests. she was able to describe improvements to the children’s behaviours that she attributed to their lack of time with [mr danwar]. it is likely that as the children’s primary carer, [ms solghi] has influenced the children’s views somewhat. however, this does not appear to be overwhelming or undue influence, given that children’s accounts appear to be nuanced and to reflect their first-hand experiences.[170]
each of the children presented as confident and articulate. no concerns were raised regarding their development. whereas during the previous assessment each of the children presented as ambivalent in regards to their parenting arrangements, they each now expressed clear views, stating that they wish to live with [ms solghi] and spend no time with [mr danwar]. contrary to the parents’ reports that the children may have been hurt by [mr danwar’s] re-partnering, each of the children cited specific behaviours by [mr danwar], occurring during unsupervised time with him, that they said had lead them to these views. it appears likely that the children's view have been formed by a combination of their own experiences and by influence from [ms solghi]. each child discussed feelings of sadness in relation to losing the relationship with [mr danwar], and appeared to have considered and processed these feelings to a certain extent. each child stated that they would not abide by orders to spend time with [mr danwar], and as such, any such orders may increase conflict with each of their parents, and may cause further deterioration to the relationship between [mr danwar] and the children. it is recommended, based on the children's ages, their apparent maturity and understanding of their circumstances, that the children's views be given significant weight.[172]
ms d maintained her opinion in this regard under cross-examination, stating that requiring the mother to effectively force the children to spend time with the father would create conflict and resentment towards the mother. further, any time that they spend with the father in those circumstances was unlikely to be enjoyable for them and unlikely to provide either child with any real benefit. she concluded that, where there is intractable parental conflict of this type, an order for the children to spend no time with the father may well be the least detrimental option. ms d maintained that there was no reason to disbelieve the children’s stated experiences of family violence irrespective of the mother’s influence. while she acknowledged that the children had enjoyed time with the father in the past, particularly under supervised conditions, their relationship with him has now deteriorated. any time forced upon them will, according to ms d, build resentment and make it harder for them to reconnect in the future, should they wish to do so. the children’s views are entrenched, articulate, and introspective. i am satisfied that ms d carefully considered whether the children’s accounts of violence, abuse, or conflict should be accepted and, as such, accept her evidence about the weight to be attached to their views.
the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents and any other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the children) (s 60cc(3)(b))  danwar] proposed that the children live with him and spend substantial time with [ms solghi]. this proposal may, in theory, provide for the children to maintain a relationship with each of their parents. however, [mr danwar’s] inability to consider the challenges that this proposal may present, and the ways that he might support the children with reuniting with him, indicates that he is unlikely to successfully support the children to navigate such a significant transition. as such it is likely that such an arrangement would lead to a high degree of distress and anxiety for the children, leading to resentment and a further deterioration in the relationship with [mr danwar]. as discussed above, in the event that the court finds veracity to allegations that [mr danwar] has perpetrated family violence, residing with [mr danwar] will also lead to a high likelihood that the children will be exposed to further family violence.[174]
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child (s 60cc(3)(c))
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the children (s 60cc(3)(ca))
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect to the children from any separation from either of their parents or any other child with whom they have been living (s 60cc(3)(d))
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis (s 60cc(3)(e))
the capacity of each of the children’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs (s 60cc(3)(f))  was a keen athlete and he loved playing cricket in summer and in winter time he would love to ride his bicycle and travel with me in the car. i considered that i had a warm and loving relationship with him. he would call me "papa". i often took him to school and picked him up from school because i was working as a [transport worker and hospitality worker] and i was able to do this. he is a good student and i helped him with any home work he had to do when i got home from work. [y] is also a good athlete. she is also a good student. she too calls me "papa" and i consider that we had a warm and loving relationship.[178] ... i consider that the children and i had a good time during the time that i spent with them. we engaged in various activities including visiting restaurants, going shopping, playing games, reading books and also in attending the local bowling alley where we played games. we otherwise attended the local park at [suburb af] where we played on the swings.[179]
there is, however, some doubt as to whether the father is currently capable of providing for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs. the same could be said for the mother as of ms d’s 2019 family report, in which ms d observed that the children (particularly y) attempted to gain the mother’s attention, with both mentioning that the mother was often ‘too busy to play with them at home’.[180] in the 2022 report ms d states that the mother considered her feedback and, based on her own and the children’s accounts, spent more recreational time with the children.[181] this is a notable application of ms d’s feedback, and demonstrates that the mother is capable of providing for (and being aware or mindful of) the children’s emotional and intellectual needs. the children’s exposure to conflict by both parents is not, however, something which serves to emotionally or intellectually enrich them.   said that [ms solghi] does not like him and [y] spending time with [mr danwar], because [mr danwar] keeps telling him bad things about [ms solghi]. he said that he wishes that [mr danwar] would stop saying bad things about [ms solghi]. [x] said he is trying to work out if [ms solghi] is wrong or [mr danwar] is wrong, and that this is very confusing. he said that he has told [ms solghi] about his confusion. he said that [ms solghi] has told him to “pick one side”, but that she has expressed that he can “pick any side” he wants to. [x] said that it would be a relief to have the court choose what is good for him.[183]
... making orders for the children to spend time according to their wishes may place excessive responsibility on the children, possibly leading to feelings of stress, guilt or confusion for the children. as such, at this time it is recommended that orders be made for the children spend no time with [mr danwar], relieving them of the burden of making such a decision. this recommendation is consistent with the children’s stated wishes, and it appears that the children have had the opportunity to consider the grief that losing contact with [mr danwar] may cause them.[184]
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children and each of the children’s parents (s 60cc(3)(g))
the attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents (s 60cc(3)(i))
any family violence involving the children or a member of the children’s family (s 60cc(3)(j))  danwar’s] ongoing denial of the occurrence of all alleged family violence, and the ongoing nature of the alleged violence raises concerns that [mr danwar] is likely to continue to perpetrate abusive and intimidating behaviours, towards [ms solghi] and towards the children. these concerns are exacerbated by allegations that the children have witnessed [mr danwar] yelling at his current partner. if the court finds veracity to allegations of family violence perpetrated by [mr danwar], this may indicate that there is a high risk that the children will be exposed to further family violence in [mr danwar’s] care, and it is recommended that the children spend no time with [mr danwar].[192]
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the children or a member of the children’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter (s 60cc(3)(k))
whether it would be preferable to make orders that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child (s 60cc(3)(l))
parental responsibility
conclusion
associate: dated: 2 december 2022
dated: 2 december 2022
[1] grainger & grainger [2015] famca 276, [52].[2] family report, family consultant ms d, 4 september 2019 (‘family report, september 2019’); family report, family consultant ms d, 11 march 2022 (‘family report, march 2022’).[3] m1 (page from mother’s patient medical history dated 10 may 2017) (‘m1’).[4] m2 (page from mother’s patient health record dated 27 october 2017) (‘m2’).[5] m3 (police report in relation to alleged assault on x by ms g , dated 10 september 2018) (‘m3’).[6] m4 (police report in relation to the father’s alleged verbal abuse of y, dated 5 april 2020) (‘m4’).[7] i1 (icl’s tender bundle, including documents from new south wales police, h contact service, family and community services, and suburb j hospital) (‘i1’).[8] affidavit, ms solghi, 4 may 2022 (‘mother’s affidavit’) [36], noting also that the mother still requires an interpreter.[9] affidavit, mr danwar, 2 may 2022 (‘father’s 2022 affidavit’) [12].[10] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [76]–[77].[11] affidavit, mr danwar, 27 august 2020 (‘father’s 2020 affidavit’) [28].[12] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [44].[13] ibid [45].[14] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [32].[15] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [46].[16] father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [29], also denied under cross-examination.[17] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [74].[18] ibid [75].[19] ibid [48].[20] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [80].[21] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [71].[22] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [33].[23] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [50].[24] ibid [51].[25] ibid [52], annex f. the mother did not indicate the time of day at which the alleged assault took place, and says only that the photograph was taken ‘after this incident’.[26] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [33]. emphasis added.[27] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [54]–[56].[28] i1 (n 7) 21. emphasis added.[29] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [34]–[35].[30] i1 (n 7) 20. emphasis added.[31] ibid 95. emphasis added.[32] m2 (n 4). emphasis added.[33] i1 (n 7) 101, noting that the event caused the police and the crisis support agency to become involved, leading to an apprehended domestic violence order (‘advo’) issuing on 1 november 2017.[34] ibid 19–20.[35] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) annex c.[36] i1 (n 7) 16.[37] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [79]–[85]. emphasis added.[38] ibid [108]–[162].[39] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [23]–[40]; father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [35]–[41].[40] mother’s affidavit (n 8) annex g.[41] i1 (n 7) 40.[42] ibid 42.[43] ibid 44.[44] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [113]. the mother alleges that the father bought x an expensive gift at the contact visit on 6 august 2018. neither the father nor the icl’s material include a report from h contact service for 6 august 2018. it is possible that the mother refers to the large purchase made on the previous occasion of time, 30 july 2018, although this was not clarified at trial.[45] ibid [108].[46] i1 (n 7) 44. emphasis added.[47] ibid 14. the mother reported the alleged incident on 19 september 2018.[48] m3 (n 5).[49] i1 (n 7) 15.[50] ibid 53. emphasis added.[51] ibid 62. emphasis added.[52] ibid 13. emphasis added.[53] stephen odgers, uniform evidence law (lawbook, 16th ed, 2021) 569–587.[54] family law act 1975 (cth) s 69zt(1)(c), as it applies to the evidence act 1995 (cth) pt 3.3, s 76 with respect to opinion evidence, for which the exception for expert opinions (at s 79) does not apply in relation to this evidence. i note also the hearsay element of the police records (ss 59, 69) as evidence of the alleged fact that the father had perpetrated family violence against the mother and that she feared him as a result.[55] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [114]–[118].[56] ibid annex i.[57] ibid [116], [119].[58] i1 (n 7) 12.[59] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) annex f, g.[60] mother’s affidavit (n 8) annex j.[61] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [103]. emphasis added.[62] ibid [105].[63] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [130].[64] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [68], [70].[65] ibid [44].[66] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [131].[67] ibid [134]–[147]. the mother specifically recalled an incident in 2018 in which x choked y in the supermarket shortly after they had spent time with the father.[68] ibid [161]. the father allegedly paid attention to his new wife on the 26 july 2020 visit instead of x, and told him ‘look what your mum has been sending to me’, causing x to come home and ask the mother ‘why are you sending these letters to papa?’. the mother says that she explained that this matter was between adults, and then that x said: ‘i told papa that mum cannot do anything wrong but papa insisted that everything mum is doing [is] wrong’.[69] ibid [147].[70] ibid [158]. on 12 july 2020 x allegedly returned from the contact visit angry, and said to the mother: ‘call the police, i don’t want to live with you, i want to live with papa’.[71] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [38].[72] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [28]–[30].[73] father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [31]. the father’s second affidavit states that he has not had any contact with the children since july 2020, but he agrees that he at least saw the children on 4 october 2020, and furthermore says that x wanted to go with him on this occasion. i have adopted february 2021 as the last visitation proper, notwithstanding that x estimated in february 2022 that he last saw the father six months prior to the date of the second family report interviews, and that ms d says y’s most recent time was in april 2021 and x’s was in around september 2021. [74] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [164].[75] family report, march 2022 (n 2) 3. ms d reports that the mother was assisted by a region k interpreter and the father was assisted by a [region z] interpreter.[76] ibid [73].[77] i1 (n 7) 103.[78] father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) annex a.[79] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [22]–[24].[80] ibid [81].[81] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 4ab(1).[82] evidence act 1995 (n 54) s 140; briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336, 361–362, noting the remarks of his honour dixon j (as he then was) that proof requires ‘actual persuasion’ and that ‘reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved. the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal’.[83] mother’s proposal, 23 june 2022 (‘mother’s proposal’) [1]; father’s proposal, 4 july 2022 (‘father’s proposal’) [1]; icl’s proposal, 6 may 2022 (‘icl’s proposal’) [1].[84] mother’s proposal (n 83) [6]–[7]; father’s proposal (n 83) [7]; icl’s proposal (n 83) [7]–[8]. the mother and the icl propose identical terms — that the mother refrain from discussing any aspect of these proceedings within the children’s presence or hearing, and that she refrain from denigrating the father (or allow others to do so) within the children’s presence or hearing. both orders are proposed on the assumption that the father has no in-person time with the children. the father, seeking unsupervised in-person time with the children, proposes a mutual non-denigration order which is otherwise identical to that proposed by the mother and the icl. the father’s proposal does not contain an injunction against discussing the family law litigation to which the children have been subject but, in the event that i order in-person time or any other contact between the father and the children, i am satisfied that it is in the children’s best interests for both parents to be restrained by injunction from denigrating one another (or allowing others to do so), or discussing these proceedings, within the children’s presence or hearing.[85] mother’s proposal (n 83) [2]; icl’s proposal (n 83) [2].[86] russell & close [1993] famca 62, 17, 19. see also re andrew [1996] famca 43; (1996) flc 92-692, 83,200–83,202 which, while not referred to by the icl in submissions, contains subsequent authorities to russell & close.[87] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [53].[88] mother’s proposal (n 83) [3]; icl’s proposal (n 83) [3].[89] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [17].[90] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 60b(4); convention on the rights of the child, opened for signature 20 november 1989, 1577 unts 3 (entered into force 2 september 1990), in respect of which i note art 9 as to separation from parents in accordance with the child’s best interests and in accordance with applicable law and procedures.[91] maldera & orbel [2014] famcafc 135, [73]–[76].[92] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 65y, noting the parenting orders to which sub-div e applies (as set out in s 65x) includes parenting orders to the extent that they provide that the child or children live with a person, spend time with a person, communicate with a person, or that a person is to have parental responsibility for a child. i note here that the mother may, if an order for sole parental responsibility is made in her favour, apply for any of the children’s australian travel documents to affect international travel; australian passports act 2005 (cth) s 11(1)(a).[93] ibid s 111b, authorising implementation of the convention in australia; family law (child abduction convention) regulations 1986 (cth).[94] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [15].[95] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 60ca.[96] ibid s 65d(1).[97] withers & russell [2016] famca 793, [315]–[318] at which watts j confirms that there is no preferred approach, there being ‘more than one suggested pathway through the legislature’.[98] mrr & gr (2010) 240 clr 461, [6]–[9] (french cj, gummow, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[99] family law act 1975 (n 54) ss 4ab, 4 (definition of ‘abuse’), noting that the act does not define ‘neglect’ for the purpose of s 60cc(2)(b), nor does it define ‘serious neglect’ for the purposes of sub-s (d) of the definition of ‘abuse’.[100] m v m (1998) 166 clr 69, 76 (mason cj, brennan, dawson, toohey and gaudron jj); bant & clayton [2019] famcafc 198, [38]–[41].[101] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97, [46]–[51], [86]; briginshaw v briginshaw (n 82), 361–362 (dixon j); evidence act 1995 (n 54) s 140. i note here the dismissal of the special leave application to the high court, published on 10 november 2022; isles v nelissen [2022] hcasl 193.[102] isles & nelissen (n 101) [83].[103] ibid [85]. citations omitted.[104] m v m (n 100) 77–78, at which their honours state that, ultimately, the court’s task is to assess the magnitude of risk and that ‘[a]fter all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child’ a court of this jurisdiction ‘is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare’, and that ‘[t]he existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access’. i note also the first instance decision of mcguire j in isles & nelissen [2021] fedcfamc1f 295, in which at [267] his honour explains the ‘separate and predictive’ inquiry, based off ‘“possibilities” in a prospective sense’, affirmed by the full court on appeal.[105] murphy & murphy [2007] famca 795, [318]–[319].[106] meadis & meadis [2022] fedcfamc1f 62, [7]. emphasis added.[107] re lynette [1999] famca 1239; (1999) flc 92-863, 86,201 (nicholson cj, kay and holden jj), citing b & b [1997] famca 33; (1997) flc 92-755, 84,183 (nicholson cj, fogarty and lindenmayer jj).[108] grainger & grainger (n 1) [52]–[53].[109] theophane & hunt [2014] famca 1038, [57]–[58].[110] bayer & imhoff [2010] famca 532, [177]–[178]. citations omitted.[111] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520, [26]; mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, [115].[112] godfrey & sanders [2007] famca 102, [36].[113] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [74].[114] ibid [74]. see also [60], [63], [70] for the children’s clear views on not wishing to see the father.[115] i1 (n 7) 24–63, which contains all of the supervision notes from 11 june 2018 until 19 november 2018.[116] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [102].[117] ibid 2. the children were observed with the father on 26 july 2019.[118] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [60]–[61].[119] ibid [68]; m4 (n 6).[120] i1 (n 7) 7–8. in june 2020 x said to the mother: ‘dad does not like you very much he said mean things’.[121] family report, march 2022 (n 2).[122] ibid [83].[123] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [169], at which the mother says that she moved the children from the school they were attending after the father removed them from school in october 2017. she expressed that she remains fearful that the father will attend the children’s school/s if he knows where they are.[124] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 68b(1)(a).[125] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [32]; father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [38].[126] evidence act 1995 (n 54) s 164(1); stamatou & stamatou [2022] fedcfamc1f 241, [180].[127] stamatou & stamatou (n 126) [181]. citations omitted.[128] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [14]–[15]. the mother alleges that the father has threatened her at changeover, with the father denying this and stating that the mother was verbally abusing him, seemingly referring to the events of 4 october 2020 or similar occurrences not alleged before me. the father also alleges that the mother’s brother in india continues to threaten the paternal family.[129] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [71]. ms d also stated in family report, march 2022 (n 2) [25] (for the mother) and [31] (for the father) that each parent expressed, in some form or another, that the children should not be exposed to parental conflict.[130] i1 (n 7) 53.[131] ibid 7 (june 2020, the mother complained that x said that the father wanted x to go and live with him), 8 (april 2020, the mother claimed that the father had admonished y when she asked about the father’s girlfriend), 13 (april 2019, the mother complained that the father told x that he was going to india and ‘have [the mother] killed’, but x told police that the father did not say that he was going to kill the mother), 14 (september 2018, the mother complained that the father was staring at her), 17 (july 2018, x acted out by pushing over a small inside heater and played with the kitchen stove to ‘annoy’ the mother).[132] family law act 1975 (n 54) ss 4ab(4)(c) (which provides that a child may have been exposed to family violence if they comfort or provide assistance to a member of their family who has been assaulted by another member of their family), 4ab(4)(e) (which provides that a child may have been exposed to family violence if they are present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of their family by another member of their family).[133] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [61], [71].[134] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [52]. the photographs at annex f do not show the date and time at which the photographs were taken and appear to have been photocopied from a binder. ms murphy did not provide evidence, either in any other document or from the mother’s phone itself at trial, of the fact alleged in the mother’s affidavit.[135] i1 (n 7) 19.[136] m2 (n 4).[137] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [89]–[91].[138] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [33].[139] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [80].[140] i1 (n 7) 101.[141] m2 (n 4). the record describes the mother as being ‘spontaneous, unlaboured, speaking in full sentences’.[142] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [49].[143] see paragraphs 21, 26 of these reasons.[144] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [81].[145] ibid [87]–[88].[146] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [69].[147] ibid [61].[148] ibid [71].[149] m3 (n 5).[150] i1 (n 7) 53.[151] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [38].[152] father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [39].[153] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [41].[154] i1 (n 7) 20. the police records created 26 october 2017 confirm that the father attended the [suburb j] police station and stated that the mother ‘[was] suffering from a mental condition’ causing her to make false allegations.[155] m2 (n 4).[156] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [77].[157] ibid [80]–[81].[158] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [105].[159] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [60].[160] bondelmonte & bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662, 674.[161] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [74].[162] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [82] (at which x reportedly said that he will ‘kind of’ miss the father if he no longer spends time with him), [91] (ms d observed in july 2019 that the father hugged and kissed x repeatedly, and x did not reciprocate), [93] (ms d also observed in july 2019 that y, while she held the father’s hand, did not respond to him kissing her, and told him to stop playing with her hair), [88] (at which y said reportedly said that she did not wish to continue spending time with the father, that she ‘might be sad’ if she has no contact with him, that she and the mother have never been apart, and that she would like to spend time with the father ‘if he stopped saying “bad words” and “behaves good”’).[163] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [63]–[64].[164] ibid [74].[165] ibid [74]–[75].[166] ibid [76].[167] ibid [60]–[61].[168] ibid [68]–[70].[169] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [81].[170] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [75].[171] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [166].[172] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [74].[173] ibid [75].[174] ibid [80].[175] ibid [62].[176] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [168].[177] the father said under cross-examination that he purchased x a mobile phone and purchased clothes for y, and that he has promised the children that he will purchase expensive electronic equipment for them. he also said that he purchased a gaming console for x which, at $400.00, was ‘not expensive’. [178] father’s 2020 affidavit (n 11) [14]–[15].[179] ibid [52].[180] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [101].[181] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [75].[182] ibid [57]–[58], [65].[183] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [81].[184] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [82].[185] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [51].[186] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [69].[187] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [51].[188] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [176].[189] ibid [169]–[170].[190] i1 (n 7) 53.[191] family report, september 2019 (n 2) [103], [110].[192] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [77].[193] ibid [74].[194] mother’s affidavit (n 8) [11].[195] ibid [17]. the charges (from 24 october 2017) were dismissed in the [suburb j] local court on 18 april 2018.[196] ibid [18].[197] evidence act 1995 (n 54) s 141(1).[198] father’s 2022 affidavit (n 9) [37]–[38], annex a. the reference to 2019 at [37] of the father’s affidavit appears to be an erroneous reference to the mother’s allegation in 2020.[199] i1 (n 7) 3–4.[200] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 61b.[201] ibid s 61c.[202] goode & goode [2006] famca 1346, [39], at which the full court clarifies the difference between pre-separation parental responsibility and post-separation parental responsibility as it results from an order: ‘we therefore consider it clear that there is a difference between parental responsibility which exists as a result of s 61c and an order for shared parental responsibility, which has the effect set out in s 65dac. in the former, the parties may still be together or may be separated. there will be no court order in effect and the parties will exercise the responsibility either independently or jointly. once the court has made an order allocating parental responsibility between two or more people, including an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the major decisions for the long-term care and welfare of children must be made jointly, unless the court otherwise provides’; family law act 1975 (n 54) s 65dac.[203] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 61da(2)(b).[204] koyroyshs & koyroyshs [2020] famca 626, [84], at which his honour harper j states that ‘if the presumption applies, an order for equal shared parental responsibility will generally be made, thus displacing s 61c and triggering consideration of the provisions of s 65daa’, and further stated his own view that trial judges should order equal shared parental responsibility when the presumption applies.[205] ibid [85].[206] family law act 1975 (n 54) s 65dac(3).[207] ibid s 65daa.[208] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [79].[209] family law (child abduction convention) regulations 1986 (n 93) r 23(1).[210] australian passports act 2005 (cth) s 11(1)(a).[211] jurss & jurss [1976] famca 20; (1976) flc 90-041, 75,184.[212] family report, march 2022 (n 2) [44].