last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wright & dannell [2022] fedcfamc2f 1743
orders
upon application made to the court by ms ross of counsel for the applicant, mr robinson of counsel for the respondent and ms goldsworthy as the independent children’s lawyer. upon noting that the proceedings were conducted in person.
upon noting that the proceedings were conducted in person.
the court orders until further order that:  during the christmas school holidays 2022/23 as follows: (i) from 4:00pm (or the conclusion of school) friday 16 december 2022 to 9:00am wednesday 21 december 2022, (ii) from 3:00pm sunday 25 december 2022 to 3:00pm monday 26 december 2022, (iii) from 4:00pm thursday to 9:00am wednesday and each alternate week thereafter following the cycle of the father’s roster, (b) as and from term 1 2023 and following the cycle of the father’s roster referred to in paragraph 4(a)(iii) herein from the conclusion of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) thursday to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day) and each alternate week thereafter, (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   from 4:00pm (or the conclusion of school) friday 16 december 2022 to 9:00am wednesday 21 december 2022, (ii) from 3:00pm sunday 25 december 2022 to 3:00pm monday 26 december 2022, (iii) from 4:00pm thursday to 9:00am wednesday and each alternate week thereafter following the cycle of the father’s roster,  ) from 3:00pm sunday 25 december 2022 to 3:00pm monday 26 december 2022, (iii) from 4:00pm thursday to 9:00am wednesday and each alternate week thereafter following the cycle of the father’s roster,  i) from 4:00pm thursday to 9:00am wednesday and each alternate week thereafter following the cycle of the father’s roster,   as and from term 1 2023 and following the cycle of the father’s roster referred to in paragraph 4(a)(iii) herein from the conclusion of school (or 4:00pm if a non-school day) thursday to the commencement of school monday (or 9:00am if a non-school day) and each alternate week thereafter, (c) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   changing the said children’s principal place of residence from the town b area, (b) changing the said children’s enrolment from the town b primary school and the town b junior primary school, (c) abusing, assaulting, denigrating, harassing or belittling the other or allowing anyone else so to do, and (d) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence of either of the said children or allowing anyone else so to do.   changing the said children’s enrolment from the town b primary school and the town b junior primary school, (c) abusing, assaulting, denigrating, harassing or belittling the other or allowing anyone else so to do, and (d) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence of either of the said children or allowing anyone else so to do.   abusing, assaulting, denigrating, harassing or belittling the other or allowing anyone else so to do, and (d) discussing these proceedings with or in the presence of either of the said children or allowing anyone else so to do.   discussing these proceedings with or in the presence of either of the said children or allowing anyone else so to do.
reasons for judgment(ex tempore reasons settled from transcript)
judge dickson:
introduction
background
documents relied upon
the father’s position
the mother’s position  during school term from after school on friday until the commencement of school on monday in each alternate week, (b) from 3:00pm on 28 december 2022 until 6:00pm on 1 january 2023 and then for four overnight periods on each alternate week with the father but with the exception of the week prior to school returning during the christmas school holiday period, and (c) such other times as agreed in writing.   from 3:00pm on 28 december 2022 until 6:00pm on 1 january 2023 and then for four overnight periods on each alternate week with the father but with the exception of the week prior to school returning during the christmas school holiday period, and (c) such other times as agreed in writing.   such other times as agreed in writing.
the independent children’s lawyer’s position  commencing friday, 16 december 2022 from the conclusion of school friday or 3:00pm of a non-school day to the commencement of school monday or 9:00am of a non-school day, (b) commencing thursday, 19 january 2023 from the conclusion of school thursday or 3:00pm of a non-school day to the commencement of school monday or 9:00am of a non-school day,   commencing thursday, 19 january 2023 from the conclusion of school thursday or 3:00pm of a non-school day to the commencement of school monday or 9:00am of a non-school day,   on a school day at the children’s school, and (b) on a non-school day at a public location in town b,   on a non-school day at a public location in town b,   making critical or derogatory remarks about the other party or any member of the other parties’ family within the presence or hearing of the child, (b) discussing these proceedings within the presence of the child, and (c) allowing any third party to do any of the above, and   discussing these proceedings within the presence of the child, and (c) allowing any third party to do any of the above, and   allowing any third party to do any of the above, and
issues in dispute
submissions
the father
the mother
the independent children’s lawyer
the legal principles
parental responsibility
best interests of the children
proposed relocation
the family assessment report dated 20 september 2022
generally, there are no concerns about either [x] or [y] with regard to their development, behaviour or engagement with school. they appear to have positive and established relationship with both parents, observations with both parents did not raise concern.
recommendations of the report writer
as it stands currently, however, purely on the basis of what impact the mother’s proposed relocation to adelaide would have on the father’s relationship with the children the consultant was of the view that if the parties were able to facilitate weekend time spending twice per term (one weekend in adelaide, one weekend in [town b]) and the children spend the maximum of school holiday time in [town b] as well as having regular facetime then the mother’s relocation with the children should be supported.   there is no magic in a family report. a judge is not bound to accept it and there should never be any suggestion that the counsellor is usurping the role of the court or that the judge is abdicating his responsibilities. in the marriage of wood [1976] famca 70, (1976) f.l.c. 90-098 at page 75,447, in the marriage of harris [1977] famca 67, (1977) 29 f.l.r. 285, 1977 f.l.c. 90-276. (b) family reports are meant to be, and almost invariably are, valuable and relevant material to assist a judge in forming his ultimate conclusions. when those views co-incide with the judgment of the court, it is not because they have been accepted automatically but because the judge has found them consistent with the rest of the body of evidence before him. (c) while the counsellor's views will normally have weight with the court because of his expertise and experience, the counsellor does not usually have the same opportunity as the trial judge to weigh the evidence, observe the demeanour of the witnesses in court under examination and cross-examination, and make findings of fact based on evidence before the court which might not have been available to the counsellor. (d) hence, the counsellor's assessment of the parties may often be based upon facts which the counsellor has accepted but which turn out to be wrong, or favourable or unfavourable views formed by the counsellor from interviewing the parties without the opportunity to test in depth the credit of persons who may in court, and under cross-examination, or in the face of evidence of other witnesses, prove to be of a different character than that which the counsellor has accepted. (e) sometimes the family report will necessarily be neutral. while the court will be assisted by a positive view, there will be many cases where the counsellor, quite properly, will conclude that the child's welfare will be equally well served, or, regrettably in some cases, equally ill served by either party. (f) whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   family reports are meant to be, and almost invariably are, valuable and relevant material to assist a judge in forming his ultimate conclusions. when those views co-incide with the judgment of the court, it is not because they have been accepted automatically but because the judge has found them consistent with the rest of the body of evidence before him. (c) while the counsellor's views will normally have weight with the court because of his expertise and experience, the counsellor does not usually have the same opportunity as the trial judge to weigh the evidence, observe the demeanour of the witnesses in court under examination and cross-examination, and make findings of fact based on evidence before the court which might not have been available to the counsellor. (d) hence, the counsellor's assessment of the parties may often be based upon facts which the counsellor has accepted but which turn out to be wrong, or favourable or unfavourable views formed by the counsellor from interviewing the parties without the opportunity to test in depth the credit of persons who may in court, and under cross-examination, or in the face of evidence of other witnesses, prove to be of a different character than that which the counsellor has accepted. (e) sometimes the family report will necessarily be neutral. while the court will be assisted by a positive view, there will be many cases where the counsellor, quite properly, will conclude that the child's welfare will be equally well served, or, regrettably in some cases, equally ill served by either party. (f) whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   while the counsellor's views will normally have weight with the court because of his expertise and experience, the counsellor does not usually have the same opportunity as the trial judge to weigh the evidence, observe the demeanour of the witnesses in court under examination and cross-examination, and make findings of fact based on evidence before the court which might not have been available to the counsellor. (d) hence, the counsellor's assessment of the parties may often be based upon facts which the counsellor has accepted but which turn out to be wrong, or favourable or unfavourable views formed by the counsellor from interviewing the parties without the opportunity to test in depth the credit of persons who may in court, and under cross-examination, or in the face of evidence of other witnesses, prove to be of a different character than that which the counsellor has accepted. (e) sometimes the family report will necessarily be neutral. while the court will be assisted by a positive view, there will be many cases where the counsellor, quite properly, will conclude that the child's welfare will be equally well served, or, regrettably in some cases, equally ill served by either party. (f) whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   hence, the counsellor's assessment of the parties may often be based upon facts which the counsellor has accepted but which turn out to be wrong, or favourable or unfavourable views formed by the counsellor from interviewing the parties without the opportunity to test in depth the credit of persons who may in court, and under cross-examination, or in the face of evidence of other witnesses, prove to be of a different character than that which the counsellor has accepted. (e) sometimes the family report will necessarily be neutral. while the court will be assisted by a positive view, there will be many cases where the counsellor, quite properly, will conclude that the child's welfare will be equally well served, or, regrettably in some cases, equally ill served by either party. (f) whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   sometimes the family report will necessarily be neutral. while the court will be assisted by a positive view, there will be many cases where the counsellor, quite properly, will conclude that the child's welfare will be equally well served, or, regrettably in some cases, equally ill served by either party. (f) whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   whether the report contains a positive recommendation, or whether it be neutral, whether the report is accepted by the judge or whether it is not, the report will still serve the court well and assist the court's investigation. a counsellor, therefore, need not be disturbed if a recommendation is not accepted because the court has had the advantage of much more material and much more examination in depth than was available to the counsellor. (g) it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   it follows that in some cases it may be desirable to question counsellors about the bases of their recommendations. indeed, there will clearly be some cases where a practitioner would be failing in his duty to his client if he did-not seek to test the recommendations of the counsellor in the light of instructions given to that practitioner. to cross-examine a counsellor is to do no more than to test an expert witness in the same way as any other expert witness may be tested or challenged. naturally, the decision to cross-examine carries with it the usual hazards involved in cross-examining any witness but more particularly an expert. (h) where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:   where there is proper reason for cross-examination, the court will be assisted and, we have no doubt, so will the counsellors. no expert should cavil at any questioning of his role or the foundations of his opinions. we consider that it is always a valuable opportunity for the counsellor himself to examine and test his own methods under critical investigation. we draw attention to an article by mrs. a. marshall, director of court counselling sydney registry - "social workers and psychologists as family court counsellors within the family court of australia". the article appears in the march 1977 edition of australian social work, volume 30 number 1 page 9- and at page 11 appears the passage:
"family law regulation 117 provides for the cross-examination of a counsellor in relation to the report. it is seen as an advantage by counsellors that they can in this way be held accountable for the report". (i) finally, and most importantly, and as a matter of public policy, no party should leave the court with a belief that justice has not been done because an opportunity to test part of the evidence has been denied. in the case of in the marriage of harris (supra) fogarty j. said (at 29 f.l.r. 289, 1977 f.l.c. at p. 76,474: "it is in my view inimical to the proper workings of the court and in particular to the proper carrying out of the functions of a welfare officer that it might be thought by practitioners or litigants that welfare officers or their reports occupy some special or privileged position before the court unchallenged or unchallengeable but yet perhaps decisive of the issue. custodial proceedings still basically fall to be determined by the court in accordance with the traditional system of determining cases. where a welfare report is delivered which contains either factual matters or matters of opinion which a party desires to challenge but is not permitted to do so that party may be pardoned for feeling that justice has not been seen to be done".  finally, and most importantly, and as a matter of public policy, no party should leave the court with a belief that justice has not been done because an opportunity to test part of the evidence has been denied. in the case of in the marriage of harris (supra) fogarty j. said (at 29 f.l.r. 289, 1977 f.l.c. at p. 76,474:
similarly, in the marriage of m (1978) 30 f.l.r. (notes) atp. 562, (1978) f.l.c. 90-249 at p. 77,182 marshall s.j., in adopting the views of fogarty j. set out above, stated:
"if the contents of such a report are not open to challenge by cross-examination the court would leave itself open to the criticism of conducting a trial 'by report' rather than on the whole of the evidence".
this court is in full agreement with the views set out above.[24]
conclusion
associate: dated: 6 december 2022
dated: 6 december 2022
[1] (2006) flc 93-286.[2] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60ca.[3] ibid s 60b.[4] ibid s 60cc(2).[5] [1998] famca 66.[6] [1997] famca 33; (1997) flc 92-755, [7.10].[7] [2007] famca 1230.[8] [2020] famcafc 297.[9] see the private family report of ms j dated 20 september 2022 at paragraph 71.[10] ibid.[11] ibid.[12] ibid.[13] ibid at paragraph 79.[14] ibid.[15] ibid at ‘recommendations’.[16] [1976] famca 70; (1976) flc 90-098.[17] [1977] famca 67; (1977) flc 90-276.[18] [1979] famca 73; (1979) flc 90-713.[19] [2006] famca 170.[20] [2009] famcafc 182.[21] [2010] famcafc 108.[22] [2010] famcafc 257.[23] [1979] famca 73; (1979) flc 90-713.[24] [1979] famca 73; (1979) flc 90-713, 11–14a.[25] ibid.[26] see the outline of case document (interim hearing) of the independent children’s lawyer filed on 30 november 2022 at page 4.[27] ibid.[28] ams & aif (1999) flc 92-852.[29] u v u [2002] hca 36.