last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
swanson & swanson [2022] fedcfamc2f 1705
orders
the court orders that:  an application in a proceeding, (b) an affidavit in support, and (c) a financial statement.   an affidavit in support, and (c) a financial statement.   a financial statement.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction
precis  x (‘x’) who is 13 years old, (b) y (‘y’) who is 10 years old, and (c) z (‘z’) who is six (6) years old.   y (‘y’) who is 10 years old, and (c) z (‘z’) who is six (6) years old.   z (‘z’) who is six (6) years old.  llectively referred to as ‘the children’).   whether the father’s application to commence parenting proceedings should be dismissed in reliance on the principle espoused in the decision of rice & asplund [1978] famca 84 (‘rice & asplund’), and (b) whether any costs order should be made.   whether any costs order should be made.   the children to live with the mother, (b) the mother to have sole parental responsibility for the children, and (c) the children to spend no time with the father.   the mother to have sole parental responsibility for the children, and (c) the children to spend no time with the father.   the children to spend no time with the father.   a significant change in circumstance had occurred because he was now out of gaol and could practically spend time with the children when at the time of the final orders, this option was not available to the court, irrespective of whether he had appeared or not, and (b) the children’s exposure to the proceedings has been extremely limited including neither their views or needs being forensically explored at the time of the final orders and now it was in their best interests that this occur because – (i) the views of x and y would carry some weight given their ages and the prospect that they are likely to recall and articulate what living with the father was like, and (ii) despite being unlikely to have any working memory of his father, z (on the mother’s evidence) is asking about his ‘dad’ and it is worth exploring whether this means that a father-son relationship should be supported.   the children’s exposure to the proceedings has been extremely limited including neither their views or needs being forensically explored at the time of the final orders and now it was in their best interests that this occur because – (i) the views of x and y would carry some weight given their ages and the prospect that they are likely to recall and articulate what living with the father was like, and (ii) despite being unlikely to have any working memory of his father, z (on the mother’s evidence) is asking about his ‘dad’ and it is worth exploring whether this means that a father-son relationship should be supported.   the views of x and y would carry some weight given their ages and the prospect that they are likely to recall and articulate what living with the father was like, and (ii) despite being unlikely to have any working memory of his father, z (on the mother’s evidence) is asking about his ‘dad’ and it is worth exploring whether this means that a father-son relationship should be supported.  ) despite being unlikely to have any working memory of his father, z (on the mother’s evidence) is asking about his ‘dad’ and it is worth exploring whether this means that a father-son relationship should be supported.   not permit the re-opening of the parenting proceedings, (b) dismiss the parenting aspect of any applications, and (c) accommodate any costs applications that may be filed as a consequence of this decision.   dismiss the parenting aspect of any applications, and (c) accommodate any costs applications that may be filed as a consequence of this decision.   accommodate any costs applications that may be filed as a consequence of this decision.
the applicable law  an alternative available to the mother, was the application of r 10.09(1)(c) or (d) of the rules, and (b) an alternative available to the father, was the application of r 10.13(1)(a) of the rules.   an alternative available to the father, was the application of r 10.13(1)(a) of the rules.
69zn principles for conducting child-related proceedings application of the principles (1) the court must give effect to the principles in this section:   in performing duties and exercising powers (whether under this division or otherwise) in relation to child-related proceedings, and (b) in making other decisions about the conduct of child-related proceedings.
failure to do so does not invalidate the proceedings or any order made in them. (2) regard is to be had to the principles in interpreting this division. principle 1 (3) the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. principle 2 (4) the second principle is that the court is to actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings. principle 3 (5) the third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will safeguard: (a) the child concerned from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence. principle 4 (6) the fourth principle is that the proceedings are, as far as possible, to be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child-focused parenting by the parties principle 5 (7) the fifth principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, and legal technicality and form, as possible   the child concerned from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence.   the parties to the proceedings against family violence.   emphasis)
the principle in rice & asplund
50. ...the change or fresh circumstance must be such that upon becoming advised of it and being satisfied of its existence, a court would be left in no doubt that it was necessary to relitigate the parenting issue in dispute between the parties. that is not to say that a court must be satisfied that the fresh or changed circumstance would result in a change to the orders. it merely indicates that the change or fresh circumstance must be such that if taken into account there is a real likelihood that a change may follow.   the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
the application for summary dismissal – rule 10.09
rule 10.09 application for summary orders (1) a party may apply for summary orders after a response has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response, that:   the court has no jurisdiction, or (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   an application under this rule must be made by filing an application in accordance with the approved form.
the court’s discretion to vary or set aside an order made in the absence of a party – rule 10.13  a reasonable explanation for the applicant’s absence at the hearing. (2) material arguments available to the applicant that might reasonably lead to the making of an order different to that sought to be set aside. (3) no prejudice to the party with the benefit of the orders.
and, in that context, the delay, if any, in bringing the application.   the circumstances around the making of the orders sought to be varied or set aside, (b) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing, and (c) the weighing of any likely changes against the potential detriment to the children caused by the litigation itself, or put another way whether any prejudice to a party can be adequately addressed by the court.   whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing, and (c) the weighing of any likely changes against the potential detriment to the children caused by the litigation itself, or put another way whether any prejudice to a party can be adequately addressed by the court.   the weighing of any likely changes against the potential detriment to the children caused by the litigation itself, or put another way whether any prejudice to a party can be adequately addressed by the court.
the evidence  the mother’s counsel sought to address my concerns, which saw various paragraphs struck out, and (b) the father read only one affidavit, not two.   the father read only one affidavit, not two.   affidavit of ms swanson, filed 9 november 2022[4] (with various redactions), (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 13 september 2022, (c) response to final orders filed 13 september 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’- outline of case document of the mother filed 23 november 2022.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 13 september 2022, (c) response to final orders filed 13 september 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’- outline of case document of the mother filed 23 november 2022.   response to final orders filed 13 september 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’- outline of case document of the mother filed 23 november 2022.   exhibit ‘m1’- outline of case document of the mother filed 23 november 2022.   amended initiating application filed 18 august 2022, (b) affidavit of mr swanson filed 31 october 2022, (c) exhibit ‘f1’ - outline of case document of the father filed 24 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’ – amended verdict and judgment record of deputy chief judge b dated 2019 made in the district court of queensland at city c in relation to the defendant, mr swanson.   affidavit of mr swanson filed 31 october 2022, (c) exhibit ‘f1’ - outline of case document of the father filed 24 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’ – amended verdict and judgment record of deputy chief judge b dated 2019 made in the district court of queensland at city c in relation to the defendant, mr swanson.   exhibit ‘f1’ - outline of case document of the father filed 24 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’ – amended verdict and judgment record of deputy chief judge b dated 2019 made in the district court of queensland at city c in relation to the defendant, mr swanson.   exhibit ‘f2’ – amended verdict and judgment record of deputy chief judge b dated 2019 made in the district court of queensland at city c in relation to the defendant, mr swanson.
the parties’ proposals
chronology  admitted to hospital for overdosing on y’s prescribed oxycodone medication (2015), (b) voluntarily admitted to an alcohol rehabilitation facility at city d (2015?), (c) supported by a health worker in caring for x and y whilst the mother was in hospital following the birth of z (2016), (d) admitted on several occasions to a region e hospital and/or mental health ward within the hospital (2017), and (e) under the care of a mental health acute care team for ptsd at the time of separation (december 2017).   voluntarily admitted to an alcohol rehabilitation facility at city d (2015?), (c) supported by a health worker in caring for x and y whilst the mother was in hospital following the birth of z (2016), (d) admitted on several occasions to a region e hospital and/or mental health ward within the hospital (2017), and (e) under the care of a mental health acute care team for ptsd at the time of separation (december 2017).   supported by a health worker in caring for x and y whilst the mother was in hospital following the birth of z (2016), (d) admitted on several occasions to a region e hospital and/or mental health ward within the hospital (2017), and (e) under the care of a mental health acute care team for ptsd at the time of separation (december 2017).   admitted on several occasions to a region e hospital and/or mental health ward within the hospital (2017), and (e) under the care of a mental health acute care team for ptsd at the time of separation (december 2017).   under the care of a mental health acute care team for ptsd at the time of separation (december 2017).   the father be of good behaviour towards the mother and the children and not commit acts of domestic violence and/or associated domestic violence and/or expose them to domestic violence, (b) the father be restrained from entering, attempting to enter or approach to within 100 metres the residence of the mother and the children or any place of education or child care where the children may be unless agreed in writing or by way of court order, (c) the father be restrained from following or remaining or approaching to within 100 metres the mother or the children wherever they may be except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order or as agreed in writing with the mother, (d) the father be restrained from contacting or attempting to contact or asking someone else to contact the mother or the children by any means whatsoever except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order, as agreed in writing with the mother or via text or email if the contact is about parental or contact issues and if about property settlement then only by email, and (e) the father be restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the mother or the children.   the father be restrained from entering, attempting to enter or approach to within 100 metres the residence of the mother and the children or any place of education or child care where the children may be unless agreed in writing or by way of court order, (c) the father be restrained from following or remaining or approaching to within 100 metres the mother or the children wherever they may be except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order or as agreed in writing with the mother, (d) the father be restrained from contacting or attempting to contact or asking someone else to contact the mother or the children by any means whatsoever except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order, as agreed in writing with the mother or via text or email if the contact is about parental or contact issues and if about property settlement then only by email, and (e) the father be restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the mother or the children.   the father be restrained from following or remaining or approaching to within 100 metres the mother or the children wherever they may be except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order or as agreed in writing with the mother, (d) the father be restrained from contacting or attempting to contact or asking someone else to contact the mother or the children by any means whatsoever except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order, as agreed in writing with the mother or via text or email if the contact is about parental or contact issues and if about property settlement then only by email, and (e) the father be restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the mother or the children.   the father be restrained from contacting or attempting to contact or asking someone else to contact the mother or the children by any means whatsoever except to appear before a court or tribunal, to attend a specified event (such as a mediation), in accordance with a court order, as agreed in writing with the mother or via text or email if the contact is about parental or contact issues and if about property settlement then only by email, and (e) the father be restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the mother or the children.   the father be restrained from locating, attempting to locate or asking someone else to locate the mother or the children.   as a result of a mental health care plan dated 28 november 2017, mr f first engaged with the mother to provide psychological intervention in order to address symptoms of moderate depression, mild anxiety and moderate stress associated with the mother being the primary carer for the father due to his significant mental health issues, (b) following what mr f describes as ms swanson’s verbal, physical and sexual assault committed by her then husband, mr f observed a significant and swift deterioration of ms swanson’s mental health.   following what mr f describes as ms swanson’s verbal, physical and sexual assault committed by her then husband, mr f observed a significant and swift deterioration of ms swanson’s mental health.   pleaded guilty to five charges of contravening a domestic violence order for acts perpetrating collectively from 14 february 2018 through to 19 february 2019 – noting that charge #3 identifies that the offence/s was/were perpetrated during a period when the father must have been on remand and the mother gives some untested evidence about the father’s actions which may have contributed to this charge[9], (b) pleaded guilty to one charge of wilful damage – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 7 january 2018, (c) pleaded guilty to one charge of stealing for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018, (d) pleaded guilty to one charge of unlawful stalking uses/threatens violence/contravenes/threatens to contravene an order/injunction for an offence perpetrated between 14 february 2018 and 7 march 2018, (e) pleaded guilty to sexual assaults – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018.   pleaded guilty to one charge of wilful damage – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 7 january 2018, (c) pleaded guilty to one charge of stealing for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018, (d) pleaded guilty to one charge of unlawful stalking uses/threatens violence/contravenes/threatens to contravene an order/injunction for an offence perpetrated between 14 february 2018 and 7 march 2018, (e) pleaded guilty to sexual assaults – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018.   pleaded guilty to one charge of stealing for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018, (d) pleaded guilty to one charge of unlawful stalking uses/threatens violence/contravenes/threatens to contravene an order/injunction for an offence perpetrated between 14 february 2018 and 7 march 2018, (e) pleaded guilty to sexual assaults – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018.   pleaded guilty to one charge of unlawful stalking uses/threatens violence/contravenes/threatens to contravene an order/injunction for an offence perpetrated between 14 february 2018 and 7 march 2018, (e) pleaded guilty to sexual assaults – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018.   pleaded guilty to sexual assaults – domestic violence offence for an offence perpetrated on 6 march 2018.   some but not all of the charges resulted in convictions, (b) some of the convictions were not punished and, (c) the majority of the convictions resulted in suspended sentences enduring over four (4) years.   some of the convictions were not punished and, (c) the majority of the convictions resulted in suspended sentences enduring over four (4) years.   the majority of the convictions resulted in suspended sentences enduring over four (4) years.
... in or around mid 2019 i was released from prison. my release from prison occurred following my plea of guilty to a set of amended facts.   the children are happy and well-adjusted and utilise school counsellors as needed, (b) the children (although i infer this is more likely to relate to x and y) still suffer from their experience with the father, (c) x has anxiety and can experience nightmares about the father. x was engaged with counselling services until 2021. x is aware of what to do if she sees the father (an escape plan) and was a witness to family violence and/or recalls her exposure to past family violence. inferentially from the mother’s evidence[12] the mother says that x has expressed a wish not to see the father and that she remains scared and fearful of the father, (d) y continues to engage with counselling and the mother observes her son to have become very protective as a result of being affected by what the mother describes as ‘the family dynamics’.[13] the mother says y has expressed a wish not to have contact with the father and that he feels worried and scared for the family if there was contact with the father. (e) z has no working memory of his father but a few months ago, he asked about his ‘dad’ and as a result, the mother has reached out to support services with a view to engaging in counselling for z.   the children (although i infer this is more likely to relate to x and y) still suffer from their experience with the father, (c) x has anxiety and can experience nightmares about the father. x was engaged with counselling services until 2021. x is aware of what to do if she sees the father (an escape plan) and was a witness to family violence and/or recalls her exposure to past family violence. inferentially from the mother’s evidence[12] the mother says that x has expressed a wish not to see the father and that she remains scared and fearful of the father, (d) y continues to engage with counselling and the mother observes her son to have become very protective as a result of being affected by what the mother describes as ‘the family dynamics’.[13] the mother says y has expressed a wish not to have contact with the father and that he feels worried and scared for the family if there was contact with the father. (e) z has no working memory of his father but a few months ago, he asked about his ‘dad’ and as a result, the mother has reached out to support services with a view to engaging in counselling for z.   x has anxiety and can experience nightmares about the father. x was engaged with counselling services until 2021. x is aware of what to do if she sees the father (an escape plan) and was a witness to family violence and/or recalls her exposure to past family violence. inferentially from the mother’s evidence[12] the mother says that x has expressed a wish not to see the father and that she remains scared and fearful of the father, (d) y continues to engage with counselling and the mother observes her son to have become very protective as a result of being affected by what the mother describes as ‘the family dynamics’.[13] the mother says y has expressed a wish not to have contact with the father and that he feels worried and scared for the family if there was contact with the father. (e) z has no working memory of his father but a few months ago, he asked about his ‘dad’ and as a result, the mother has reached out to support services with a view to engaging in counselling for z.   y continues to engage with counselling and the mother observes her son to have become very protective as a result of being affected by what the mother describes as ‘the family dynamics’.[13] the mother says y has expressed a wish not to have contact with the father and that he feels worried and scared for the family if there was contact with the father. (e) z has no working memory of his father but a few months ago, he asked about his ‘dad’ and as a result, the mother has reached out to support services with a view to engaging in counselling for z.   z has no working memory of his father but a few months ago, he asked about his ‘dad’ and as a result, the mother has reached out to support services with a view to engaging in counselling for z.
analysis – the mother’s rice & asplund application to dismiss the father’s parenting application  at the time of the making of the final orders, the date of the father’s release could not have been known and/or speculated such as to enable the court to make orders other than in the form adopted, and (b) the father’s release into the community is a factor which now materially changes the options that may be available to the court in the exercise of its discretion to make parenting orders.   the father’s release into the community is a factor which now materially changes the options that may be available to the court in the exercise of its discretion to make parenting orders.   there would be adverse effects to the children from any changes in the children’s circumstances including the likely effect on the children from separation from the mother: s 60cc(3)(d), (b) there was the potential for the mother’s parenting capacity to be severely impaired should the parenting proceedings be re-opened notwithstanding that at the present time, the father’s final parenting position is unknown and (it seems) that on an interlocutory basis, other than a s 62g child impact report, the most the father has sought is a re‑introduction process through family therapy: s 60cc(3)(f), and (c) there is no evidence to support the father having the capacity to meet the needs of the children: s 60cc(3)(f)   there was the potential for the mother’s parenting capacity to be severely impaired should the parenting proceedings be re-opened notwithstanding that at the present time, the father’s final parenting position is unknown and (it seems) that on an interlocutory basis, other than a s 62g child impact report, the most the father has sought is a re‑introduction process through family therapy: s 60cc(3)(f), and (c) there is no evidence to support the father having the capacity to meet the needs of the children: s 60cc(3)(f)   there is no evidence to support the father having the capacity to meet the needs of the children: s 60cc(3)(f)   he was charged with two counts of breach dvo and charges related to sexually assaulting the mother – all of the offences having occurred in or around march 2018, (b) he ended up pleading guilty to one count of sexual assault and one count of stalking, (c) he is stable in relation to his mental health and he maintains an appropriate level of treatment, (d) he has not been convicted of any offences since he was released.   he ended up pleading guilty to one count of sexual assault and one count of stalking, (c) he is stable in relation to his mental health and he maintains an appropriate level of treatment, (d) he has not been convicted of any offences since he was released.   he is stable in relation to his mental health and he maintains an appropriate level of treatment, (d) he has not been convicted of any offences since he was released.   he has not been convicted of any offences since he was released.
analysis – the exercise of discretion to summarily dismiss  a 10-year restraining order protecting the mother from having any contact or communication with her, and (b) a five (5) year family violence order protecting the mother and the children from him that remains in place until 20 june 2023.   a five (5) year family violence order protecting the mother and the children from him that remains in place until 20 june 2023.
analysis – the exercise of an unfettered discretion to vary or set aside an order made in the absence of a party  there was extremely limited material arguments available to the father that might reasonably lead to the making of an order different to that sought to be set aside, something i have canvassed earlier in terms of a consideration of the children’s best interests pursuant to ss 60ca and 60cc, (b) there are likely to be significant adverse impacts upon the mother and the children, firstly, because the final orders have been in place for such a long time so there arises a real concern about the impact of a change in circumstance upon them and secondly, because they are all variously specified as being persons in need of protection from the father and/or (in the mother’s case) have been the victim of criminal acts including sexual assault which causes me to find that the prejudice likely to be occasioned by them having to re-engage in a court process is not able to be adequately addressed by the court – particularly in light of the complete lack of contrition displayed by the father to-date.   there are likely to be significant adverse impacts upon the mother and the children, firstly, because the final orders have been in place for such a long time so there arises a real concern about the impact of a change in circumstance upon them and secondly, because they are all variously specified as being persons in need of protection from the father and/or (in the mother’s case) have been the victim of criminal acts including sexual assault which causes me to find that the prejudice likely to be occasioned by them having to re-engage in a court process is not able to be adequately addressed by the court – particularly in light of the complete lack of contrition displayed by the father to-date.
costs application
associate: dated: 13 december 2022
dated: 13 december 2022
[1] see rr 10.09 (1)(c) & 10.09 (1)(d)[2] richardson & colombo at [64][3] see for example, marsden & winch at [50] and richardson & colombo at [64]
[4] for convenience, references to any content within the affidavit of ms swanson shall be prefaced by the letters ‘’, followed by the numbered paragraph with the annexures identified alphanumerically. [5] see -[75] and annex d[6] see s 135 evidence act 1995 (cth)[7] see dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21, (2011) 243 clr 588 at [37][8] see makita (australia) pty ltd v sprowles [2001] nswca 305, (2001) 52 nswlr 705 at [64][9] -[70][10] -[72]
[11] see for example - sedgley and sedgley [1995] famca 154 (‘sedgley’), re andrew [1996] famca 43 (‘re andrew’) and keane & keane [2020] famca 99 at [82] – [93][12] -[84][13] -[85][14] at [17] [15] at [25][16] thomas & hogan at [24][17] section 60ca