last updated: 29 september 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
simco & cripps [2021] fedcfamc2f 717
orders
the court orders that:
pending further orders, the court orders:
the court further orders that:
expedited hearing
applications
evidence
expert evidence
undertaking as to disclosure
costs notice
subpoenas
terms of settlement
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge morley:  a case outline document filed 10 april 2021 and prepared by the mother, (2) the mother’s initiating application filed 18 august 2020, (3) the mother’s application in a case filed 26 february 2021, in which she set out the orders that she sought in relation to the threshold hearing. such orders included a raft of proposed interim parenting arrangements, which was an issue that went beyond the threshold question before the court, (4) a notice of risk filed on 18 august 2020 with the initiating application, and i note at this point that the notice of risk filed by the mother in compliance with the rules did not assert any risk. (5) her affidavit adopted by her electronically pursuant to the prevailing practice direction under the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic on 23 february 2021 and filed the next day.   the mother’s initiating application filed 18 august 2020, (3) the mother’s application in a case filed 26 february 2021, in which she set out the orders that she sought in relation to the threshold hearing. such orders included a raft of proposed interim parenting arrangements, which was an issue that went beyond the threshold question before the court, (4) a notice of risk filed on 18 august 2020 with the initiating application, and i note at this point that the notice of risk filed by the mother in compliance with the rules did not assert any risk. (5) her affidavit adopted by her electronically pursuant to the prevailing practice direction under the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic on 23 february 2021 and filed the next day.   the mother’s application in a case filed 26 february 2021, in which she set out the orders that she sought in relation to the threshold hearing. such orders included a raft of proposed interim parenting arrangements, which was an issue that went beyond the threshold question before the court, (4) a notice of risk filed on 18 august 2020 with the initiating application, and i note at this point that the notice of risk filed by the mother in compliance with the rules did not assert any risk. (5) her affidavit adopted by her electronically pursuant to the prevailing practice direction under the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic on 23 february 2021 and filed the next day.   a notice of risk filed on 18 august 2020 with the initiating application, and i note at this point that the notice of risk filed by the mother in compliance with the rules did not assert any risk. (5) her affidavit adopted by her electronically pursuant to the prevailing practice direction under the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic on 23 february 2021 and filed the next day.   her affidavit adopted by her electronically pursuant to the prevailing practice direction under the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic on 23 february 2021 and filed the next day.   his case outline document prepared on his behalf by his counsel, ms petrie. that case outline document included the orders sought by the father that i will come to shortly, and substantial written submissions made on his behalf by ms petrie. (2) his response to application for final orders filed 30 october 2020, (3) his notice of risk filed 30 october 2020, and i note at this point also that in his notice of risk filed under the former federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth), the father did not assert any risk, and (4) his affidavit affirmed by him on 15 january 2021 and filed on 18 january 2021.   his response to application for final orders filed 30 october 2020, (3) his notice of risk filed 30 october 2020, and i note at this point also that in his notice of risk filed under the former federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth), the father did not assert any risk, and (4) his affidavit affirmed by him on 15 january 2021 and filed on 18 january 2021.   his notice of risk filed 30 october 2020, and i note at this point also that in his notice of risk filed under the former federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth), the father did not assert any risk, and (4) his affidavit affirmed by him on 15 january 2021 and filed on 18 january 2021.   his affidavit affirmed by him on 15 january 2021 and filed on 18 january 2021.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for x for all major long-term issues, except issues relevant to x’s education and his name, (2) that x live with his mother, (3) that x spend time with his father (a) during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school thursday to before school monday during school terms, during each other alternate week from after school wednesday to before school thursday, (b) for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   that x live with his mother, (3) that x spend time with his father (a) during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school thursday to before school monday during school terms, during each other alternate week from after school wednesday to before school thursday, (b) for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   that x spend time with his father (a) during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school thursday to before school monday during school terms, during each other alternate week from after school wednesday to before school thursday, (b) for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   during school term time, each alternate weekend from after school thursday to before school monday during school terms, during each other alternate week from after school wednesday to before school thursday, (b) for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, (c) on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   on the weekend that includes father’s day, from after school friday to before school monday, (d) for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   for in effect half of the term 4 school holidays, alternating first half/second half year by year, (e) an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   an order that each parent be permitted to travel internationally with x during the period when x is in their care during school holidays, (f) changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   changeovers not taking place at school take place by the father collecting x from his mother’s home at the start and the mother collecting x from the father’s home at the end of his time with his father, (g) that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   that if the father’s time with x coincides with the mother’s day weekend, that period of time be suspended, (h) what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   what is known as a non-denigration order, extending to removing x from the presence of any other person denigrating the other parent, members of the other parent’s family or household, and (i) an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   an order that the mother notify the father in writing within a timely period of any decision made by her pursuant to the order granting her sole parental responsibility for issues other than education and his name.   that she have sole parental responsibility for x for all major long-term issues except his name, therefore seeking to add education to her role of having sole parental responsibility for x. (2) a continuance of the order that x live with his mother, (3) a variance to the time that x would spend with his father in consequence of relocation of x’s place of residence from canberra to sydney, such that it would be: (a) each alternate weekend during school term time, being once every four weeks in canberra from 7 pm friday until 4 pm sunday, with the mother to do all of the transport, and then (b) once every alternate four weeks, it would be after school thursday to before school monday, occurring in sydney with the father collecting x from school and delivering him to school. (c) she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”. (4) she did not seek any interim orders.   a continuance of the order that x live with his mother, (3) a variance to the time that x would spend with his father in consequence of relocation of x’s place of residence from canberra to sydney, such that it would be: (a) each alternate weekend during school term time, being once every four weeks in canberra from 7 pm friday until 4 pm sunday, with the mother to do all of the transport, and then (b) once every alternate four weeks, it would be after school thursday to before school monday, occurring in sydney with the father collecting x from school and delivering him to school. (c) she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”. (4) she did not seek any interim orders.   a variance to the time that x would spend with his father in consequence of relocation of x’s place of residence from canberra to sydney, such that it would be: (a) each alternate weekend during school term time, being once every four weeks in canberra from 7 pm friday until 4 pm sunday, with the mother to do all of the transport, and then (b) once every alternate four weeks, it would be after school thursday to before school monday, occurring in sydney with the father collecting x from school and delivering him to school. (c) she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”. (4) she did not seek any interim orders.   each alternate weekend during school term time, being once every four weeks in canberra from 7 pm friday until 4 pm sunday, with the mother to do all of the transport, and then (b) once every alternate four weeks, it would be after school thursday to before school monday, occurring in sydney with the father collecting x from school and delivering him to school. (c) she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”.   once every alternate four weeks, it would be after school thursday to before school monday, occurring in sydney with the father collecting x from school and delivering him to school. (c) she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”.   she sought that the father have two-thirds of school holidays “(or half if the father preferred)”.   she did not seek any interim orders.   has a strong, meaningful relationship with his father.   has continued to attend school as provided for in the orders, and in all the circumstances, the only change in circumstances has been that unilaterally made by [ms simco].
i am not sure that he does in fact suffer from adhd.
and:
i do not like him being on ritalin.
nevertheless, the father has acted in accordance with medical advice and in accordance with the prescribed medication. he says that the mother has not given him information about the doctors x has attended or the diagnosis or medication. nevertheless, he seems to have been compliant with what is required.  ] as to the test itself, the rule in rice & asplund is not a statutory provision to be construed according to its terms, but it is rather a general principle of law, first identified in rice & asplund itself, and subsequently discussed and explained in many cases, some of which have been mentioned above. the nature of that discussion varies in response to the particular facts and submissions before the court in each case. it is an error, therefore, to identify the particular words taken from just one of those cases and to treat that statement as if it was indeed a statutory requirement. [57] in elmi & munro [2019] famcafc 138, [2019] flc 93-912, and as has been said many times:
38. the essence of the issue to be determined is whether there has been a material change in circumstances which indicate that it would be in the best interests of the child for there to be a reconsideration of the parenting orders.  ] more importantly, i consider any differences between the two phrases as semantic and not substantial. as the authorities make clear, the essential point in the application of the rule in rice and asplund is the balancing of the new circumstances against the undesirability of further litigation involving the child. the nature of that exercise will depend very much upon the nature of the changes relied upon. obviously enough, if there are no changes or if the changes are insignificant or unsubstantial, there will be little to justify reconsideration of the earlier orders. [20] the starting point is rice and asplund itself, where evatt cj said at 78,905-78,906:
the principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for and the material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation for change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that, to quote barber j., there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material (passage quoted in hayman and hayman (supra), at p. 75,680). these are not necessarily matters for a preliminary submission, but they are matters that the judge should consider in his reasons for decision. it is a question of finding that there are circumstances which require the court to consider afresh how the welfare of the child should best be served. these principles apply whether the original order is made by consent or after a contested hearing. the way they apply and the factors which will justify the court in reviewing a custody order will vary from case to case.  ] in the oft quoted case of sps and pls (2008) flc 93-363, warnick j said:  ] thus, in my view when the threshold question described in rice and asplund is determined as a preliminary matter, it remains a determination “on the merits”. where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on a hearing. though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue. ... [83] accordingly, the rule may not impede hearing an application for a small alteration, which may require only a short and narrow enquiry, but may properly prevent a hearing in respect of more far-reaching changes. [84] although i do not suggest that, when judgments of the court in which the rule is discussed are read in full, the rule is in any case inaccurately or even insufficiently expressed, sometimes “shorthand” descriptions of the rule are used and are then taken up by others in later cases. some phrases used seem to better direct attention to the essential question than others. for example, the phrase used by nygh j in mcenearney (supra), that a court should discourage a parent from coming back to court where there “is really no startling new circumstance” focuses attention on the character of the circumstance itself. similarly, terms such as “a substantial change in circumstance since the making of an existing order”, as used by the full court in d and y (supra), may tend to focus attention on the character of a particular event or events. the essential question however is as to the sufficiency of new events to provoke a new enquiry. the answer to this question involves putting events in the context of the broader circumstances pertaining to arrangements for a child and measuring the significance of the events against the significance of the steps that might follow in light of them. (emphasis added)  ] these authorities make clear that a change in circumstances is not itself the answer to the question as to whether the earlier parenting orders should be reconsidered, but that those new matters, in all of the circumstances, must be sufficient to justify or to provide for such a hearing. [23] in marsden v winch [2009] famcafc 152, (2009) 42 fam lr 1, consistently with the above authorities, the full court said:  ] nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at:  the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation. ] as the respondent points out, although the above cases refer to a significant change in circumstances, other cases describe it differently. in d and y [1995] famca 146, (1995) flc 92-581 (“d and y”) and bennett and bennett [1990] famca 148, (1991) flc 92-191 (“bennett”), the full court referred to a “substantial” change in circumstances. it is clear from the reasons in those matters that the court did not intend to impose a test that differed from that in rice and asplund itself. indeed, in d and y at 81,764, the court posed the ultimate conclusion as to whether there had been a sufficient change of circumstances to justify the reopening of the issue of custody. [25] the approach of the primary judge was therefore fully in accord with well-established principles, although her honour would not have erred if she had in fact used the word “substantial”. i consider that her honour did not look at the nature of the asserted changes of circumstances alone. rather, her honour was at pains to weigh those changes against the disadvantage to the child of being involved in further litigation. in my opinion, this ground of appeal has not been made out.
law in relation to rice & asplund [16] the evidence of the father had to be accepted at its highest, and as warnick j said in sps and pls (2008) flc 93-363 (“sps and pls”) at [81] and [84], the essential question to be asked is, assuming the evidence of the father is accepted, are the “new events” sufficient to provoke a new enquiry (see also miller & harrington [2008] famcafc 150, (2008) flc 93-383 at [105], noting that an alternative formulation of the question has been propounded by the full court in marsden v winch [2009] famcafc 152, (2009) 42 fam lr 1 at [58] with the emphasis on the establishment of a prima facie case of change of circumstances). [17] as indicated, the father submits that the changes to the orders he proposes are not radical and consequently the changes which he relies upon to justify a reopening of the litigation need not be substantial. [18] in sps and pls, warnick j said at [48(v)] and [82]–[83]:  ] ... the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. ... [82] this proposition lay behind what evatt cj said in in the marriage of zabaneh [1986] famca 18, (1986) flc 91-766 at 75,587 (fogarty and renaud jj agreeing):
the welfare of children may ultimately demand that issues concerning access, custody and so forth, and so on, be reconsidered, but only when there is some evidence of an underlying change in the circumstances, whether that be in the attitudes of the parties, or the needs or circumstances of the children. the fact that time has elapsed or a considerable time, may be relevant, but it is not the only factor to take into account. different issues arise in relation to reinstatement of access. the issues involved in reconsidering access relate much more directly to the children and their needs, their own attitudes and wishes. time may play a part in this. this court would not wish to subject children to the repeated intervention of court proceedings to the extent that they have to be reassessed every few months, or every year, by court counsellors to see if they maintain the same attitudes. that certainly could not be encouraged, but there may come a time when there are such changes in the attitudes of the parties, or such evidence relating to the children and their needs and attitudes towards their parents, that it would be reasonable to reconsider access. ] accordingly, the rule may not impede hearing an application for a small alteration, which may require only a short and narrow enquiry, but may properly prevent a hearing in respect of more far-reaching changes.  ] in our view, the rice & asplund test applies to all applications which seek to revisit parenting orders. sometimes the test will be easily satisfied even though the issues to reconsider are major ones and sometimes the test will be easily satisfied even though the issues to be revisited are relatively minor in character. in both situations, the overarching test is to be applied, namely, (having regard to the best interests of the child) new events or changed circumstances have to be sufficient to provoke a new inquiry. [20] it is also useful when considering, as a preliminary matter, what issues a parent might be permitted to re-litigate, to remember that under s 69zq(1)(a) of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”), there is a mandatory requirement to decide which of these issues in the proceedings require full investigation and hearing. [21] the rule in rice & asplund involves the exercise of discretion and not merely a process of making factual findings. that is because the “rule” is a manifestation of the best interests principle. all s 60cc(2) and (3) matters, so far as they are relevant, must be considered, to the extent that they can be, based on the material before the court. the rule focuses particularly on s 60cc(3)(l) and the preference to make final orders in parenting matters that are least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child. axiomatically that is because unless other considerations are more weighty, it is not in the best interests of a child for that child to be the subject of repeated litigation between his/her parents. there is a focus in an application of this kind upon the change(s) in circumstances that outweigh the negative impact of reopening litigation. although when considering the preliminary issue, if cross-examination is not permitted, then the evidence of the father is to be taken at its highest, and it is not only the father’s evidence that is considered.
the father submits that the mother’s proposed location with the child to sydney is unrealistic and not child-focused. it will require a significant change in circumstances for the child, based entirely on the mother seeking employment in sydney that is otherwise available to her in canberra, and in circumstances where the current spend time with regime has only been in place for just over 12 months.
associate: dated: 15 august 2022
dated: 15 august 2022