last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
farouq & ismat (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1712
orders
the court finds that:-   contravened order 2(b) made 16 april 2021 at 5:00pm on 16 april 2022, and (b) contravened order 6 made on 10 november 2020 at 5:00pm on 8 january 2022.   contravened order 6 made on 10 november 2020 at 5:00pm on 8 january 2022.
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch:
introduction
background  by consent, that for the purpose of facilitating the father’s time with the child the child shall be delivered to the father’s residence at the commencement of his time with the child by such person as the mother may nominate, and the father’s nominee, but not the father himself, shall deliver the child to [k street, suburb l] at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, and in this regard, the father or his nominee must ensure that a safety car seat is installed in the vehicle and that the child is properly restrained whilst the child is in the car. (6) pending further order, the applicant and/or his agents are restrained by injunction from: (a) assaulting, harassing, intimidating or interfering in any manner with the respondent, (b) approaching or attending within 500m of the respondent’s residence, including but not limited to the rm’s home, being [k street, suburb l], (c) sending any third party, including but not limited to any private investigator, and/or surveillance service, or taking any other step personally or via an agent to follow the respondent or any member of the respondent’s family for the purposes of discovering her place of residence. (7) the court notes that order 6 is made for the personal protection of the respondent.   assaulting, harassing, intimidating or interfering in any manner with the respondent, (b) approaching or attending within 500m of the respondent’s residence, including but not limited to the rm’s home, being [k street, suburb l], (c) sending any third party, including but not limited to any private investigator, and/or surveillance service, or taking any other step personally or via an agent to follow the respondent or any member of the respondent’s family for the purposes of discovering her place of residence.   approaching or attending within 500m of the respondent’s residence, including but not limited to the rm’s home, being [k street, suburb l], (c) sending any third party, including but not limited to any private investigator, and/or surveillance service, or taking any other step personally or via an agent to follow the respondent or any member of the respondent’s family for the purposes of discovering her place of residence.   sending any third party, including but not limited to any private investigator, and/or surveillance service, or taking any other step personally or via an agent to follow the respondent or any member of the respondent’s family for the purposes of discovering her place of residence.   that the father spend time with the child as follows:   each wednesday from 4.00pm to 6.00pm. (b) in week one: each saturday from 9.00am to 5.00pm. (c) in week two: each sunday from 9.00am to 5.00pm. (d) during the month of ramadan: (e) that the time referred to in order 2 a be extended to 7.30pm commencing 16 april 2021 and concludes at the end of ramadan.   that the time referred to in order 2 a be extended to 7.30pm commencing 16 april 2021 and concludes at the end of ramadan.   that pending further order, the mother is restrained from doing any act or thing to cause or facilitate the child [x] born in 2018 coming within 500 metres of [mr b] born [in] 1980.
the charges
charge one
charge two:
charge three:
the law   a parenting order is: (a) an order under this part (including an order until further order) dealing with a matter mentioned in subsection (2), or (b) an order under this part discharging, varying, suspending or reviving an order, or part of an order, described in paragraph (a). however, a declaration or order under subdivision e of division 12 is not a parenting order. (2) a parenting order may deal with one or more of the following:   an order under this part (including an order until further order) dealing with a matter mentioned in subsection (2), or (b) an order under this part discharging, varying, suspending or reviving an order, or part of an order, described in paragraph (a).   an order under this part discharging, varying, suspending or reviving an order, or part of an order, described in paragraph (a).   the person or persons with whom a child is to live, (b) the time a child is to spend with another person or other persons, (c) the allocation of parental responsibility for a child, (d) if 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child--the form of consultations those persons are to have with one another about decisions to be made in the exercise of that responsibility, (e) the communication a child is to have with another person or other persons, (f) maintenance of a child, (g) the steps to be taken before an application is made to a court for a variation of the order to take account of the changing needs or circumstances of: (h) a child to whom the order relates, or (i) the parties to the proceedings in which the order is made, (j) the process to be used for resolving disputes about the terms or operation of the order, (k) any aspect of the care, welfare or development of the child or any other aspect of parental responsibility for a child.   if 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child--the form of consultations those persons are to have with one another about decisions to be made in the exercise of that responsibility, (e) the communication a child is to have with another person or other persons,   the communication a child is to have with another person or other persons,   the steps to be taken before an application is made to a court for a variation of the order to take account of the changing needs or circumstances of:   the process to be used for resolving disputes about the terms or operation of the order, (k) any aspect of the care, welfare or development of the child or any other aspect of parental responsibility for a child.   any aspect of the care, welfare or development of the child or any other aspect of parental responsibility for a child.
a person is taken for the purposes of this division to have contravened an order under this act affecting children if, and only if: (a) where the person is bound by the order—he or she has:   intentionally failed to comply with the order, or (ii) made no reasonable attempt to comply with the order, or   otherwise—he or she has:   intentionally prevented compliance with the order by a person who is bound by it, or (ii) aided or abetted a contravention of the order by a person who is bound by it.   a parenting order, or (b) an injunction granted by the court,   under section 68b, or (ii) under section 114 in so far as the injunction is for the protection of a child, ...  ) under section 114 in so far as the injunction is for the protection of a child,
it is readily apparent that the court must determine “reasonable excuse” objectively and disregard the alleged contravener’s own motives or rationale. there must be a determination of reasonable excuse based on belief on reasonable grounds.
charge one
the maternal grandmother’s evidence
the mother’s evidence
the father’s evidence
given the extent of contact the mother had with me in previous days including my attendance’s at the [k street, suburb l] property and her attendances upon my home, i didn’t see it unreasonable or a threat taking the short route to my friend’s home being via [k street, suburb l] .[4]
findings
charge two
ramadan is a very important time for our family and the first day when our family comes together to celebrate the breaking of the fast. [x] was enjoying his time with his family...i broke my fast at 6:30 pm and then arranged for [x] to be delivered back to the mother.
charge three
on this day, the family was invited to my brother’s home to break the fast. [x] has not seen his cousins for a very long time.
penalty
associate: dated: 13 december 2022
dated: 13 december 2022
[1] mother’s costs notice filed 10 november 2022. [2] father’s costs notice filed 30 august 2022. [3] affidavit of ms ismat filed 13 may 2022, paragraph 62 to 64. [4] affidavit of mr farouq filed 13 september 2022, paragraph 31.