last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kaufman & cain [2022] fedcfamc2f 1699
orders
the court orders that:  the mother is to inform the father in writing of any significant decisions with respect to the child’s health, welfare and development, and seek the father’s input, prior to the mother making such decisions for the child, (b) that the mother is to keep the father updated as to significant events pertaining to the health, welfare, education and development of the child, including progress at school and any medical and allied health appointments.   that the mother is to keep the father updated as to significant events pertaining to the health, welfare, education and development of the child, including progress at school and any medical and allied health appointments.   for four (4) hours each alternate sunday, at such times as agreed, and failing agreement between 12.00pm and 4.00pm, (b) on father’s day each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm provided that the father’s time be suspended on mother’s day each year, (c) on christmas day each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (d) on easter sunday each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (e) on the child’s birthday, if on a weekend, from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (f) at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on father’s day each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm provided that the father’s time be suspended on mother’s day each year, (c) on christmas day each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (d) on easter sunday each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (e) on the child’s birthday, if on a weekend, from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (f) at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on christmas day each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (d) on easter sunday each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (e) on the child’s birthday, if on a weekend, from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (f) at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on easter sunday each year from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (e) on the child’s birthday, if on a weekend, from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (f) at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   on the child’s birthday, if on a weekend, from 12.00pm to 4.00pm, (f) at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at other such and further times as agreed between the parties in writing.   bringing the child into contact with d, (b) attending at the mother’s home or any place she may work.   attending at the mother’s home or any place she may work.   denigrating the other party, the other party’s partner or the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the child or allowing anyone else to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) posting about these proceedings or the other party on any social media platform whatsoever, (d) physically disciplining the child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (e) exposing the child to family violence, (f) consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   discussing these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the child or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) posting about these proceedings or the other party on any social media platform whatsoever, (d) physically disciplining the child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (e) exposing the child to family violence, (f) consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   posting about these proceedings or the other party on any social media platform whatsoever, (d) physically disciplining the child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (e) exposing the child to family violence, (f) consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   physically disciplining the child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (e) exposing the child to family violence, (f) consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   exposing the child to family violence, (f) consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   consuming alcohol to excess while the child is in their care or for a period of 24 hours prior to the child coming into their care, (g) approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   approaching the other party outside of any handovers as provided for in these orders, (h) leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   leaving the child unsupervised without the presence of another responsible adult person.   in the case of interstate travel notice prior to such travel, and (b) in the case of overseas travel at least 30 days prior notice.   in the case of overseas travel at least 30 days prior notice.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
orders made pursuant to section 102na
mandatory protections for parties in certain cases (1) if, in proceedings under this act: (a) a party (the examining party ) intends to cross-examine another party (the witness party ), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   a party (the examining party ) intends to cross-examine another party (the witness party ), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and   any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,   either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  ) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  i) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,  ) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross-examination,
then the requirements of subsection (2) apply to the cross-examination. (2) both of the following requirements apply to the cross-examination: (a) the examining party must not cross-examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   the examining party must not cross-examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   the cross-examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.
documents relied upon   her amended initiating application filed 4 may 2022, (b) her trial affidavit filed 4 may 2022, (c) the family assessment report prepared by ms r (“ms r”), dated 1 february 2022 (“the family report”).   her trial affidavit filed 4 may 2022, (c) the family assessment report prepared by ms r (“ms r”), dated 1 february 2022 (“the family report”).   the family assessment report prepared by ms r (“ms r”), dated 1 february 2022 (“the family report”).   his response to the initiating application filed 2 june 2021, (b) his affidavit filed 6 june 2021.   his affidavit filed 6 june 2021.   the family report, (b) the child inclusive memorandum of family consultant ms s filed 9 june 2021 (“the cic”).   the child inclusive memorandum of family consultant ms s filed 9 june 2021 (“the cic”).
the evidence
the parties
the father was a poor historian and appeared easily irritated by the consultant's questions and the consultant, at times, experienced the father as belligerent. most of the father's answers were monosyllabic. he explained that he has "brain fog" because of his medical condition and subsequent medication he was required to take.
witnesses are supposed to answer questions put by counsel responsively: they are supposed to give a full answer, but no more. it is one thing to say that a witness was not asked the right questions. it is another thing to say that a witness did not answer the questions that were asked. and it is an even more serious thing to say that a witness was “reluctant” to answer. the duty of a witness is to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so far as the questions asked seek it. the duty of a witness to answer questions responsively involves not only a negative duty (not to volunteer material for which the question does not call), but also a positive duty (to proffer all material within the witness’s knowledge for which the question does call)...
ms r
the law   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the children, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm and from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of the children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm and from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of the children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of the children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of the children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
...protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child.
equal shared parental responsibility
the primary considerations   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
...should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...
...what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
that was subsequently endorsed by the full court in mccall & clark.
protection from harm
12 april 2018:
21 june 2018:
22 june 2018:
6 august 2018:
17 august 2018:
23 august 2018:
28 august 2018:
21 march 2019:
15 april 2019:
1 may 2019:
28 may 2019:
27 march 2020:
7 may 2020:
28 april 2021:
5 may 2021:   kaufman] disputed concerns regarding [d], indicating that [d] and [x]’s interactions are “pretty normal sibling stuff” and mutual “horse play”. he laughed in relation to [ms cain]’s reports of [x] being fearful of [d] telling him to lie under the car.
he attribute the dispute to “the mother”, indicating that she has failed to follow court orders regarding time-spending. he seemed to feel that the court should “deal with” [ms cain] “in an appropriate manner”, in relation to contravening court orders, seeming to believe the court should be aware of this occurring, without him filing a contravention application. he also presented as dismissive of concerns reported by [ms cain], and with a negative view of dcp and sapol. (as per the original)
the father says that there is no basis to her [the mother’s] allegations that the child is at risk of harm in his care. he said that the only risk to the child is of him "having a good time". in regard to the allegations about [d] being a risk to the child, the father was of the view that [d] poses a minimal risk to the child. he said that [d] would not intentionally hurt the child and that incidents occur when the children's play escalates.   he is very busy, (b) he does not think his anger is a problem, (c) he believes the only reason his time is not occurring is due to the mother not following the orders, and (d) he believes the mother has blocked him from time out of spite and has embellished the family violence.   he does not think his anger is a problem, (c) he believes the only reason his time is not occurring is due to the mother not following the orders, and (d) he believes the mother has blocked him from time out of spite and has embellished the family violence.   he believes the only reason his time is not occurring is due to the mother not following the orders, and (d) he believes the mother has blocked him from time out of spite and has embellished the family violence.   he believes the mother has blocked him from time out of spite and has embellished the family violence.   cain] presented as cooperative, child-focussed and protective of [x]. her presentation and affect was consistent with her affidavit material, and she presented with what appeared to be genuine concern for [x]’s wellbeing whilst in [mr kaufman]’s care. she attributed the dispute to [x] “getting hurt” when he spends time at [mr kaufman]’s [mr kaufman]’s home, and indicated that the concerns are primarily in relation to [d].
the additional considerations
any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
the nature of the child’s relationship with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives
it was clear that the child delighted in his interactions with the mother. he was loving and affectionate with his mother, picking her hand up to pat him and cuddling into her.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, to spend time and to communicate with the child
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the child spending time with and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs
the father was not able to articulate the child's developmental needs and his unique needs. there was limited insight demonstrated in the father's answers. he minimised the child's experience of his older half-brother, [d], and he minimised the conflict between his partner and [d] (insinuating that his partner had made the incident seem worse than it was).
the mother presented appropriately. she engaged with the consultant in a detached, clinical manner. the content of her conversation indicated a sophisticated knowledge about parenting children, strategies for managing children who struggle with learning needs, and children who have difficulty emotionally regulating. the mother describes the child with a richness which indicates that she has an in-depth knowledge of the child and his developmental history. she says that the child behaves differently at home and does not have the same behaviour which he exhibits at the school. it appears that the mother attributes this to the strategies which she employs with the child.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child
the attitude to the child, and to the responsibility of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
discussion
the father's apparent compromised parenting template combined with the child's hair trigger propensity to become emotionally dysregulated, the father minimising the child protection concerns results in the consultant's opinion that there is unacceptable risk for the child to spend unsupervised time in the father's care.
...would minimise the potential risk to the child. the longer a child spends in the care of a parent who has a compromised parenting template, the greater the risk of the child being harmed. furthermore, given the father's lack of energy, short blocks of time spending between the father and the child has the potential to positively promote a relationship, particularly as the father has a history of struggling to manage his own emotional regulation in the context of stress.
because the child has been noted to have difficulty with his emotional regulation, and struggles with lack of routine and structure, combined with his apd means that the child needs a parent who is emotionally available, has the energy to be mindful, the ability to predict cues, can create a predictable environment, is able to provide a high level of supervision, and is able to manage the child's behaviour with patience, particularly when the child becomes dysregulated. however, the father describes struggling with his energy levels and time, which is not conducive to the type of parenting and supervision that the child requires at this time. furthermore, irrespective of the child protections concerns, the description of the family dynamic at the father's home is one of instability. there have been frequent changes to the members of the household, with the child's half sibling returning six months ago. furthermore, maintaining consistency and predictability in a household where there is more than one child with special needs is very difficult.
the father has reportedly reduced his alcohol intake, which the father, and his parents, have identified as historically being strongly correlated to the child protection notifications and police involvement. further to this, the child's older half sibling, [d], who was identified as being violent towards other family members and a significant stressor to the father and his partner, is no longer residing with the father. whilst this may have reduced the risk to the child, the consultant is concerned that the risk of harm to the child remains. particularly as the father and the family has not engaged in therapeutic intervention to address the high level of conflict.
it is clear that the child has identified his half sibling, [d], as a source of anxiety. to reintroduce [d] to the child without it being therapeutically recommended would be potentially detrimental to the child.
associate: dated: 14 december 2022
dated: 14 december 2022