last updated: 28 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia  ision 2)
gainor & nance [2022] fedcfamc2f 1719
orders
the court orders that:
undefended/default judgment
final parenting orders  the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense the result of a hair follicle drug screen test and the test result indicates the father has not used any illicit substances, (b) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense the results of a carbohydrate deficient transferrin (‘cdt’) test and such test result along with any explanation from a medical practitioner with qualifications to assess the cdt test result indicates that the father is not chronically or excessively consuming alcohol, (c) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense evidence from his treating psychologist as to his regular attendance on the psychologist or alternatively, evidence from his treating psychologist that it is no longer necessary for him to receive treatment from the psychologist, and (d) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense following 12 consecutive fortnightly supervised visits, a written report from the family contact service confirming that the service has not identified any safety, welfare or other concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during supervised sessions.   the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense the results of a carbohydrate deficient transferrin (‘cdt’) test and such test result along with any explanation from a medical practitioner with qualifications to assess the cdt test result indicates that the father is not chronically or excessively consuming alcohol, (c) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense evidence from his treating psychologist as to his regular attendance on the psychologist or alternatively, evidence from his treating psychologist that it is no longer necessary for him to receive treatment from the psychologist, and (d) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense following 12 consecutive fortnightly supervised visits, a written report from the family contact service confirming that the service has not identified any safety, welfare or other concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during supervised sessions.   the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense evidence from his treating psychologist as to his regular attendance on the psychologist or alternatively, evidence from his treating psychologist that it is no longer necessary for him to receive treatment from the psychologist, and (d) the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense following 12 consecutive fortnightly supervised visits, a written report from the family contact service confirming that the service has not identified any safety, welfare or other concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during supervised sessions.   the respondent father provides to the applicant mother at his expense following 12 consecutive fortnightly supervised visits, a written report from the family contact service confirming that the service has not identified any safety, welfare or other concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during supervised sessions.   the respondent father is required to maintain his head hair at a length of not less than four (4) centimetres, neither head hair nor body hair is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) the respondent father is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results, (c) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (d) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (e) the respondent father is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders.   the respondent father is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising awdts or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results, (c) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (d) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (e) the respondent father is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders.   the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required, (d) awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (e) the respondent father is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders.   awdts is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body, awdts’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with international society of hair testing (soht) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available, and (e) the respondent father is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders.   the respondent father is at liberty to provide awdts with a copy of these orders.   in week 1, on saturday from 9.00am to 6.00pm, and (b) in week 2, on wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm on a non-school day) until 8.00pm.   in week 2, on wednesday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm on a non-school day) until 8.00pm.   between 5.00pm and 6.00pm on mondays provided the children are not engaged in extracurricular activities during this time, (b) between 5.00pm and 6.00pm on thursdays provided the children are not engaged in extracurricular activities during this time, (c) in the event the children are not able to participate in the weekly communication with the respondent father provided for in these orders, the applicant mother notify the respondent father in writing and propose an alternative day/time for the communication to occur.   between 5.00pm and 6.00pm on thursdays provided the children are not engaged in extracurricular activities during this time, (c) in the event the children are not able to participate in the weekly communication with the respondent father provided for in these orders, the applicant mother notify the respondent father in writing and propose an alternative day/time for the communication to occur.   in the event the children are not able to participate in the weekly communication with the respondent father provided for in these orders, the applicant mother notify the respondent father in writing and propose an alternative day/time for the communication to occur.
the court declares that:  that it is not practicable to obtain the consent of the respondent father to enable the children of the relationship x, born in 2011, and y, born in 2013 to obtain an australian passport to travel internationally, the court makes the following orders:   both parties shall ensure that they provide the other party with their up to date email and contact details, and (b) such communication shall be solely in relation to time arrangements or the health, welfare and development of the children.   such communication shall be solely in relation to time arrangements or the health, welfare and development of the children.   denigrating, insulting, rebuking or otherwise speaking negatively about the other party, a partner of the other party, members of the other party’s family, or their household, to or in the presence or hearing of the children, or allowing any other person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings in the presence of the children or allowing another person to do so, and (c) posting any content on any form of social media (whether on private settings or not) concerning the other party to these proceedings or family law matters in general.   discussing these proceedings in the presence of the children or allowing another person to do so, and (c) posting any content on any form of social media (whether on private settings or not) concerning the other party to these proceedings or family law matters in general.   posting any content on any form of social media (whether on private settings or not) concerning the other party to these proceedings or family law matters in general.
property orders
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
background
... upon the later of the parties receiving and exchanging the respondent father’s hair follicle drug screen test results, both parties’ carbohydrate-deficient transferrin test results and psychological assessment reports by the single expert psychologist appointed by the parties, the parties attend to the following: (a) the applicant mother is to provide to the respondent father a final draft of proposed parenting orders, (b) the respondent father is to respond to that final draft indicating where he agrees or disagrees and any further orders he proposes, and   the applicant mother is to provide to the respondent father a final draft of proposed parenting orders, (b) the respondent father is to respond to that final draft indicating where he agrees or disagrees and any further orders he proposes, and   the respondent father is to respond to that final draft indicating where he agrees or disagrees and any further orders he proposes, and   the parties be at liberty to apply for further directions of the court.
... 12. the children live with the applicant mother. unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the children spend time with the respondent father on one (1) occasion each week for two (2) hours’ duration (or such other times as agreed between the parties and the family contact service) professionally supervised by [ms b], or her delegate, of the family contact service, at the shared expense of the parties, with each of the parties at liberty to request a report from the family contact service. unless otherwise agreed in writing, the costs charged by the supervised contact service from the date of separation until the date of final hearing be paid by the respondent father in the first instance and reimbursed to the respondent father, upon production of corresponding receipts, from the protected monies held by the parties following the sale of real property as provided for further in these orders. unless otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the children commence spending weekly unsupervised time with the respondent father when the later of the following occurs: (a) the respondent father’s hair follicle drug screen test is returned and provided it does not indicate illicit drug use, and (b) the respondent father’s cdt test returns results that do not indicate the chronic or excessive consumption of alcohol, and (c) the representative(s) of the family contact service supervising the children’s time with the respondent father do not identify any welfare, safety or other protective concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during future sessions. ...   the respondent father’s hair follicle drug screen test is returned and provided it does not indicate illicit drug use, and (b) the respondent father’s cdt test returns results that do not indicate the chronic or excessive consumption of alcohol, and (c) the representative(s) of the family contact service supervising the children’s time with the respondent father do not identify any welfare, safety or other protective concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during future sessions.   the respondent father’s cdt test returns results that do not indicate the chronic or excessive consumption of alcohol, and (c) the representative(s) of the family contact service supervising the children’s time with the respondent father do not identify any welfare, safety or other protective concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during future sessions.   the representative(s) of the family contact service supervising the children’s time with the respondent father do not identify any welfare, safety or other protective concerns in relation to the children in the respondent father’s care during future sessions.
... within 7 days of the date of this order the respondent father file a notice of address for service. by 4.00pm on 15 august 2022 the respondent father file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with the orders of 22 october 2021 (‘october orders’) including: (a) compliance with order 5 of the october orders relating to his enrolment in the tuning into kids program, (b) compliance with order 7 of the october orders relating to his completion of a hair follicle test, (c) compliance with order 8 of the october orders relating to his undertaking for a carbohydrate-deficient transferring test (d) his regular attendance upon his treating psychologist and that he confirm the name of his treating psychologist and the frequency of his attendances. order 1 of the orders made by judge a kelly on 22 october 2021 be discharged. the applicant mother have leave to file a fully particularised further amended initiating application setting out the final orders that she seeks by 4.00pm on 15 august 2022 any application in a proceeding by the mother in relation to interim property or financial issues must be filed and served by 15 august 2022 and accompanied by an affidavit in support. the applicant mother serve a copy of these orders on the father at his email address, and by message to his mobile phone number. the matter be adjourned to 25 august 2022 at 10.00am for mention before judge blake at the federal circuit and family court of australia in melbourne (‘the adjourned date’). 9. the respondent father must personally attend court on the adjourned date. ...   compliance with order 5 of the october orders relating to his enrolment in the tuning into kids program, (b) compliance with order 7 of the october orders relating to his completion of a hair follicle test, (c) compliance with order 8 of the october orders relating to his undertaking for a carbohydrate-deficient transferring test (d) his regular attendance upon his treating psychologist and that he confirm the name of his treating psychologist and the frequency of his attendances.   compliance with order 7 of the october orders relating to his completion of a hair follicle test, (c) compliance with order 8 of the october orders relating to his undertaking for a carbohydrate-deficient transferring test (d) his regular attendance upon his treating psychologist and that he confirm the name of his treating psychologist and the frequency of his attendances.   compliance with order 8 of the october orders relating to his undertaking for a carbohydrate-deficient transferring test (d) his regular attendance upon his treating psychologist and that he confirm the name of his treating psychologist and the frequency of his attendances.   his regular attendance upon his treating psychologist and that he confirm the name of his treating psychologist and the frequency of his attendances.   to her compliance with previous orders of the court including that she had completed a tuning into kids program, a parenting after separation course and a carbohydrate deficient transferrin (‘cdt’) test, (b) that she had not completed psychological testing by a single expert psychologist because she had nominated three qualified psychologists to the father, and he had not selected a psychologist as was contemplated by the orders of 22 october 2021, (c) that she was unaware whether the father had complied with various previous orders of the court, and (d) that in accordance with the orders made on 10 june 2022, she had caused her solicitor to serve a copy of the orders on the father at his email address and also at his last known residential address. she also deposed that she had had a conversation with her solicitor who had informed her that the father had received the orders of 10 june 2022.   that she had not completed psychological testing by a single expert psychologist because she had nominated three qualified psychologists to the father, and he had not selected a psychologist as was contemplated by the orders of 22 october 2021, (c) that she was unaware whether the father had complied with various previous orders of the court, and (d) that in accordance with the orders made on 10 june 2022, she had caused her solicitor to serve a copy of the orders on the father at his email address and also at his last known residential address. she also deposed that she had had a conversation with her solicitor who had informed her that the father had received the orders of 10 june 2022.   that she was unaware whether the father had complied with various previous orders of the court, and (d) that in accordance with the orders made on 10 june 2022, she had caused her solicitor to serve a copy of the orders on the father at his email address and also at his last known residential address. she also deposed that she had had a conversation with her solicitor who had informed her that the father had received the orders of 10 june 2022.   that in accordance with the orders made on 10 june 2022, she had caused her solicitor to serve a copy of the orders on the father at his email address and also at his last known residential address. she also deposed that she had had a conversation with her solicitor who had informed her that the father had received the orders of 10 june 2022.   a copy of these orders, (b) an updated financial statement, and (c) any other document filed by the applicant upon which she may rely at the next court date. the respondent file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit outlining his compliance with all previous court orders on or before 29 september 2022.   any other document filed by the applicant upon which she may rely at the next court date.
the application to proceed on an undefended basis
principles
failure to comply with a legislative provision or order (1) if a step is taken after the time specified for taking the step by these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the step is of no effect. (2) if a party to a proceeding does not comply with these rules, the family law regulations or a procedural order, the court may do any of the following:   dismiss all or part of the proceeding, (b) set aside a step taken or an order made, (c) determine the proceeding as if it were undefended, (d) order costs, (e) prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   prohibit the party from taking a further step in the proceeding until the occurrence of a specified event, (f) make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).   make any other order the court considers necessary, having regard to the overarching purpose of these rules (see rule 1.04).
note: this subrule does not limit the powers of the court. it is an expectation that a non-defaulting party will minimise any loss.   the expression “undefended” is not defined, or otherwise explained, in the rules. however the explanatory guide to the rules (which is expressly stated not to be part of the rules) explains the term “undefended basis” in the following way:
...the court may order that a hearing or trial may proceed, because of the respondent’s failure to comply with a rule or order, as if a response has not been filed. the court may make orders set out in the application on being satisfied by evidence that the orders should be made.
when a party is in default ... (2) for the purposes of rule 10.27, a respondent is in default if the respondent fails to: (a) give an address for service before the time for the respondent to give an address has expired, or (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or   give an address for service before the time for the respondent to give an address has expired, or (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or   file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or   comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or (g) defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.
... (2) if a respondent is in default, the court may: (a) order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   order that a step in the proceeding be taken within the time limited in the order, or   give judgment or make any other order against the respondent, or (c) make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   make an order referred to in paragraph (b) to take effect if the respondent does not take a step ordered by the court in the proceeding in the time limited in the order.   the court may make an order of the kind referred to in subrule (1) or (2), or any other order, or may give any directions, and specify any consequences for non-compliance with the order, that the court thinks just.   if a party to a proceeding is absent from a court event, the court may also make an order of the kind referred to in subrule 10.27(1) or (2) (orders on default), or any other order, or may give any directions, and specify any consequences for non-compliance with the order, that the court thinks just.  ] before a matter can proceed on an undefended basis, the court must be satisfied that all parties to the proceeding have had an opportunity to be heard: taylor v taylor [1979] hca 38, (1979) 143 clr 1.  ] ... the court has a discretion as to how to conduct a hearing when a case is undefended. that this is so has been confirmed in earlier cases. i note that in the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in zane & allan [2008] famcafc 115 – the court did not cavil with the comments of the trial judge (le poer trench j) concerning the “wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge” in relation to, amongst other things, the involvement of the defaulting party in an undefended hearing. it was noted by le poer trench j and (seemingly supported by the full court) that the discretion “must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties.”
...unlike some other jurisdictions, such a circumstance does not and cannot lead, in this court, to a 'judgment by default' in favour of the applicant, because the court must still decide, on the evidence before it, that the applicant is entitled, in law, to the relief claimed and that, in the exercise of its discretion, it is appropriate to grant that relief...
consideration  on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to file an amended response by 5 november 2021, (b) on 22 october 2021, the father was required to enrol in a ‘tuning into kids’ program, (c) on 22 october 2021, the father was required to submit to hair follicle drug testing, (d) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to submit to a cdt test, (e) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to select a psychologist from three names provided by the mother, (f) on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 22 october 2021, the father was required to enrol in a ‘tuning into kids’ program, (c) on 22 october 2021, the father was required to submit to hair follicle drug testing, (d) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to submit to a cdt test, (e) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to select a psychologist from three names provided by the mother, (f) on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 22 october 2021, the father was required to submit to hair follicle drug testing, (d) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to submit to a cdt test, (e) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to select a psychologist from three names provided by the mother, (f) on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to submit to a cdt test, (e) on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to select a psychologist from three names provided by the mother, (f) on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 22 october 2021, the father was ordered to select a psychologist from three names provided by the mother, (f) on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 22 october, the father was ordered to confirm in writing the name of his psychologist within 14 days of the date of the order, and the frequency of his attendances, (g) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file a notice of address for service within seven days of the date of the order, (h) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an affidavit attaching evidence of his compliance with orders made by the court on 22 october 2021, (i) on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 10 june 2022, the father was ordered to personally attend court on the next adjourned date being 25 august 2022, and (j) on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.   on 25 august 2022, the father was ordered to file and serve an updated financial statement and affidavit.
the application for parenting orders
the parenting orders sought by the mother
the evidence  she met the father in around mid 2010 and shortly after moving in together, the mother became pregnant with x. x was born in 2011 and y was born in 2012. the parties never married, (b) the father worked in public relations and would consume alcohol regularly often to the point of becoming drunk and passing out, on one occasion vomiting on the lounge room rug, (c) the father used cocaine following his nights out, (d) the parties agreed to separate in 2019 and the father subsequently moved out of the family home in suburb f into a rental property. in the period may 2019 to november 2019, the children spent about four nights a fortnight with the father, (e) in around january 2020, the father threatened or attempted suicide, attaching a hose from his car exhaust into his vehicle, and live streaming the events on facebook. he was subsequently admitted as a patient at the g hospital, (f) following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the father worked in public relations and would consume alcohol regularly often to the point of becoming drunk and passing out, on one occasion vomiting on the lounge room rug, (c) the father used cocaine following his nights out, (d) the parties agreed to separate in 2019 and the father subsequently moved out of the family home in suburb f into a rental property. in the period may 2019 to november 2019, the children spent about four nights a fortnight with the father, (e) in around january 2020, the father threatened or attempted suicide, attaching a hose from his car exhaust into his vehicle, and live streaming the events on facebook. he was subsequently admitted as a patient at the g hospital, (f) following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the father used cocaine following his nights out, (d) the parties agreed to separate in 2019 and the father subsequently moved out of the family home in suburb f into a rental property. in the period may 2019 to november 2019, the children spent about four nights a fortnight with the father, (e) in around january 2020, the father threatened or attempted suicide, attaching a hose from his car exhaust into his vehicle, and live streaming the events on facebook. he was subsequently admitted as a patient at the g hospital, (f) following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the parties agreed to separate in 2019 and the father subsequently moved out of the family home in suburb f into a rental property. in the period may 2019 to november 2019, the children spent about four nights a fortnight with the father, (e) in around january 2020, the father threatened or attempted suicide, attaching a hose from his car exhaust into his vehicle, and live streaming the events on facebook. he was subsequently admitted as a patient at the g hospital, (f) following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   in around january 2020, the father threatened or attempted suicide, attaching a hose from his car exhaust into his vehicle, and live streaming the events on facebook. he was subsequently admitted as a patient at the g hospital, (f) following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   following the suicide attempt, the children spent supervised time with father for two hours a week for a period of five or six weeks, (g) from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   from around february 2020, the father sent the mother increasingly abusive text messages. the mother subsequently attended suburb c police station and victoria police applied for an intervention order on her behalf, (h) on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   on 5 march 2020, the father sent a text message to y saying ‘tell your mum and x it’s been a great life’, (i) she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   she attempted to arrange counselling for the children to help them with the separation, but the father withdrew his consent for the children to attend counselling on 28 april 2021, (j) on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   on 6 may 2020, the father threatened to report her to the ato. a confrontation between the parents in front of the children ensued, (k) in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   in the period around may 2020, it was not unusual for the mother to receive a large volume of text messages from the father each day, of which many were abusive, threatening or rude, (l) on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   on 12 may 2020, the magistrates court made an interim intervention order against the father in favour of the mother and the children, (m) on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   on 15 june 2020, the mother reported a breach by the father of the ivo. criminal charges were subsequently brought against him, (n) the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the august 2021 intervention order proceedings finalised by consent, (o) the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the father has not spent any time with the children since he disengaged from the supervision service on or around 18 november 2021. the mother attaches to her affidavit an email from ms b contact service dated 18 november 2021 indicating that the father is in arrears and the services have been placed on hold until payment has been made, (p) in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   in the period november 2021 to december 2021, the father attended at her home unannounced on two occasions asking to see the children. on both occasions, the children were left distressed by the incident, (q) on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   on 15 december 2021, the mother applied for what she describes as a ‘no contact’ intervention order which was granted on 17 february 2022, (r) the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the father ceased participating in telephone time with the children at christmas 2021. despite that, the mother continued to place calls to him on mondays and thursdays. he eventually answered on the evening of 14 july 2022. the mother says that the father then participated in calls regularly but inconsistently for a period of some weeks. she says, however, that the father has not answered any calls since 4 august 2022, (s) she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   she is not receiving any child support from the father and that she pays for all of the children’s expenses, and (t) the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the children love their father and miss him and the mother remains hopeful they can have a meaningful relationship with him in the future.   the father acknowledged his historic consumption of drugs and alcohol, (b) the father reflected that while he had been linked in with drug and alcohol counselling through the g hospital cat team, he was no longer seeing a counsellor, (c) the father acknowledged his historic suicide attempt in early 2020, stating it was a ‘situational crisis’. the father confirmed he was on mood suppressants, but told the report writer he was unaware of the type or dosage, (d) y told the report writer that she loved her father and missed him. x did not wish to speak to the report writer, and (e) the report writer expressed the opinion that ‘the children have been stuck in a deeply combative and acrimonious relationship. as such, they are likely feeling caught in the middle of their parents dispute and may be deeply confused and uncertain’.   the father reflected that while he had been linked in with drug and alcohol counselling through the g hospital cat team, he was no longer seeing a counsellor, (c) the father acknowledged his historic suicide attempt in early 2020, stating it was a ‘situational crisis’. the father confirmed he was on mood suppressants, but told the report writer he was unaware of the type or dosage, (d) y told the report writer that she loved her father and missed him. x did not wish to speak to the report writer, and (e) the report writer expressed the opinion that ‘the children have been stuck in a deeply combative and acrimonious relationship. as such, they are likely feeling caught in the middle of their parents dispute and may be deeply confused and uncertain’.   the father acknowledged his historic suicide attempt in early 2020, stating it was a ‘situational crisis’. the father confirmed he was on mood suppressants, but told the report writer he was unaware of the type or dosage, (d) y told the report writer that she loved her father and missed him. x did not wish to speak to the report writer, and (e) the report writer expressed the opinion that ‘the children have been stuck in a deeply combative and acrimonious relationship. as such, they are likely feeling caught in the middle of their parents dispute and may be deeply confused and uncertain’.   y told the report writer that she loved her father and missed him. x did not wish to speak to the report writer, and (e) the report writer expressed the opinion that ‘the children have been stuck in a deeply combative and acrimonious relationship. as such, they are likely feeling caught in the middle of their parents dispute and may be deeply confused and uncertain’.   the report writer expressed the opinion that ‘the children have been stuck in a deeply combative and acrimonious relationship. as such, they are likely feeling caught in the middle of their parents dispute and may be deeply confused and uncertain’.
37. the children remain in the primary care of [ms gainor]. it is recommended professionally supervised time between [mr nance] and the children start as soon as possible, with a professional supervisor’s report to be provided to the court after no less than eight sessions. both parties would benefit from engaging in a program such as “tuning into kids” to provide them with information and advice on how best to support the children moving forward. [ms gainor] would benefit from completing a parenting after separation course, to provide her with tools to successfully co-parent with [mr nance]. it is recommended the parties consider using a co-parenting app such as “appclose” to assist in their communication and co-parenting relationship. this would work to provide focus on developing a sustainable co-parenting relationship, whilst attending to the children’s needs. it will be important for the children to be connected with some therapeutic support, to provide them with assistance regarding their trauma experience, a play therapist would be most appropriate. the court would benefit from obtaining victoria police records for [mr nance]. given the allegations of [mr nance]’s alcohol and drug misuse, the court may consider ordering [mr nance] complete a carbohydrate deficit test and hair follicle test to assess [mr nance] pattern of alcohol and drug use.
the best interests of the children
the orders sought by the mother
the application for final property orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 15 december 2022
dated: 15 december 2022