last updated: 28 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
spalla & spalla (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1723
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
applicant’s orders sought
applicant’s case outline 1. the orders sought
1.1 noting the preliminary issues to be determined by the court, the applicant seeks the following orders:
1.1.1 a declaration that the “deed of settlement and release” (deed) is not enforceable, 1.1.2 in the alternative, if the deed is enforceable, the court not enforce the deed principally on the basis to do so would not be just and equitable, 1.1.3 the date of separation on a final basis occurred on or about 7 november 2019, and 1.1.4 the substantive matter is listed for final hearing on a date to be determined and fixed by the court.
2. summary of the issues in dispute
2.1 as noted in orders of the court on 22 october 2020, the preliminary issues between the applicant and respondent include:
2.1.1 what is the date of separation on a final basis? 2.1.2 the deed purportedly dated 31 january 2014 and its validity, 2.1.3 the stanford issue regarding a “post separation” purchase by the respondent.
2.2 due to the respondent’s non-compliance with the court’s orders dated 29 june 2021, whether or not leave should be granted to the respondent to be able to rely on the following affidavits:
2.2.1 [ms f] filed 30 august 2021, 2.2.2 [mr g] filed 1 september 2021, 2.2.3 [ms d] filed 1 september 2021.
2.3 the applicant also submits that the fact that the respondent has not filed and served any evidence is a significant issue that needs to be determined and in particular the nature, extent and scope of adverse inferences which ought to reasonably be drawn.
3. list of documents intended to be relied upon
3.1 the applicant relies upon the following documents:
3.1.1 initiating application dated 7 may 2020 3.1.2 affidavit of [mr spalla] sworn 7 may 2020 3.1.3 affidavit of [mr spalla] sworn 26 august 2021, 3.1.4 financial statement dated 7 may 2020, 3.1.5 financial statement dated 26 august 2021.
4. list of authorities intended to be relied upon
4.1 the applicant relies upon the following authority:
4.1.1 stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52
5. statement of asserted assets and liabilities
5.1 the applicant refers to and relies upon his financial statements dated 7 may 2020 and 26 august 2021.
if the hearing thus far relates only to the section 79(2) fla preliminary issue. order the court is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order pursuant to s 79 of the act. that updated financials and trial affidavits be filed and served by [insert date]. that the property settlement proceedings be set down for hearing [insert date]. if the hearing is to be considered a final hearing order the court is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order pursuant to s 79 of the act. that the property be divided equally between the parties. the parties provide agreed draft orders to reflect order 2 by [insert date]. in the event that the orders cannot be agreed, each party provide their preferred order reflecting order 2 to be determined by the court.
respondent’s orders sought
1. husband’s application be dismissed. in the alternative to order 1, declaration the wife is the sole owner to the exclusion of the husband of all right title and interest in the property at [h street, town j] in the state of new south wales. other than as provided herein, each party retain to the exclusion of the other any motor vehicle, bank account, superannuation and any other personality in his or her possession as at the date hereof. 4. the husband pay the wife’s costs of and incidental to the application.
evidentiary issues & other things  neither party issued any subpoena or notice to produce to the lawyers who acted for the husband in relation to the deed until after the hearing in september 2021. this was an immensely regrettable circumstance. in my view, given how much focus there was upon the deed, the signing and advice surrounding it, and/or the import of it, it is difficult to overstate this astonishing procedural and evidentiary omission, (b) one of the parties to the deed (although apparently not signed) was the insurer e. in submissions, the applicant complained about information concerning many things, including details from the insurer e. however, although the relevant file from the insurer e was available, it was never tendered. nobody submitted that the court could (or should) draw any relevant inference from this omission or otherwise. to speak somewhat colloquially, this file and any material in it was simply “left hanging”, (c) multiple submissions by the husband were critical of the son, mr g, especially but not only for his criminal record. remarkably, however, mr g was never required for cross examination notwithstanding that he filed an affidavit in support of the respondent wife. respectfully, it is inappropriate to criticise a witness in circumstances where that witness has not been cross examined and was otherwise available for this to occur, (d) somewhat similarly, the husband’s submissions were highly critical of the daughter, ms d. yet, (to speak generally) it was ms d who provided the bulk of the documents in relation to the central issues that were before the court. but for her oral and documentary evidence, the court would be in an even more parlous position regarding the state of the evidence before the court, (e) there was no evidence from the husband’s friend and current land-lady, who is alleged to be his current partner. again, this was a significant and unexplained omission, (f) multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   one of the parties to the deed (although apparently not signed) was the insurer e. in submissions, the applicant complained about information concerning many things, including details from the insurer e. however, although the relevant file from the insurer e was available, it was never tendered. nobody submitted that the court could (or should) draw any relevant inference from this omission or otherwise. to speak somewhat colloquially, this file and any material in it was simply “left hanging”, (c) multiple submissions by the husband were critical of the son, mr g, especially but not only for his criminal record. remarkably, however, mr g was never required for cross examination notwithstanding that he filed an affidavit in support of the respondent wife. respectfully, it is inappropriate to criticise a witness in circumstances where that witness has not been cross examined and was otherwise available for this to occur, (d) somewhat similarly, the husband’s submissions were highly critical of the daughter, ms d. yet, (to speak generally) it was ms d who provided the bulk of the documents in relation to the central issues that were before the court. but for her oral and documentary evidence, the court would be in an even more parlous position regarding the state of the evidence before the court, (e) there was no evidence from the husband’s friend and current land-lady, who is alleged to be his current partner. again, this was a significant and unexplained omission, (f) multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   multiple submissions by the husband were critical of the son, mr g, especially but not only for his criminal record. remarkably, however, mr g was never required for cross examination notwithstanding that he filed an affidavit in support of the respondent wife. respectfully, it is inappropriate to criticise a witness in circumstances where that witness has not been cross examined and was otherwise available for this to occur, (d) somewhat similarly, the husband’s submissions were highly critical of the daughter, ms d. yet, (to speak generally) it was ms d who provided the bulk of the documents in relation to the central issues that were before the court. but for her oral and documentary evidence, the court would be in an even more parlous position regarding the state of the evidence before the court, (e) there was no evidence from the husband’s friend and current land-lady, who is alleged to be his current partner. again, this was a significant and unexplained omission, (f) multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   somewhat similarly, the husband’s submissions were highly critical of the daughter, ms d. yet, (to speak generally) it was ms d who provided the bulk of the documents in relation to the central issues that were before the court. but for her oral and documentary evidence, the court would be in an even more parlous position regarding the state of the evidence before the court, (e) there was no evidence from the husband’s friend and current land-lady, who is alleged to be his current partner. again, this was a significant and unexplained omission, (f) multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   there was no evidence from the husband’s friend and current land-lady, who is alleged to be his current partner. again, this was a significant and unexplained omission, (f) multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   multiple times during the trial, i requested that counsel meet to formulate an agreed list of issues. while i was assured that there were some discussions, ultimately, and unfortunately, there was no agreed list, (g) the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   the issue regarding the january 2014 deed was a central feature in the case but, concerningly, not a single authority was cited by either party regarding, for example, the provenance of recitals in deeds, notwithstanding the court raising (in general terms) this precise point at the outset of the trial, (h) the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   the issue of relevant legal advice to the husband, and the import of it (or purported lack of it) was scarcely explored, and again not a single authority was cited by either party, and (i) while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]   while the high court decision in stanford was cited or referred to in the course of submissions, there was surprisingly little actual detailed discussion of it.[6]
issues in dispute  the date of separation on a final basis, (b) the deed purportedly dated 31st january 2014 and its validity, and (c) the stanford issue regarding a “post-separation” purchase by the respondent.   the deed purportedly dated 31st january 2014 and its validity, and (c) the stanford issue regarding a “post-separation” purchase by the respondent.   the stanford issue regarding a “post-separation” purchase by the respondent.   date of separation, (b) whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31st january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, and (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31st january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, and (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, and (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.
applicant husband’s oral evidence
the witness: my daughter is a crook like my son, just like my son, he has been here for five years. he’s a crook. ms winfield: [mr spalla], would you, please, answer the question. the witness: i answer your question. i don’t sign nothing. i answer your question. next one. ms winfield: well, you did. you’ve signed two affidavits in these proceedings, haven’t they – haven’t you? the witness: i don’t sign these papers. this paper is signed by my daughter or my criminal son. he has been here for four years. he being a good boy.
the witness: i trust this woman. it’s a scum woman. his honour: a what, sorry? how did you describe your daughter? the witness: a scum. his honour: a scum woman? the witness: yes. his honour: you seem to have a very hostile attitude towards your former wife, son and daughter. is that reasonable to say, [mr spalla]? the witness: sorry? his honour: you have a hostile attitude towards the members of your family, yes? the witness: yes. yes. his honour: is there any specific reason or is there a range of reasons why you are so hostile to them all. the witness: because i give everything to my kids, and now my kids screw my back.
ms winfield: never? all right. well, how did you run a business if you didn’t speak enough english to communicate with people who came in? the witness: in the time, i got [country s] supervisor. ms winfield: all right. and you say, do you, that you can’t read english at a conversational level? the witness: yes. ms winfield: but you’ve signed this affidavit without it being interpreted to you in the [language b] language? the witness: yes. ms winfield: does this fall into the same category of documents that your daughter asked you to sign and you signed them without reading them? the witness: yes. ms winfield: and you never took it anywhere else and asked somebody to read it over to you to make sure that it said what you wanted it to say, is that right? the witness: yes. never. ms winfield: [mr spalla], you’re not telling the truth, are you? the witness: sorry? ms winfield: you’re not telling the truth, are you? the witness: it does – i tell the truth. and my .... know that. ms winfield: [mr spalla], you understand that you were answering my questions at a conversational level, don’t you? the witness: yes. ms winfield: so do you now concede that you speak english at a conversational level? the witness: i understand the english, but i don’t speak english 100 per cent. do you understand that? ms winfield: and you see, [mr spalla], i’d suggest to you that you are efficient enough that you wouldn’t sign a document that you didn’t understand, would you? the witness: which one? ms winfield: when you signed the deed in 2014, you knew that it was an important document, didn’t you? the witness: i signed because my son said, “sign, no problem, daddy.” so at that time.
ms winfield: yes. i think you say it was purchased for 625 to 650, and the mortgage was about 425 to 450, so – now, i would suggest to you that [ms d] took a personal loan, [mr g] – for $30,000. [mr g] provided $30,000 and [ms d] provided $20,000 and added that to the $100,000 as a deposit on [t street, suburb u]. what do you say about that?
ms winfield: yes. [ms d] and [mr g] rented it and moved in it, didn’t they? the witness: no. [ms d]..... not [mr g]. ms winfield: all right. and you moved into [x street, suburb y], didn’t you? the witness: yes. when you sell ..... everyone move into [x street, suburb y]. ms winfield: and you told centrelink at that time that you were living at [x street, suburb y] from 6 may 2013 to 15 december 2016? the witness: maybe.
ms winfield: [ms d] says that at that meeting she read the deed out loud to you in english and said, “this deed means that the final amount that is owed to dad from you, mum, is now paid in full and his name will be removed from the title of [t street, suburb u].” do you remember being told that? the witness: no. ms winfield: and she said, “as agreed by your lawyers and yourselves, the property was valued at a million dollars and five per cent equates to $50,000. dad, this is a little bit more than what mum owes you, but she doesn’t care.” do you remember that being said to you? the witness: i never meet a lawyer. i never discuss nothing this. ms winfield: she said to you, “the deed is final and gives mum permission to pay [insurer e] $50,000 on your behalf. it also means this separation is now final as well.” this is the witness: i don’t – i never give permission for that. ms winfield: all right. and she said, “this has all been explained by each lawyer. do you understand or have any questions?” do you recall being asked that? the witness: no, i never do permission for nothing. ms winfield: and she said to you – and you – [ms spalla] said, “i understand.” and you said, “i understand. will [insurer e] come after me for any more money?” the witness: no, i don’t said that. ms winfield: yes. and she said, “well, you will need to ask the lawyer.” do you recall that? the witness: no. ms winfield: and you then said, “so you give me a cheque in my name, and i will give it to the [insurer e] ”, and she said, “no, it has to go to the [insurer e].” do you recall that? the witness: i never see no money at all ..... nothing. ms winfield: and after the document was signed, your son, [mr g], witnessed your signature, do you recall that? the witness: i can’t remember signing nothing on – on this case – on this matter. ms winfield: did you see your wife sign it? the witness: i see my wife sign some paper from ..... what my daughter said. ms winfield: and you see before some time – at some time between 2012 and 2015, you told [ms d], “i’m in a new relationship with a woman known as [ms ad], who was my ex-girlfriend from [country ae].” do you remember that? the witness: i can’t remember that. ms winfield: you see, that’s why you wanted the $100,000 the witness: she’s lying. ms winfield: to go to [country b] to live with [ms ad], didn’t you? the witness: i don’t needed money. what money? ..... the money on my super, which i did. ms winfield: yes. you said, “i’m moving to [country b] to be with my girlfriend from [country ae]. she’s the love of my life.” do you recall saying that to your daughter? the witness: she’s lying. she’s lying. ms winfield: i would suggest to you, [mr spalla], that she isn’t lying and she’s telling the truth. the witness: yes, me too. ms winfield: [mr spalla] mr moffett: ..... ms winfield: you had a cranial bleed his honour: sorry. sorry. mr moffett. mr moffett: just in terms of the answer to that question, the witness said, “yes, that’s true.” my understanding of what the witness said was, “yes, she was” – namely, the respondent was lying, but he’s telling the truth. i just want to make sure that the yes is not interpreted by your honour as the fact finder that he accepted the proposition that the respondent is not lying. his honour: given, amongst other things, that he’s called the daughter a scum, i didn’t understand that there had been a sudden change in position.
his honour: whether it’s simply perception or otherwise, but in the re-examination, most of the questions [mr spalla] has responded immediately, clearly, promptly in a way that’s completely different to the way the questions were put to him in cross-examination, maybe just because his – he’s just feeling a lot more relaxed having his counsel, his champion, in his corner. but there just seems to be a greater degree of facility and felicity in the responses to you rather than from the terrorising questions of ms winfield. just an observation.
husband’s affidavit (and other) evidence  there was nothing in the husband’s may 2020 affidavit regarding him having, or disposing of, any property in country b, (b) although he referred to his partner, ms f and her financial assistance provided to him, not only did he disavow the nature of his relationship with her, he never had her file an affidavit on his behalf, and (c) there was no mention at all of the january 2014 deed. he made reference to it only in his second affidavit, and only after ms d filed her affidavit in october 2020.   although he referred to his partner, ms f and her financial assistance provided to him, not only did he disavow the nature of his relationship with her, he never had her file an affidavit on his behalf, and (c) there was no mention at all of the january 2014 deed. he made reference to it only in his second affidavit, and only after ms d filed her affidavit in october 2020.   there was no mention at all of the january 2014 deed. he made reference to it only in his second affidavit, and only after ms d filed her affidavit in october 2020.   he and his son attended lawyers offices in suburb n [the then location of k lawyers], on unspecified dates, where he signed documents having been convinced by his son to do so. he said that he now believes that these documents were related to an insurance claim that resulted in the insurer e judgment against him. by observation only: such a contention would require that the lawyer involved was liable (perhaps even criminally so) for assisting in any such deception of the husband. this is an astonishingly broad, seriously grave, and unsupported claim, (b) on a separate, but still unspecified, occasion, he said that his daughter had also provided documents for him to sign. he averred that ms d had said that they were necessary to submit to suburb ah council to change house plans. he said that the wife signed them and he counter-signed them, and (c) he deposed (par.25): “at no point prior to my departure from the matrimonial home [sic] that any materials i have been provided to sign declared the termination of my relationship with my wife. it has also never been explained any material signed by me would release my ex-wife of any liability for the insurer e judgment debt.” for my part, i am quite unclear to what most of the matters stated here generally refer.   on a separate, but still unspecified, occasion, he said that his daughter had also provided documents for him to sign. he averred that ms d had said that they were necessary to submit to suburb ah council to change house plans. he said that the wife signed them and he counter-signed them, and (c) he deposed (par.25): “at no point prior to my departure from the matrimonial home [sic] that any materials i have been provided to sign declared the termination of my relationship with my wife. it has also never been explained any material signed by me would release my ex-wife of any liability for the insurer e judgment debt.” for my part, i am quite unclear to what most of the matters stated here generally refer.   he deposed (par.25): “at no point prior to my departure from the matrimonial home [sic] that any materials i have been provided to sign declared the termination of my relationship with my wife. it has also never been explained any material signed by me would release my ex-wife of any liability for the insurer e judgment debt.” for my part, i am quite unclear to what most of the matters stated here generally refer.
case guardian daughter’s oral evidence
and sorry, [ms d], can i ask do you know whether or not on any of these occasions when your mother saw the police and you weren’t there whether or not any other member of the family was with her? i believe her and [ms d], to the best of my knowledge because i was not there, were taken into separate rooms and [ms d] is my sister-in-law. right? i can tell you at that time my mother was not well and under pressure. i can tell you that what is possibly here would have been what she had definitely indicated to the police with no sense of trying to lie to anyone.
nowhere in those entries at all indicates that the work of this firm was relevant to providing any relevant – to providing any advice with respect to a deed. would you agree?‑‑‑no. this invoice provides a detailed description of work that was performed by the solicitors for your dad relevant to the writ registered on title of [t street, suburb u], correct?‑‑‑based on the heading, yes. well, more than that, isn’t it? what about the description? nowhere in the description is there any reference at all based upon the provenance of this document that your dad received any independent advice upon a deed. would you agree?‑‑‑i’m sorry, i can’t comment on that. i mean there’s a reference there saying that [ms m] spoke to [mr ak] which was mum’s lawyers at that time and that could only on assumption be about the deed. mr moffett: well, more than that, isn’t it? what about the description? nowhere in the description is there any reference at all based upon the provenance of this document that your dad received any independent advice upon a deed. would you agree? ... i’m sorry, i can’t comment on that. i mean there’s a reference there saying that [ms m] spoke to [mr ak] which was mum’s lawyers at that time and that could only on assumption be about the deed. well, how do you draw that assumption in ? i’m not ... mr moffett: ...circumstances where the bill is in relation to a writ registered on title of [t street, suburb u]? well, i can only assume when he went to speak to [ms m] about the transfer when we realised there was issues he has instructed [ms m]. i am not privy to that. i have no documentation. only based on what i was cc’d in and, unfortunately, my brother cannot get access to those emails on his email account so, sorry, i cannot make any comment on that. your assumption about any conferences that your dad had with [k lawyers] between 17 october 2013 and 3 december 2013 could be entirely wrong. would you agree? i’m sorry. again, i’m only going based on what i’m looking at so i can’t really make any comments. well, you made a comment that you only assumed that one of the meetings or one of the conversations that were between this lawyer and your mum’s lawyer was relevant to a deed. my question to you is this. your assumption based upon the description of services provided in the context of this bill that your dad received any independent legal advice about the deed could be wrong, correct? he had a conference on 3 december 2013 just before the deed was signed. so my assumption would be that he’s at his lawyers talking to them about the deed, yes. his honour: sorry. how do you know that there was that conference on 3 december? that’s the last entry that i was pointed to 3 december 2013 am conference with you yes? ... seven units 210. and that’s the only basis upon which you say that you at least infer that there was a discussion between the lawyers and your father about the deed, yes? ... besides what i know from also what my brother and my father told me. yes, that we’re looking at the invoice, yes.
no, no. don’t be. don’t be sorry. that’s all right. it might have been the way i asked the question. you’ve gone through, can i suggest, all of your dad’s private paperwork at [h street, town j], is that right? i’ve gone through a lot of paperwork at [h street, town j], yes. not just dad’s, yes. okay. but is it safe to say that in your preparation of this case assisting your mum you’ve, effectively, turned the house upside down to try and find evidence which would support your mother’s claims, is that so? that would support the deed’s claim, yes. yes, and in going through all your dad’s private paperwork at home you were not able to find a document which would be consistent on your interpretation of your dad receiving legal advice from a solicitor, correct? i have found documents. you have not attached any such document to any of your affidavits in this proceeding, have you? it actually should have been attached to the email dated 4 december 2013 at 11.26 am. do you have a copy of that document in front you? i do. i do, yes. i can see immediately that there is a watermark across that document which says draft, is that right? that is correct. you understand in your experience at least working for the law firm law partners that when a document is marked draft that doesn’t mean that the person who is the author of the advice intends for it to be published, correct? that is correct. that document doesn’t support the proposition that your dad ever received that document, does it? there’s an email going to him and my brother and asking him to provide instructions on that draft document. right. i call for a copy of that document. his honour: so, [ms d], do you know whether or not your lawyers have a copy of this document? i’m sorry, your honour. it was just while i was looking at lunch i realized that there was no attachment to that back email and i have just sent it to zali. it has just been missed. it was previously sent as well. so, sorry, when do you say that it was previously sent? when we were going – the correspondence it has obviously just been missed when we bundled all the documents together
documentary evidence provided by the wife’s case guardian, ms d  annexure d is a copy of the deed of settlement and release: 31st january 2014, (b) annexure f is a copy of the final apprehended domestic violence order (issued by city am local court on application by nsw police): 25th february 2020, (c) annexure g is a copy of court attendance notices, which list the husband’s address (as at may 2018) at v street, suburb o: 9th may 2018.   annexure f is a copy of the final apprehended domestic violence order (issued by city am local court on application by nsw police): 25th february 2020, (c) annexure g is a copy of court attendance notices, which list the husband’s address (as at may 2018) at v street, suburb o: 9th may 2018.   annexure g is a copy of court attendance notices, which list the husband’s address (as at may 2018) at v street, suburb o: 9th may 2018.   annexure b is a copy of the undated contract for sale, dated 11th august 2012, for the purchase of the t street, suburb u property, purchased for $634,000. ms d deposed that it was purchased with the wife taking a 95% “share” in the property, and the husband a 5% “share” in it. ms d here deposed (par.12) that the t street, suburb u property was settled on or around october 2012. these matters were further discussed by her at pars.30 – 36. these paragraphs confirm the date of the contract for sale to be 11th august 2012 (copy was annexure h), (b) the t street, suburb u property was “refinanced” through company an in august 2013, solely under the wife’s name, and for the transfer of the husband’s 5% share into the wife’s name. a copy of the unsigned statutory declaration, and letter of instruction to k lawyers to effect this is annexure c. other details regarding the refinancing were not provided, (c) at par.14 of this affidavit, ms d deposed that around august 2013, “whilst undertaking final title search for the settlement, it was discovered the property had a writ for a judgment against my father”, (d) at pars.15 – 21, ms d deposed to various conversations, primarily with her father, regarding the debt owing to insurer e. she also said that her mother instructed ao lawyers regarding (i) the drafting of the deed and (ii) the resolution of the matter involving the insurer e. a copy of a letter confirming these matters, dated 10th december 2013, is annexure d. ultimately, the husband remained with k lawyers. copies of emails from ms m, from k lawyers, between 7th november 2013 and 5th december 2013, are annexure e. this correspondence included a bill of costs, dated 3rd december 2013, addressed to the husband at the v street, suburb o property. it was headed “re: writ registered on title of t street, suburb u.” the last item on this bill referred to a conference with the husband on 3rd december 2013 for a period of “7 units”, thereby indicating that it was a meeting of approximately 40 minutes in length, (e) pars.22 – 29 outline ms d’s account of the signing of the deed on 31st january 2014, and various further conversations with her father regarding matters concerning his various relationships. i do not need to canvass them further, (f) at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   the t street, suburb u property was “refinanced” through company an in august 2013, solely under the wife’s name, and for the transfer of the husband’s 5% share into the wife’s name. a copy of the unsigned statutory declaration, and letter of instruction to k lawyers to effect this is annexure c. other details regarding the refinancing were not provided, (c) at par.14 of this affidavit, ms d deposed that around august 2013, “whilst undertaking final title search for the settlement, it was discovered the property had a writ for a judgment against my father”, (d) at pars.15 – 21, ms d deposed to various conversations, primarily with her father, regarding the debt owing to insurer e. she also said that her mother instructed ao lawyers regarding (i) the drafting of the deed and (ii) the resolution of the matter involving the insurer e. a copy of a letter confirming these matters, dated 10th december 2013, is annexure d. ultimately, the husband remained with k lawyers. copies of emails from ms m, from k lawyers, between 7th november 2013 and 5th december 2013, are annexure e. this correspondence included a bill of costs, dated 3rd december 2013, addressed to the husband at the v street, suburb o property. it was headed “re: writ registered on title of t street, suburb u.” the last item on this bill referred to a conference with the husband on 3rd december 2013 for a period of “7 units”, thereby indicating that it was a meeting of approximately 40 minutes in length, (e) pars.22 – 29 outline ms d’s account of the signing of the deed on 31st january 2014, and various further conversations with her father regarding matters concerning his various relationships. i do not need to canvass them further, (f) at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   at par.14 of this affidavit, ms d deposed that around august 2013, “whilst undertaking final title search for the settlement, it was discovered the property had a writ for a judgment against my father”, (d) at pars.15 – 21, ms d deposed to various conversations, primarily with her father, regarding the debt owing to insurer e. she also said that her mother instructed ao lawyers regarding (i) the drafting of the deed and (ii) the resolution of the matter involving the insurer e. a copy of a letter confirming these matters, dated 10th december 2013, is annexure d. ultimately, the husband remained with k lawyers. copies of emails from ms m, from k lawyers, between 7th november 2013 and 5th december 2013, are annexure e. this correspondence included a bill of costs, dated 3rd december 2013, addressed to the husband at the v street, suburb o property. it was headed “re: writ registered on title of t street, suburb u.” the last item on this bill referred to a conference with the husband on 3rd december 2013 for a period of “7 units”, thereby indicating that it was a meeting of approximately 40 minutes in length, (e) pars.22 – 29 outline ms d’s account of the signing of the deed on 31st january 2014, and various further conversations with her father regarding matters concerning his various relationships. i do not need to canvass them further, (f) at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   at pars.15 – 21, ms d deposed to various conversations, primarily with her father, regarding the debt owing to insurer e. she also said that her mother instructed ao lawyers regarding (i) the drafting of the deed and (ii) the resolution of the matter involving the insurer e. a copy of a letter confirming these matters, dated 10th december 2013, is annexure d. ultimately, the husband remained with k lawyers. copies of emails from ms m, from k lawyers, between 7th november 2013 and 5th december 2013, are annexure e. this correspondence included a bill of costs, dated 3rd december 2013, addressed to the husband at the v street, suburb o property. it was headed “re: writ registered on title of t street, suburb u.” the last item on this bill referred to a conference with the husband on 3rd december 2013 for a period of “7 units”, thereby indicating that it was a meeting of approximately 40 minutes in length, (e) pars.22 – 29 outline ms d’s account of the signing of the deed on 31st january 2014, and various further conversations with her father regarding matters concerning his various relationships. i do not need to canvass them further, (f) at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   pars.22 – 29 outline ms d’s account of the signing of the deed on 31st january 2014, and various further conversations with her father regarding matters concerning his various relationships. i do not need to canvass them further, (f) at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   at pars.30 – 36, ms d provided further information regarding the purchase of the t street, suburb u property and its renovation (see annexure i). water and council rates thereafter issued solely in the wife’s name (annexure j). the t street, suburb u property sold on or around 27th july 2016 for $1.3 million, (g) the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   the h street, town j property was purchased by the wife for $340,000 on or around 12th december 2016. a copy of the contract for sale of this property was annexure k. the certificate of title, which issued on 19th january 2017, records only the wife as the registered proprietor (annexure l), (h) pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   pars.39 – 46 record various transactions relating to property in country b. for current purposes, i need only record that a named property (at par.41) recorded that it was sold in june 2007 to pay for “a business debt” in the sum of €55,000. the contract for sale for this property is at annexure n, (i) pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   pars.42 – 45 (annexures o – r) record various transfers of funds primarily to the husband (one transfer was to his company company w), which totalled $35,000, plus €55,000, (j) pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   pars.47 – 50 detail an avo taken out in the wife’s favour (among others) following various facebook threats by the husband (annexures t and u), (k) pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   pars.51 – 52 record a range of particulars from centrelink, indicating the husband’s various addresses and the dates applicable to them, plus a record, dated 28th january 2014 advising centrelink that he was “separated”, (l) the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.   the remainder of this affidavit records ms d’s comments on the husband’s affidavits of may 2020 and august 2021. she also noted (pars.53 – 59) various additional information, which had been first outlined in her affidavit of 19th october 2020.
ms f’s oral evidence
mr moffett: i suggest to you that you did not see [mr spalla] sign that document with your own eyes at all. the interpreter: i saw it, i was there. okay. yes, here in [country b] it is impossible to obtain a sworn or – document or a declaration without all the parties being present, so it is necessary for me to – it was necessary for me to be there together with the other parties. it is – it is always the case that the civil registry office won’t issue otherwise. the only exception is if a document is signed in australia and then in that case, of course, i won’t be able to be present. but this particular one was signed in the civil registry office of [city aj].
affidavit evidence of mr g
at the meeting, i can’t recall exactly the words of the discussion, now, but i recall my parents agreed the following would occur: mum said: “i will pay dad $100,000”, each said: “we will keep our own personal belongings”, mum and dad: “we will each keep our own [company ap] shares and accounts”, mum said: “i will take the liability of the land in [country b]”, mum said: “dad can keep his family’s estate”, mum said: “dad can keep his gun collection”, each said “i will be responsible for my own debts and loans”, dad said: “i give my father’s watch to [ms d], to pass on to [aq]”. to the best of my knowledge, there was no further assets of my parent’s marriage.
on 16 july 2012, the property at [v street, suburb o] settled. mum found a small 1 bedroom house in [v street, suburb o] that was affordable and it needed a fair bit of renovation work to be done. at this time [ms d] said to me words to the effect of:
“i contacted the bank about possible refinance, but westpac rejected the loan, i asked other lenders and we don’t have enough time. the best that can be done is the settlement of funds from [v street, suburb o] are put into a term deposit with westpac and this is secured against the current mortgage. once mum settles the [v street, suburb o], westpac will swap over the term deposit as the deposit for the new property. this means dad will have to stay on title for [v street, suburb o] until mum can organise the refinance under her name. i asked dad if he agreed and his interest would still be protected by the 5% share in [v street, suburb o], dad said it’s fine, when you’re ready, just give me the money”.  ] on or about august 2013, mum said: “i got refinancing under my name with [company an]. it was discovered that there was a writ on title for a judgement against dad for [insurer e]”. i recall my sister calling me about this and i spoke to my father about it and him saying something like:
“not my problem, i want my money, your sister can sort it out”.  ] i recall on or about september 2013, hearing ms d having a further discussion with my father regarding the [insurer e] writ on title at my home. mum was not present. [ms d] said to our father words to the effect of:
“do you have the money to pay [insurer e]?”
my father said words to the effect of:
“i do not have the money and i need the money to travel overseas.”   d] said words to the effect of:
“dad, you have to pay the [insurer e]”.
“i am not paying them a cent. i need the money to start a new life in [country b]”.
“it is best you and mum get your own lawyers to sort this out and for your divorce”.  ] on or september 2013, [ms d] said to me words to the effect of:
“i will assist mum and you assist dad with lawyers to sort out the [insurer e] and their split”.   d] and i organised lawyers for our parents. during the course of my parents instructing lawyers, my mum’s lawyer prepared a deed of settlement to contemplate paying the [insurer e] to remove them from the title so [t street, suburb u] can be sold. during this time, there were several conversations between my father, myself and his lawyer about the separation and the deed. i recall the deed and separation was explained to my father on or around 4th november 2012 by lawyer [ms m] from [k lawyers], which we both attended at the suburb n office. i recall [ms m] going into detail and explaining everything to my father. i said recall the lawyer asking dad words to the effect of:
“do you understand everything and the effect of the deed?”
“yes, i do and i just want my money and go to [country b]”.  ] on or around january 2014, [ms d] called for a family meeting for the signing of the deed. the deed was signed at [x street, suburb y] nsw in the presence of myself, my mother and my sister. although my wife [ms d] was not at the table, she was in the house. i recall [ms d] laying out a copy of the deed and asking both of my parents: “review it before signing”. although my father reads, writes and speaks english, he asked [ms d]: “will you read out the deed again?” which she did. i remember [ms d] saying to my parents words to the effect of:
“this deed covers two things. the first is the final payment under the separation agreement and the second that you authorise mum to pay $50,000 to [insurer e]. it is what the lawyers explained. do both understand, do you have any questions?”
my mother said words to the effect of:
“ i understand and agree”.
“i agree but does this stop [insurer e] come after me for more money?”
“i don’t know”.
“i want the cheque made out to me, not [insurer e] and i can pay them myself”.
“no, it has to go to [insurer e], if it doesn’t they will come after mum again for the amount”.
my father got angry and said words to the effect of:
“this is my money not [insurer e]”.
“the cheque has to be paid directly to [insurer e]”.
“okay, i sign”.  ] my father signed the deed and i witnessed his signature and [ms d] witnessed my mother’s signature. at the end the singing of the deed, [ms d] said words to the effect of:
“ this is it! it’s finally over and you can both move on and live your own lives”.
i remember my mother crying and being very emotional on this day.
affidavit of ms d
i further lent the following amounts on each occasion after [mr g] said to me: “can we lend some money to my father?” i can’t confirm that the total amount was given to him as [mr g] asked me, not his father: 15 august 2013- $17,000 6 october 2013- $5,000 7 october 2013- $5,000 8 october 2013- $5,000 16 december 2013- $7,000
general observations on evidence
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
submissions on behalf of the applicant husband 1. key “fla” family law act 1975. “stanford” stanford v stanford [2012] 247 clr 108. purpose of hearing this matter was set down for interlocutory hearing by order of the court on 22nd october 2020 for the following preliminary issues in dispute. 3. the issues in dispute relate to:
3.1. the 2014 deed and its validity, 3.2. a stanford issue regarding a post separation purchase by the respondent wife, and 3.3. further issues raised by the applicant husband who suggests that the date of separation is not 2012 but rather 2019.
the background the husband and wife married in [country b] in 1978. neither party had any assets of significance. throughout the marriage they jointly accumulated property that, excepting a deed of settlement (deed) arising from failed litigation, would ordinarily be divided through s.79 fla. due to the unsuccessful litigation the property was redistributed to minimise risk of attachment for the purposes of satisfying the judgment debt owed to the [insurer e]. it is this restructuring that is central to the question of whether the court should exercise its powers pursuant to section 79(2) fla. the relationship of the [spalla] family it is necessary to understand the family dynamics. the parties have 2 adult children: [ms d] ([ms d]) born [in] 1979 and [mr g] [mr g]) born [in] 1986. the parents have limited command of english and have relied on their children for interpretation of documentation, preparation of documentation and general advice. the applicant husband has an extremely strained relationship with both of his children. in contrast the respondent wife has a good relationship with the children who are completely supportive of the mother’s position: they have clearly taken a side. both children have been involved in the decision making process to the extent that notwithstanding purported legal representation, the deed was witnessed by the children and not the lawyers. evidence generally throughout these proceedings there is considerable conflict between the witnesses about events that have taken place and payment of cash. as a result of a case guardian being appointed the court can only rely on disputed evidence in the context of the daughter [ms d] who is clearly on her mother’s side and the son [mr g] who is not only on the mother’s side but the mastermind of the insurance claim where he left his father high and dry to a costs order brought about by his insuring a vehicle with [insurer e] in his father’s name, and then falsely representing that the vehicle had been stolen. the court does not have the benefit of evidence directly from the respondent. [ms d] and [mr g] provide the evidence that is relied upon by the respondent and have been instrumental in making decisions which affect the parent’s legal interests in property. unlike in stanford where there were previous marriages of the parties and even court sanctioned property settlements, the need for change of legal title in property was brought about by unsuccessful litigation arising from [mr g] unsuccessfully alleging that a [motor vehicle 5] that was owned by him but insured in his father’s name was stolen. whilst due to mental illness, the respondent has not personally engaged in these proceeding, what is of significance is that as recently as 2019 she provided evidence relating to the date of separation, through the reporting of domestic violence of the parties. this evidence differed from the version provided by [ms d] and supported that of the applicant. this will be addressed in more detail below. the deed purchase of [motor vehicle 5] (the car) whilst the parties were overseas in 2003 or 2003, [mr g] purchased a [motor vehicle 5] and registered it in his own name but insured it in his father’s name, it would appear to secure a lower insurance premium. [mr g] made the applicant lodge a claim with [insurer e] alleging that his car had been stolen from [suburb as] whilst he was at the movies. [insurer e] refused the claim. the case against [insurer e] as the vehicle was insured in the name of the applicant husband, it was only he that could launch an action against [insurer e] even though it was [mr g] who stood to benefit. at the same time, [mr g] had no personal risk if the case was unsuccessful. [mr g] arranged legal representation and provided instructions in the matter, the applicant merely signed documents as directed. judgment was entered in favour of [insurer e] which resulted in the applicant being ordered to pay $100,620,01 costs, which became a judgment debt. as a result of this outcome, a family meeting was held where it was acknowledged that the parties’ only real asset was their home [v street, suburb o] nsw ([v street, suburb o]) which was jointly owned by the parents which was at risk of being sold to satisfy the judgment debt. it is [ms d]’s evidence that the equity from the sale would be approximately $200k. there is no evidence on how this figure was reached. it is alleged by [ms d] that the applicant was paid $100k from the sale of this property. acceptance by the court that this amount was paid is crucial to the respondent being successful. there were no records of withdrawals from accounts or deposits into the father’s account or receipts notwithstanding that [ms d] had full control of the transactions and access to her father’s information. the applicant husband denies ever receiving this money and it borders on the incredible to suggest that by nothing more than luck, there is no objective evidence to support that he received such a payment. in fact [ms d] says: “to the best of my knowledge, those funds were paid in cash. i will require further time to ascertain further records” these records were never forthcoming. it is clear that the payment was not made so there has not been a division of significant matrimonial property as alleged. even a settlement statement for the sale of [v street, suburb o] might have assisted. after the [insurer e] judgment, [t street, suburb u] was purchased for $634k. there is no objective evidence provided on how this was actually funded just unsubstantiated claims of loans and gifts to the mother, yet the property still recorded a reduced legal interest of the applicant. this needs to be further explored for the purposes of distribution of property. purchase of [t street, suburb u] due to circumstances, it was not possible to register the property exclusively in the name of the respondent so it was decided that the title deed would record a lesser interest being owned by the applicant. the parties continued to cohabitate in this house. at no time was it suggested that the parties should enter into a binding financial agreement (bfa) as it clearly was a means designed to avoid the judgment debt. notwithstanding the smaller interest of the applicant, the [insurer e] lodged a writ against the [t street, suburb u] property which resulted in the deed dated 31st january 2014 to avoid the need to sell the property. deed of settlement (deed) the deed was entered into between the respondent, the applicant and [insurer e]. it is not argued that the deed is not valid but only that it properly settles the [insurer e] litigation and does not purport to settle any family law action. it is somewhat unusual that, notwithstanding alleged independent legal advice, the deed was signed, not in a lawyer’s office but at the home of the parties with the children acting as witnesses. this in itself undermines any suggestion of the applicant having received independent legal advice. the deed related to the judgment debt which, whilst technically in the name of the applicant, was incurred as a result of [mr g] making the applicant commence legal action against [insurer e]. it could just as easily have been the respondent who was nominated for the insurance policy. choosing the applicant father over the respondent mother should not determine the outcome. the scheme of the deed was designed to protect the property from further action from the creditor. it was never suggested that the respondent owed the creditor any money: she was never a judgment debtor. had the property been transferred to her sole name before the writ was lodged, there was no way that the creditor could have attached the property and there would have been no need for the deed. the writ was really lodged against the applicant’s interest however to avoid the inevitable sale of the property an amount was paid ($50k) which represented approximately half the debt. it is clear that it was necessary to have the applicant removed from the title document so that his interest in the property could not be attached in the future. this is where the deed made assertions which this court is not bound to accept as representing the true position. recitals of the deed the recitals relate only to the deed and not any prospective bfa. it was never suggested by the judgment creditor that the respondent wife was liable for the debt. in other words, it was only a judgment debt recorded against the applicant husband. recital i makes it clear that the applicant is the sole judgment creditor. a bfa could have shared liability or make adjustment for the situation into which the applicant was put. recital v makes it clear that the respondent denies personal liability however recital vi provides that all claims by the creditor against the respondent wife are settled, which does not seem to logically sit with the respondent never having been liable. the deed at times does not logically flow. for example, clause 3.3 commences “subject to compliance with this deed....” however, when one looks at clauses such as clause 2.7, noncompliance would suggest that the respondent loses the indemnity provisions of clause 3.3. this is an example of the family law issues not being properly considered. the deed however included matters that extended beyond issues regarding the judgment debt. in particular, clause 2.7 provided that within 28 days the applicant shall attend upon a solicitor for the purposes of entering into a binding financial agreement (bfa) with [ms spalla] pursuant to section 90c of the fla. there was however no requirement for the respondent to enter into a bfa. as it stood, the respondent could frustrate clause 2.7. there is no evidence that the respondent was ready, willing and able to enter into a bfa. at the time of the deed, it is being suggested that the applicant was obtaining independent legal advice from [k lawyers] of [suburb n]. those lawyers were retained by the son, [mr g]. it is clear that they were only involved in the [insurer e] matter as there were no extant family law proceedings. there is no evidence of whether the lawyer was qualified to give family law advice or whether in fact it was given. in fact the deed clearly suggested that the advice should come from elsewhere. even if it were the intention of the parties to resolve matrimonial property, there is no logical explanation for the need for clause 2.7. that is, if the applicant was receiving independent legal advice, why wasn’t a bfa made at the same time as the deed of settlement? it is clear that the reference that the words “attend upon a solicitor” implies that a different solicitor would provide advice as to whether to enter into a bfa. it is also worthy of note that the clause did not provide that “[mr spalla] and [ms spalla]” attend a solicitor for the purposes of entering into a bfa. it is clear that, as suggested by the applicant, this was not a matter that was explained to him nor given proper consideration for the purposes of the deed. the deed of settlement makes clear that it was not meant to resolve all matrimonial property issues when it provides that:
52.1. a bfa is to be responsible for that task, and 52.2. the bfa should state “inter alia”... which clearly indicates that there are matters outside of the deed, and within the jurisdiction of this court, to exercise in relation to matrimonial property. the deed is not to be construed as meaning that if a bfa is not agreed that the applicant has no remedy under section 79. furthermore, the deed did not cover all matters to be covered by a bfa. simpliciter, it seems to be accepted that if the deed did not exist, there would in principle be no section 79(2) fla issue. that being the case, unless somehow the deed identified all matters that would be required to make a property distribution under the fla, the only remedy is for the court to make the distribution under s 79 fla.
binding financial agreement (bfa) there was never a bfa entered into when in fact the deed contemplated that the family law issues should be resolved only by way of bfa. a requirement for one party to attend a solicitor for the purposes of entering into a bfa is totally inadequate. for example:
56.1. what was the purpose of attending a solicitor? 56.2. to get advice? 56.3. to sign a bfa already agreed? 56.4. what if the other party did not agree? it was clearly anticipated in the deed that there were matters beyond that covered in the deed regarding the division of property that needed to be resolved5. any such bfa should resolve that the applicant’s share of the property was released to the judgment creditor via the proceeds of the refinance settlement as set out under the deed of settlement.6 the deed does not say that the $50k payment represented the applicant’s entire share of the matrimonial property, it merely suggests that the partial settlement sum ($50k) comes out of his share of the residential property. whether this extended to ultimately being deducted from his share of matrimonial property is something about which the applicant would have required advice before signing a bfa. this of course, was of no concern of [insurer e]. even though as between the applicant and the [insurer e], he was the judgment creditor at law, it did not automatically follow that only he should to the exclusion of the respondent wife, burden the brunt of the son’s conduct merely because he was nominated as the insurer over the respondent mother. these are matters that would need to be properly dealt with by a bfa or through a hearing in this honourable court.
date of separation recital ii of the deed states that the applicant and respondent are married but separated. as at 31 january 2014, this clearly was not the case and in fact the parties continued to cohabitate to the extent that the respondent when requesting police intervention made it clear that the parties separated on 7th november 2019. there was no requirement at law that the parties be cohabitating to get the apprehended violence order: it was simply a declaration of truth made by the respondent and agreed by the applicant. the bottom line is that this court has conflicting documentary evidence regarding the date of separation. the representation of separation in the deed was clearly designed to justify the restructuring of the property in such a fashion as to minimise the risk of [insurer e] recovering the balance of its judgment debt through sale of the property. this court does not need to make the finding at this stage, it is an argument that justifies overcoming section 79(2) fla. having said that, the date of separation may not be material for the purposes of the question currently before the court and, due to the considerable length of the marriage, will not likely be material to any subsequent property division. case guardian [ms d] is case guardian for the respondent. as a result, she is not only directing the case but is basically supplanting the respondent and providing the evidence. she is also a witness in the proceedings. her evidence is mostly subjective. furthermore, she is a witness to a contentious deed and, together with [mr g], was an adviser to the father in [insurer e] action: she has clearly chosen a side in these proceedings and has the means to direct the whole action. it would be unjust for the court to deprive the applicant the opportunity to have the matrimonial property distributed without the intervention of the children. at times her evidence is contradictory to the respondent. for example, in relation to the date of separation provided to police. [ms d] is selective with evidence especially when considering the importance of her brother’s involvement. there is clear evidence of [mr g]’s criminal history and involvement in the [insurer e] action which would have been known by [ms d], yet there is no real mention. in contrast, she has access to all documentation of the applicant, had control of his affairs and takes every opportunity to advance any evidence against his interests. she says that her mother suffered from major depression for the past 12 months and attributes it to her father. yet when referring to her brother’s criminal history she offers no information and does not seem to suggest that he has in any way contributed to the respondent’s depression. it is clear from the applicant’s evidence that [mr g] accounts for much of his grief. [mr g] ([mr g]) [mr g] provides an affidavit sworn 19th october 2020, he is 7 years younger than his sister [ms d]. from the outset he sets a negative tone about his father alleging that he was pressured to work in the family business as a [tradesman]. whilst his parents were overseas [mr g] purchased a [motor vehicle 5] and insured it in his father’s name because due to his age, he could not insure it himself. he subsequently falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen and when the insurer refused to pay, made his father commence unsuccessful legal action which resulted in his father facing a costs order. it is worthy of note that even as late as this hearing he describes his father as having legal proceedings against [insurer e] for the payout of the car. he has no problem with removing himself from the matter. like [ms d], he also conveniently fails to disclose his own criminal convictions. it is clear that he has no intention to contribute to the judgment debt. stanford issue the court shall not make an order under section 79 unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. if the court accepts that the deed of settlement with [insurer e] does not operate so as to settle the matrimonial property, it should be satisfied that in all the circumstances that it should proceed to make an order under s 79 fla as the change in legal title, post judgment pre-deed, does not properly reflect the true position. it is necessary to consider whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property.9 the subsequent purchase of property by the respondent wife on the back of the deed does not fairly represent the parties share in the property, it does nothing more than reflect the attempt to avoid the judgment debt. the husband has made substantial contribution which is not properly reflected in the title and needs to be rectified under s 79 fla. notwithstanding that the related litigation was brought about by the conduct of [mr g], it seems to be the position of the family that the consequences of the unsuccessful action should be the sole responsibility of the applicant husband. in reality, had [mr g] nominated his mother as the owner, the circumstances could just have easily been reversed. it is the applicant’s submission that the resulting legal interest was not meant to settle the property between the parties but was a means of minimising the risk that the judgment creditor could recover from the matrimonial property. the timing of the registration juxtaposed with the judgment and deed supports this submission. regardless of the integrity or honesty of such an aim, the entire family was party to the scheme. accordingly, it would be just and equitable to alter those rights and interests by ignoring the scheme. without the efforts of the husband throughout the marriage, the respondent would not have been in a position to purchase any real estate which directly affects existing legal interests in the property. unlike in stanford, the current legal entitlements of the parties do not reflect their contributions to the marriage. not only is this factor relevant it may be decisive. had there not been the deed there would be no issue regarding section 79(2) fla.
87.1. notwithstanding, by advocating a position that:
87.1.1. an agreement to enter into a financial agreement, or 87.1.2. even the entering into a financial agreement, should result in a finding that this court should not be satisfied that in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the orders, is circular and unworkable. the deed clearly states that a bfa was necessary to divide the matrimonial property: one never came into existence. bfas are dealt with in part viiia fla the object of which is to allow the court to make an order under, inter alia, section 79 fla that is directed to, or alters the rights, liabilities or property interests unless the court were to find that the deed was designed to resolve property pursuant to the fla, it is submitted that there is no suggestion that the court should not be exercising its power to distribute property. the respondent also relies on unsubstantiated payments being made to the husband which are denied to justify why the legal title is determinative. unless the court is satisfied on the evidence that the payments were made and received, the respondent’s position is unsustainable. on the one hand there are clear records of transactions and payments made in relation to properties in [country b] however in relation to an allegation that $100k cash has been paid to the applicant husband:
92.1. there is no evidence of $100k being withdrawn from any accounts. 92.2. there is no evidence of $100k being received into an account of the applicant. 92.3. there is no written receipt. in fact, [ms d] does actually not state that the payment was made – only that she believes it has been made. since the date of her affidavit [ms d] has never produced documentation to support her belief after suggesting that she would. furthermore, trust had clearly failed between the parties, it is, therefore, unbelievable that no record of substantial payment would be kept, especially when one considers the effort that was made to produce the deed. it simply was not paid to the applicant. there is no explanation as to why such a large amount of cash was paid to the applicant whilst there was an outstanding bfa: surely it would have been a part of the bfa.
costs submissions have not been made in relation to reserved costs and it is assumed that when necessary, submissions will be invited by the court. notwithstanding, at this stage it is worthy of note that when costs were reserved it was believed that further court time was necessary for hearing that could impact on costs. no extra court time was taken as proceedings on the last hearing day had reached its natural conclusion and the need for further court time avoided.
submissions in reply to respondent wife’s on behalf of the applicant husband introduction due to the response page limitation by order of this court, the husband cannot respond to every submission of the wife. by limiting the response, it is not to be construed that points not addressed are conceded or agreed. purpose of hearing was not a final hearing the proceedings were run on the basis of resolving a preliminary s 79(2) family law act 1975 (fla) basis. it was adjourned part heard on that basis only. without the outstanding fraud issue, the evidence was complete and could progress to written submissions. no court time was wasted. it was anticipated that fraud was to be raised in a bid to have the deed of settlement (deed) set aside. as this was a tripartite agreement designed to settle a non-family law district court matter, it was neither necessary nor appropriate to set the deed aside. it was always anticipated that there would be separate family law proceedings. the parties to the family law proceedings with the assistance of their children were trying to protect the wife from exposure to the civil judgment. this was an unnecessary course because, unbeknown to the parties and primarily on the advice of the daughter the mother never was at risk. there is no evidence of father obtaining independent legal advice regarding the family law matter. it was not simply a case of bundling it with the civil action. the deed contemplated that there was further work to be undertaken, in the form of a legally compliant binding financial agreement (bfa) for it to be effective under the family law. this was never done, the deed per se was not the instrument designed to reflect the parties’ interests in the property, the bfa was meant to do so. the bfa was clearly meant to be formulated with both parties having independent legal advice. there was no provision in the deed of the consequences if the parties were not prepared to sign a bfa. it is worthy of note that it was always open for the wife not to sign it, in which case the deed was not determinative. throughout the litigation resulting in the deed, the children were giving the parents legal advice before and after the deed was prepared and executed. the deed was not executed in the presence of lawyers, let alone independent lawyers. it was executed in the presence of the children. the children were providing advice and able to influence the husband right up to executing the deed. the husband could not read or write english to the level required to properly represent his interests when signing the deed. there was never a bfa. for the purposes of facebook he would use google translate. property these submissions are only necessary if the court is of the view that the hearing morphed into a final hearing. they were not fleshed out in the hearing. there was insufficient evidence led for the purposes of a property distribution because the purpose of the hearing was only to deal with the s79(2) issue. the evidence is clear: a) this was a long marriage, b) the husband assumed the role of being the main income earner, primarily through his business. the wife assumed the role of home maker supplemented at times by income through work. c) the husband’s business management skills might have been lacking at times. d) notwithstanding, the parties were able to accumulate wealth. the parties shared the benefits of the accumulated wealth equally. e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses. whilst there is considerable documentation is relation to sale of property and disbursement of funds, there is no evidence to support alleged payments made to the husband. [ms d], the daughter-in-law says that she took out loans to use for payment to the husband by the amounts was only $81,731.99. she paid this money to [mr g] (the son) who merely stated that part of it was to go to the father and the rest for the renovation of the [t street, suburb u] property. the husband also provided $52,536 to prepare the [t street, suburb u] property for sale. date of separation date of separation whilst relevant is not material in the context of this long marriage for the purposes of property division. it is not necessary for the court to go beyond the 7th november 2019 which was clearly the date of separation. it was provided by the wife to police and the court. to suggest that it was a police error is neither accurate nor credible. nowhere in affidavit material is there a suggestion that there was an error and at no time did the wife or [ms d] correct the information. costs there was no additional court time used. this would have only been an issue if there was a need to progress a suggestion that the deed should be set aside due to fraud. if the matter is dealt with as a final hearing, considerable court time has been saved and there should not be a costs order.
a) this was a long marriage, b) the husband assumed the role of being the main income earner, primarily through his business. the wife assumed the role of home maker supplemented at times by income through work. c) the husband’s business management skills might have been lacking at times. d) notwithstanding, the parties were able to accumulate wealth. the parties shared the benefits of the accumulated wealth equally. e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
b) the husband assumed the role of being the main income earner, primarily through his business. the wife assumed the role of home maker supplemented at times by income through work. c) the husband’s business management skills might have been lacking at times. d) notwithstanding, the parties were able to accumulate wealth. the parties shared the benefits of the accumulated wealth equally. e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
c) the husband’s business management skills might have been lacking at times. d) notwithstanding, the parties were able to accumulate wealth. the parties shared the benefits of the accumulated wealth equally. e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
d) notwithstanding, the parties were able to accumulate wealth. the parties shared the benefits of the accumulated wealth equally. e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
e) the son purchased a motor vehicle and insured it in the name of the husband. f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
f) the son falsely claimed that the vehicle was stolen to lodge a claim with [insurer e]. g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
g) the husband was used to commence an unsuccessful legal action to claim on the policy and suffered judgment. h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
h) the wife, son and daughter are of the view that whilst the wife should share in the gain of wealth accumulated during the life of the marriage, the husband should burden all losses.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent  date of separation, (b) whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31 january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed. 3. witnesses who gave oral evidence:   whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31 january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.
applicant [mr spalla] in chief t 25 cross examination t 27 re-examination t 84 -98 day 2 applicant [mr spalla], on former affirmation t 14 further cross-examination t 20 – 22 [ms f] t 7:35 cross examination t 8:39 - 13:15 applicant [mr spalla], on former affirmation t14:17 cross-examination t 20:43 – 22:40 [ms d] in chief t 40:1 cross-examination t 42:33 – 70:26 the proceedings were derailed on the second day of hearing when counsel for the applicant at 3.16pm on the second day of hearing made a sudden application for adjournment to enable him to get instructions about an allegation of fraud. t 73 this application was despite counsel for the applicant’s having assured the court on day 1 “....they’re findings of fact that will need to be made, so i’m not alleging fraud. i’m not alleging that at all.” t 10: 44-45 the matter could possibly have concluded on 10 september 2021 but for the application for adjournment. the applicant has not been able to particularise the fraud despite a number of attempts. the history of requests is set out in the affidavits: (a) ms burrows filed 16 december 2021, (b) [ms d] filed 17 march 2022.
in frustration, in an attempt to bring the matter to a head, the respondent applied on 16 december 2021 as amended for orders that the points of claim be struck out or in the alternative the applicant answer the specified request for particulars and security for costs. no satisfactory answer to particulars was ever received and ultimately, by letter dated 18 august 2022, the applicant informed the respondent: “....upon review it is the position of our client that, whilst the evidence suggests that there may have been some misrepresentations and inaccuracies in the deed of settlement, they are not material to its effect in relation to the judgment debt and does to raise a matter of fraud between the parties in this action. thus being the case, we hereby abandon any previous suggestion that our client will be relying on any allegation of civil or criminal fraud.” nevertheless, the written submissions filed by the applicant hark back to allegations of fraud. the usefulness of that course is questionable. a comprehensive list of documents and chronology has been filed by the respondent from which an outline of contributions can be drawn. 11. outline of contributions
1. initial financial contributions section 79(4)(a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them,
2. financial contributions during the marriage
3. contributions post-separation:
in the context of parties who married in 1978, migrated from [country b] to australia in 1987, raised two children, owned property and ran a business, whether the parties separated on 1 august 2012 ([ms d] 5, 39) or 31 january 2014 (as recorded in the deed) or 7 november 2019 (applicant 29) is not as significant as the date of separation in much shorter marriages. however, the respondent says there are factors which support her case for the earlier date to be accepted and for the respondent’s evidence to be accepted over the applicant’s: the wife says the parties separated in 2012 and inquiries by the daughter [ms d] (affidavit sworn 31 august 2021 at paragraph 52) reveal the husband declared the following addresses as his residence at various material times: dates address 1.2.1990 - 6.10.1991 [aw street, suburb ah] 7.10.1991 - 25.5.1992 [ax street, suburb ah] 25.5.1992 - 5.12.1997 [ay street, suburb ah] 6.12.1997 - 18.2.2008 [az street, suburb ah] 19.2.2008 - 5.5.2013 [v street, suburb o] 16.5.2013 -15.12.2016 x street, suburb y 4.7.2018 - 19.11.2019 [z street, suburb y] 20.11.2019 - 3.6.2020 [ab street, town ac] the wife did not share with the husband any of the last three addresses listed above. crucially, on 31 january 2014, the contentious deed with [insurer e] was signed at the [x street, suburb y] property, not at the [t street, suburb u] property where the wife was living. if both parties had resided in [t street, suburb u], it would have been reasonable to expect that that is where the deed would be signed. in september 2012, the wife purchased [t street, suburb u] (2 [ms d] 12) and in january 2017, the wife purchased [h street, town j] ([ms d] 60). neither the [t street, suburb u] nor the [h street, town j] address appears on the husband’s list to centrelink. when asked about the addresses, the husband said [ms d] had filled out the forms for him (t 46: 1-31). the addresses are proof from the husband himself to support the wife’s version of the separation. if the 2019 separation was correct, then there was no reason to not use the [t street, suburb u] address before 2014 nor [h street, town j] after 2017. if the 2014 deed was a sham, or a fraud as suggested by the husband, [ms d] had remarkable prescience to give a false address before the deed even came into being in 2014. the husband claimed to not read english (t46: 15), yet he had run a business for many years and communicated with other people on facebook in english. (t52:13-54:12). nor did his affidavit bear a certificate of interpretation. (t57: 37) he answered questions with the interpreter. (t58: 14) he suggested his son or daughter had signed the document for him t35: 25) but then conceded “i signed because my son said, “sign, no problem, daddy.” (t58:33). the wife says the parties entered into a financial arrangement between late 2012 and january 2014, which is reflected in the registration of [t street, suburb u] in the wife’s name as the husband had taken his share of the sale proceeds of [v street, suburb o]. in this respect, the wife says “under s 79(2) of the act, a court shall not make a property settlement order unless satisfied that it is "just and equitable" to do so.” stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52 at 35: “it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order". at paragraph 39: “because the power to make a property settlement order is not to be exercised in an unprincipled fashion, whether it is "just and equitable" to make the order is not to be answered by assuming that the parties' rights to or interests in marital property are or should be different from those that then exist. all the more is that so when it is recognised that s 79 of the act must be applied keeping in mind that "[c]ommunity of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common law"[hepworth v hepworth (1963) 110 clr 309 at 317 per windeyer j, [1963] hca 49.]. questions between husband and wife about the ownership of property that may be then, or may have been in the past, enjoyed in common are to be "decided according to the same scheme of legal titles and equitable principles as govern the rights of any two persons who are not spouses"[hepworth v hepworth (1963) 110 clr 309 at 317 per windeyer j. see also wirth v wirth [1956] hca 71, (1956) 98 clr 228 at 231-232 per dixon cj]. the question presented by s 79 is whether those rights and interests should be altered.” the deed appears at annexure d to the affidavit of [ms d] dated 19 october 2020. three other people were present when the deed was signed, the wife, daughter [ms d] and son [mr g] ([ms d] sworn 19 october 2020 paragraph 48). 22. the deed provides: the property be transferred to the wife (clause 2.1), within 28 days the husband to attend on a solicitor to execute a binding financial agreement with [ms spalla] pursuant to section 90c family law act (clause 2.7), the husband’s share in the property to be released to [insurer e] (clause 2.7.1), the husband makes no further claim against the wife for property (clause 2.7.2), each party had independent legal advice prior to signing the deed (clause 12.1). notwithstanding the husband failed to comply with clause 2.7 of the deed, the wife submits the deed is such strong evidence of settlement that the court should treat it as a property settlement between the parties. the husband says he does not recall signing the deed, but he does not say non est factum and it must be remembered that on father’s day 2015, the husband was admitted to hospital with a cranial bleed. *husband para 11, 30). the husband’s detail on sale of [t street, suburb u] is as unreliable as his recollection in respect of other property transactions (husband 32, 58, 2h16, 59, 2h15). on the other hand, the evidence given by daughter [ms d] ([ms d] sworn 31 august 2021) can be verified on the internet, although her recollection of the purchase sale price is incorrect at $1,300,000 when the internet shows the sale price was $1,385,000.00. in all the circumstances of this case, the wife says the parties settled their financial affairs to their mutual satisfaction between 2012 and january 2014. a document sent to the court and to the husband’s solicitor on 1 april 2022, being letter from [k lawyers] (acting for husband) to [ba lawyers] dated 10 february 2014 confirmed settlement of the transfer with payment to [company bb] of $50,000 and to the wife of $175,858.97. the document discloses the mortgage at that time was $519,769.70. a further document sent to the court at the same time and to the husband’s solicitor, being letter from [k lawyers] to conveyancing studio dated 27 july 2016 confirmed sale of [t street, suburb u], payment of mortgage $775,230.25 and receipt by the wife of $468,828.77 plus balance of deposit. it would not be just and equitable to permit the husband to proceed with this application and to make any further adjustment between the parties pursuant to section 79 family law act 1975. response to the husband’s submissions generally, despite counsel for the applicant’s having assured the court on day 1 “....they’re findings of fact that will need to be made, so i’m not alleging fraud. i’m not alleging that at all” (t 10: 44-45), the husband persists throughout his submissions with his allegations of fraud. it must be remembered the husband had brain aneurysm [in] 2015, about which there is no medical evidence, but which may very well have affected his mood or memory, although the wife submits the husband is not otherwise to be believed. response to paragraphs by number r9. it is not true to say the husband has a limited command of english. his ability is addressed at paragraph 17 above. r12. as to paragraph 12, the legal representation was actual, not “purported” and extensive correspondence is annexed to [ms d’s] affidavit sworn 17 march 2022. r14. the assertions in this paragraph are not correct. the husband had an opportunity to cross-examine both [ms d] and [mr g] and did not take it. the [insurer e] file is available and does not support the allegations in this paragraph. r15. as to paragraph 15, not only is the assertion that [ms d] and [mr g] “have been instrumental in making decisions which affect the parents’ legal interests in property”, the evidence is that [ms d] and [mr g] have supported the husband, giving him a home with them at [x street, suburb y], on the husband’s own evidence from 16 may 2013 to 15 december 2016 and at other times. the affidavits of [ms d] and [mr g] show both have been physically, emotionally and financially supportive of their father who has repaid them with allegations of fraud, name-calling, nasty facebook posts [ms d] sworn 31 august 2021) against them and their mother and threats against them and their mother. r16. again, the husband had an opportunity to cross-examine both [ms d] and [mr g] and did not take it. the [insurer e] file is available and does not support the allegations in this paragraph. r18 and 19. the [insurer e] file is available. the husband had an opportunity to cross-examine both [ms d] and [mr g] and did not take it. he cannot now make such allegations without pleadings and evidence. r21. this assertion is not supported by the correspondence attached to [ms d]’s affidavit of 17 march 2022. the husband had an opportunity to cross-examine both [ms d] and [mr g] and did not take it. r26. the husband was in control of his own bank accounts, ran businesses, received money from [country b] and nevertheless was threatened with bankruptcy by the ato. to suggest this was somehow [ms d]’s fault is a scurrilous allegation. r24 to 28. these paragraphs are incorrect. the settlement sheet for [v street, suburb o] appears at [ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 annexure pp 287 –295 and shows from the amount of $820,117.78, 622,343.87 payable to westpac leaving the amount payable to the parties as $169,543.22 + balance of deposit $77,820 (p295) = $247,363.22. the [t street, suburb u] house was worth significantly less than the [v street, suburb o] property as it was purchased in august/september 2013 for $634,000, being $276,000 less. ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 annexure i pp 86-121). the [v street, suburb o] house sold for $1,385,000.) a document sent to the court and to the husband’s solicitor on 1 april 2022, being letter from [k lawyers] to [ba lawyers] dated 10 february 2014 confirmed settlement of the transfer with payment to [company bb] of $50,000 and to the wife of $175,858.97. the document discloses the mortgage at that time was $519,769.70. a further document sent to the court at the same time and to the husband’s solicitor, being letter from [k lawyers] to conveyancing studio dated 27 july 2016 confirmed sale of [t street, suburb u], payment of mortgage $775,230.25 and receipt by the wife of $468,828.77 plus balance of deposit. no document is available to show purchase of [t street, suburb u], but the mortgage is significantly more than it had been for [v street, suburb o] $775,239,25 ([v street, suburb o] mortgage $622,343.87 or $152,895.38 less) despite [t street, suburb u] being a much cheaper property and despite the wife having owned it for 4 years and paid the mortgage in that period. documents show the wife was owner builder of the renovations to [t street, suburb u] ([ms d] 31 august 2021 annexure i pp 123-128). the [h street, town j] property purchase was a substantial step down in value as it was purchased for $340,000 by contract dated 15 december 2016 ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 annexure k and l pp 133-6). a settlement sheet is not available, but if the wife had anything significant after discharge of the debts, it is not reflected in her financial statements filed 19 october 2020 nor 27 august 2021. the assumption must be that the wife started with very little when [t street, suburb u] was purchased and the cost of [h street, town j] must reflect what she had after implementing the terms of the deed, paying the mortgage on [t street, suburb u] and improving it. r30. the wife denies the parties continued to live together in [t street, suburb u]. that suggestion is refuted by evidence of the address the husband gave to centrelink and by the evidence of his daughter and son. r31 and 32. the submission cannot be supported. the husband had had financial problems for some time, the [insurer e] litigation perhaps being the final straw for the wife:   in 2011, the husband was threatened with bankruptcy by the ato, (b) the husband received the proceeds of sale of land in [country b] amounting to some 55 euros which he applied to business debts ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 paras 39 to 46 annexures m to s pp 137-167) (c) the husband had conducted a number of businesses over the years ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 paras 53 to 60(h).), (d) the husband withdrew sums from his superannuation.   the husband received the proceeds of sale of land in [country b] amounting to some 55 euros which he applied to business debts ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 paras 39 to 46 annexures m to s pp 137-167) (c) the husband had conducted a number of businesses over the years ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 paras 53 to 60(h).),   the husband had conducted a number of businesses over the years ([ms d]’s affidavit 31 august 2021 paras 53 to 60(h).),
r33 to 60. these paragraphs deal with the deed. the wife’s submissions in respect of the deed are made above. evidence that the husband received legal advice is set out in the affidavit of [ms d] 17th march 2022 which annexes extensive emails in respect of that advice. a chronology of and index to the emails was filed 30 march 2022. there is no question the husband received legal advice. r61 – 60. the submission as to the date of separation is not supported by the husband’s address to centrelink. nevertheless, the daughter in particular and the son and his wife, also [ms d], have been dutiful children and housed and supported the husband at various times, until he moved in with his present partner [ms f] on 7 november 2019. it would be disingenuous if the husband suggested his relationship with his present partner commenced when he moved in with her on 7 november 2019. [ms d] had been contacted by [ms f] via facebook on 21 september 2019 ((2 [ms d] 28:f). in 2014-5, the husband had a relationship with [ms ad] and told [ms d] he was moving to [country b] with her ([ms d] 32), although that did not eventuate. while extra marital relationships are not determinative of separation, it would not be unreasonable to infer separation from a former spouse from two such relationships. nevertheless, the children were supportive of the husband and he kept machinery at the [h street, town j] property and worked from there, at times. at the same time, the parties were not divorced, are still not divorced, and this led to police recording on 25 november 2019 “the relationship ended 2 weeks ago on the 7-11-2019 at 6pm when the defendant suddenly moved out”. the facts were created by the police constable and are not signed by the wife. in the circumstances, the sentence from the police application for an avo is not determinative of separation. ([ms d] 31 august 2021 annexure u pp177-185 at 183). r67 to 73. with respect to the case guardian. the wife was first diagnosed with a major depressive disorder in 2004 and is treated by psychiatrist [dr bc]. ([ms d] 2:a) the husband’s messages and facebook posts attached to [ms d]’s affidavit sworn 31 august 2021 are symptomatic of long-term abuse and disrespect by the husband to his wife and family. in addition to her major depressive disorder, the wife has had concerns in relation to her heart. ([ms d] sworn 3 september 2021). r72. this paragraph contains another scurrilous allegation, which cannot be supported on the evidence. r73. [mr g]’s affidavit discloses his arrest in 2017 ([mr g] 30) and the husband’s facebook post ( [ms d] sworn 31 august 2021 para 26 annexure a page 11) shows he was aware of it. it is and was no secret. it relates to drugs, not “fraud”. r76. the allegation about the [motor vehicle 5] and [insurer e] is dealt with above. r86. the husband has received a property settlement from the meagre funds available from sale of [v street, suburb o] ($100,000 from $245,000), from [country b] (55 euros) and from his superannuation ($52,535.16 in 2015, although to be fair, he says this was to prepare the [t street, suburb u] property for sale but provides no documentation and $10,261.12 in april 2015, which he says he deposited into a westpac joint account, but provides no documentation). he now seeks to take away the little security the wife is left with. costs 31. the wife filed a costs notice on 1 april 2022. costs are always in the discretion of the court. section 117 applies, so that the primary position is that each party pay his or her own costs. however, section 117(2)(c): “the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters,” given the course of conduct embarked on by the respondent, the applicant asks that, the respondent pay the applicant’s costs not only thrown away by the adjournment, but of the application and attempts to receive particulars together with applications, affidavits, appearances and correspondence seeking particulars. the wife respectfully asks this honourable court to dismiss the husband’s application.   the 2014 deed and its validity, (b) stanford issue regarding a post separation purchase by the respondent wife, and (c) further issues raised by the applicant husband who suggests that the date of separation is not 2012 but rather 2019.   stanford issue regarding a post separation purchase by the respondent wife, and (c) further issues raised by the applicant husband who suggests that the date of separation is not 2012 but rather 2019.   further issues raised by the applicant husband who suggests that the date of separation is not 2012 but rather 2019.   date of separation, (b) whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31 january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed, (d) whether the husband received independent legal advice about the deed.   whether the parties separated on the date set out in the deed signed by each of them on 31 january 2014, (c) whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed,   whether the parties put into effect a property settlement between them as provided in the deed,
the deed, date of separation & independent legal advice
it is not argued that the deed is not valid but only that it properly settles the [insurer e] litigation and does not purport to settle any family law action.
the recital must relate to specific facts ... be certain, clear, and unambiguous. ... estoppel by deed is a rule of evidence founded on the principle that a solemn and unambiguous statement ... in a deed must be taken as binding between parties and privies, and therefore as not admitting any contradictory proof ... this is a rule of common law.
the party invoking an estoppel by deed does not have to prove that he relied on the statement and changed his position apart from entering the deed. such an estoppel cannot be based on an implication and must relate to what on its face is an existing fact.
so long as the deed remains in place, those recitals are admissions by mr thumbiran that he was a guarantor and that silver chef had the benefit of a charge. they were also apt to give rise to a common law estoppel to prevent him denying either matter: see franklins pty ltd v metcash trading ltd [2009] nswca 407, (2009) 76 nswlr 603 at [380(4)]. the position in equity is different. as lord maugham explained in greer v kettle [1938] ac 156 at 171: “the position in equity is and always was different in this respect”, adding that there could be no estoppel in the face of a claim to rectification or rescission, points emphasised in k handley, “reinventing estoppel in the privy council” (2014) law quarterly review (statements to the contrary in prime sight ltd v lavarello [2013] ukpc 22, [2014] ac 436 notwithstanding). but the nuances attendant upon the legal effect of an estoppel flowing from a recital in a deed do not deny that the inclusion of recitals such as cl 2.2 had a substantive legal effect.   the husband is indebted to the insurer e pursuant to a judgment debt obtained in the nsw district court in the sum of $100,620.01 (recital par.i), (b) as at the date of the deed, the parties are married but separated (par.ii), (c) the remaining recitals summarise that the wife is not indebted to the insurer e, the parties are the registered proprietors of the t street, suburb u property, and in order to remove the writ over that property (which will involve some re-financing in relation to this property), the parties have determined to pay, in part, the judgment debt.   as at the date of the deed, the parties are married but separated (par.ii), (c) the remaining recitals summarise that the wife is not indebted to the insurer e, the parties are the registered proprietors of the t street, suburb u property, and in order to remove the writ over that property (which will involve some re-financing in relation to this property), the parties have determined to pay, in part, the judgment debt.   the remaining recitals summarise that the wife is not indebted to the insurer e, the parties are the registered proprietors of the t street, suburb u property, and in order to remove the writ over that property (which will involve some re-financing in relation to this property), the parties have determined to pay, in part, the judgment debt.   clause 2.1: mr spalla and ms spalla shall do all things and execute all such documents that may be required to transfer all of the right, title and interest in the property [t street, suburb u] held by mr spalla and ms spalla,[63] (b) clause 2.7 provided that within 28 days of settlement, mr spalla would attend upon a solicitor for the purpose of entering into a binding financial agreement with ms spalla, (c) clause 2.7.2 provided that mr spalla would have no further claims against ms spalla in relation to the property “or other marital property in the possession and control of ms spalla or his personal maintenance”, and (d) clause 12.1 provided that both parties acknowledged that they had each received, “or had the opportunity to receive” independent legal advice in relation to the terms and effect of the deed.   clause 2.7 provided that within 28 days of settlement, mr spalla would attend upon a solicitor for the purpose of entering into a binding financial agreement with ms spalla, (c) clause 2.7.2 provided that mr spalla would have no further claims against ms spalla in relation to the property “or other marital property in the possession and control of ms spalla or his personal maintenance”, and (d) clause 12.1 provided that both parties acknowledged that they had each received, “or had the opportunity to receive” independent legal advice in relation to the terms and effect of the deed.   clause 2.7.2 provided that mr spalla would have no further claims against ms spalla in relation to the property “or other marital property in the possession and control of ms spalla or his personal maintenance”, and (d) clause 12.1 provided that both parties acknowledged that they had each received, “or had the opportunity to receive” independent legal advice in relation to the terms and effect of the deed.   clause 12.1 provided that both parties acknowledged that they had each received, “or had the opportunity to receive” independent legal advice in relation to the terms and effect of the deed.
it is generally said that a statement capable of supporting an estoppel must be precise, clear and unambiguous, read in the context of the deed as a whole. that seems to be an abiding requirement ... more technical requirements of earlier times appear largely to have melted away. the law appears no longer to confine an estoppel to statements of fact as distinct from statements of law, express as distinct from implied statements, and statements contained in a recital, as distinct from an operative part, of a deed ...
the essential idea of estoppel by deed is that a party who, by entry into a deed, expresses a solemn intention to be bound by a particular proposition will, in proceedings against a party entitled to the benefit of the deed, be precluded (ie, stopped), by reason of entry into the deed, from denying the truth, or at least the operation, of that proposition ...
consideration & application of stanford ] first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. so much follows from the text of s.79(1)(a) itself, which refers to "altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property" (emphasis added). the question posed by s.79(2) is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order. [38] secondly, although s.79 confers a broad power on a court exercising jurisdiction under the act to make a property settlement order, it is not a power that is to be exercised according to an unguided judicial discretion. in wirth v wirth, dixon cj observed that a power to make such order with respect to property and costs "as [the judge] thinks fit", in any question between husband and wife as to the title to or possession of property, is a power which "rests upon the law and not upon judicial discretion". and as four members of this court observed about proceedings for maintenance and property settlement orders in r v watson, ex parte armstrong[
"the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as 'palm tree justice'. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down".  ] because the power to make a property settlement order is not to be exercised in an unprincipled fashion, whether it is "just and equitable" to make the order is not to be answered by assuming that the parties' rights to or interests in marital property are or should be different from those that then exist. all the more is that so when it is recognised that s.79 of the act must be applied keeping in mind that "[c]ommunity of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common law". questions between husband and wife about the ownership of property that may be then, or may have been in the past, enjoyed in common are to be "decided according to the same scheme of legal titles and equitable principles as govern the rights of any two persons who are not spouses". the question presented by s.79 is whether those rights and interests should be altered. [40] third, whether making a property settlement order is "just and equitable" is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s.79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised "in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down". to conclude that making an order is "just and equitable" only because of and by reference to various matters in s.79(4), without a separate consideration of s.79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act. [41] adherence to these fundamental propositions in exercising the power in s.79 gives due recognition to "the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage" identified in s.43(1)(a) as a principle to be applied by courts in exercising jurisdiction under the act. if the parties have made a financial agreement about the property of one or both of the parties that is binding under pt viiia of the act, then, subject to that part, a court cannot make a property settlement order under s.79 but if the parties to a marriage have expressly considered, but not put in writing in a way that complies with pt viiia, how their property interests should be arranged between them during the continuance of their marriage, the application of these principles accommodates that fact. and if the parties to a marriage have not expressly considered whether or to what extent there is or should be some different arrangement of their property interests in their individual or commonly held assets while the marriage continues, the application of these principles again accommodates that fact. these principles do so by recognising the force of the stated and unstated assumptions between the parties to a marriage that the arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the purposes of that husband and wife during the continuance of their marriage. the fundamental propositions that have been identified require that a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interests during the continuance of the marriage.   the husband’s various assertions regarding either contributions or payments alleged to have been made by him are, almost in all instances, unsupported by any independent documentation or other evidence, (b) conversely, almost every assertion or contention made in the wife’s case, usually by one or other (or both) of her children, are supported by documentation, even if some of the documentation is difficult to decipher in certain respects. the evidence of the parties’ children (plus the other witnesses – one cross examined, the other not), together with the documentation provided by these witnesses, undermines and refutes almost all of the applicant’s evidence and contentions. notably, much of the evidence on the respondent’s behalf was unchallenged, (c) the husband’s evidence was very unsatisfactory in almost every respect, while that of ms d was sound and, usually, independently supported by documentation, such as correspondence with the husband’s solicitor at the time, (d) a number of witnesses were not required for cross examination by the husband. they included his son mr g, who provided a range of documents annexed to his trial affidavit, which confirmed much of his account (and that of his sister) regarding things like, the date of separation, what did and did not happen leading up to the signing of the deed in january 2014, and importantly, the payment of funds, in cash, as requested if not demanded by the husband. by not challenging his son in cross examination, the husband cannot now challenge (or more generally complain about) the multiple pieces of documentary and other evidence provided by his son mr g, or his wife, ms d. the applicant’s evidence regarding, for example, that he did not receive any legal advice in relation to the deed, was clearly refuted by the evidence contained in the documents produced by ms d, and in certain respects by the evidence supplied by mr g, (e) the husband’s failure to call his “new partner”, ms f, was also telling. so too was his own contradiction of evidence where, in his first affidavit, he confirmed that she was his new partner, and that she had provided (and still seemingly does so) financial support and assistance to him (including, apparently, rent-free accommodation), yet in his oral evidence, he stated that she was not his partner and that he simply rented a room from her. whether on the basis of the principles set out by the high court in jones v dunkel regarding inferences drawn from the failure to call a witness, or principles set out by the full court in chang v su regarding “disclosure” (accepting that the husband has had difficulty in accessing material), the husband’s evidence was significantly flawed, unsupported, and/or refuted by documentary evidence supplied on behalf of the respondent, on multiple levels.[66] and as earlier recorded when considering his oral evidence, i found him to be a most unsatisfactory witness, (f) the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   conversely, almost every assertion or contention made in the wife’s case, usually by one or other (or both) of her children, are supported by documentation, even if some of the documentation is difficult to decipher in certain respects. the evidence of the parties’ children (plus the other witnesses – one cross examined, the other not), together with the documentation provided by these witnesses, undermines and refutes almost all of the applicant’s evidence and contentions. notably, much of the evidence on the respondent’s behalf was unchallenged, (c) the husband’s evidence was very unsatisfactory in almost every respect, while that of ms d was sound and, usually, independently supported by documentation, such as correspondence with the husband’s solicitor at the time, (d) a number of witnesses were not required for cross examination by the husband. they included his son mr g, who provided a range of documents annexed to his trial affidavit, which confirmed much of his account (and that of his sister) regarding things like, the date of separation, what did and did not happen leading up to the signing of the deed in january 2014, and importantly, the payment of funds, in cash, as requested if not demanded by the husband. by not challenging his son in cross examination, the husband cannot now challenge (or more generally complain about) the multiple pieces of documentary and other evidence provided by his son mr g, or his wife, ms d. the applicant’s evidence regarding, for example, that he did not receive any legal advice in relation to the deed, was clearly refuted by the evidence contained in the documents produced by ms d, and in certain respects by the evidence supplied by mr g, (e) the husband’s failure to call his “new partner”, ms f, was also telling. so too was his own contradiction of evidence where, in his first affidavit, he confirmed that she was his new partner, and that she had provided (and still seemingly does so) financial support and assistance to him (including, apparently, rent-free accommodation), yet in his oral evidence, he stated that she was not his partner and that he simply rented a room from her. whether on the basis of the principles set out by the high court in jones v dunkel regarding inferences drawn from the failure to call a witness, or principles set out by the full court in chang v su regarding “disclosure” (accepting that the husband has had difficulty in accessing material), the husband’s evidence was significantly flawed, unsupported, and/or refuted by documentary evidence supplied on behalf of the respondent, on multiple levels.[66] and as earlier recorded when considering his oral evidence, i found him to be a most unsatisfactory witness, (f) the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   the husband’s evidence was very unsatisfactory in almost every respect, while that of ms d was sound and, usually, independently supported by documentation, such as correspondence with the husband’s solicitor at the time, (d) a number of witnesses were not required for cross examination by the husband. they included his son mr g, who provided a range of documents annexed to his trial affidavit, which confirmed much of his account (and that of his sister) regarding things like, the date of separation, what did and did not happen leading up to the signing of the deed in january 2014, and importantly, the payment of funds, in cash, as requested if not demanded by the husband. by not challenging his son in cross examination, the husband cannot now challenge (or more generally complain about) the multiple pieces of documentary and other evidence provided by his son mr g, or his wife, ms d. the applicant’s evidence regarding, for example, that he did not receive any legal advice in relation to the deed, was clearly refuted by the evidence contained in the documents produced by ms d, and in certain respects by the evidence supplied by mr g, (e) the husband’s failure to call his “new partner”, ms f, was also telling. so too was his own contradiction of evidence where, in his first affidavit, he confirmed that she was his new partner, and that she had provided (and still seemingly does so) financial support and assistance to him (including, apparently, rent-free accommodation), yet in his oral evidence, he stated that she was not his partner and that he simply rented a room from her. whether on the basis of the principles set out by the high court in jones v dunkel regarding inferences drawn from the failure to call a witness, or principles set out by the full court in chang v su regarding “disclosure” (accepting that the husband has had difficulty in accessing material), the husband’s evidence was significantly flawed, unsupported, and/or refuted by documentary evidence supplied on behalf of the respondent, on multiple levels.[66] and as earlier recorded when considering his oral evidence, i found him to be a most unsatisfactory witness, (f) the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   a number of witnesses were not required for cross examination by the husband. they included his son mr g, who provided a range of documents annexed to his trial affidavit, which confirmed much of his account (and that of his sister) regarding things like, the date of separation, what did and did not happen leading up to the signing of the deed in january 2014, and importantly, the payment of funds, in cash, as requested if not demanded by the husband. by not challenging his son in cross examination, the husband cannot now challenge (or more generally complain about) the multiple pieces of documentary and other evidence provided by his son mr g, or his wife, ms d. the applicant’s evidence regarding, for example, that he did not receive any legal advice in relation to the deed, was clearly refuted by the evidence contained in the documents produced by ms d, and in certain respects by the evidence supplied by mr g, (e) the husband’s failure to call his “new partner”, ms f, was also telling. so too was his own contradiction of evidence where, in his first affidavit, he confirmed that she was his new partner, and that she had provided (and still seemingly does so) financial support and assistance to him (including, apparently, rent-free accommodation), yet in his oral evidence, he stated that she was not his partner and that he simply rented a room from her. whether on the basis of the principles set out by the high court in jones v dunkel regarding inferences drawn from the failure to call a witness, or principles set out by the full court in chang v su regarding “disclosure” (accepting that the husband has had difficulty in accessing material), the husband’s evidence was significantly flawed, unsupported, and/or refuted by documentary evidence supplied on behalf of the respondent, on multiple levels.[66] and as earlier recorded when considering his oral evidence, i found him to be a most unsatisfactory witness, (f) the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   the husband’s failure to call his “new partner”, ms f, was also telling. so too was his own contradiction of evidence where, in his first affidavit, he confirmed that she was his new partner, and that she had provided (and still seemingly does so) financial support and assistance to him (including, apparently, rent-free accommodation), yet in his oral evidence, he stated that she was not his partner and that he simply rented a room from her. whether on the basis of the principles set out by the high court in jones v dunkel regarding inferences drawn from the failure to call a witness, or principles set out by the full court in chang v su regarding “disclosure” (accepting that the husband has had difficulty in accessing material), the husband’s evidence was significantly flawed, unsupported, and/or refuted by documentary evidence supplied on behalf of the respondent, on multiple levels.[66] and as earlier recorded when considering his oral evidence, i found him to be a most unsatisfactory witness, (f) the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   the husband’s failure to provide any information regarding properties in country b, and later denial that he currently had any such properties, in circumstances where the evidence, especially of ms f, confirmed that there were such properties and that funds had come from them, and (g) the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.   the same information and principles regarding the deed, noted above, apply equally here, to preclude the husband, and in turn the court, according to principle, in effect permitting the litigation to continue in the face of the clear and unambiguous terms of the recitals, and likewise the terms of the deed itself.
conclusion ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41] :
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.  ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added)  ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
associate: dated: 15 december 2022
dated: 15 december 2022
[1] see transcript (9th september 2021) at p.3. because the complete transcript of the final hearing does not have continuous page numbering, hereafter, such references to the transcript for the first day will be “ta” followed by the page number.[2] a copy of the enduring power of attorney, dated 4th may 2016, is annexure b to ms d’s affidavit, filed 19th october 2020.[3] ta 10.[4] see t 8 – 13.[5] the transcript for the second day of the trial on 10th september 2021 will be referred to as “tb” followed by the page number. thus here, tb 66 – 83.[6] stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108.[7] ta 27.[8] ta 28.[9] ta 29.[10] ta 32.[11] ta 32. [12] ta 35 – 37. [13] ta 38. [14] ta 39. [15] ta 40. [16] see pars.80 – 82 of the husband’s primary affidavit, where he deposed that ms f has assisted him with legal fees in relation to certain avo proceedings, as well as (it is reasonably inferred) with rent-free accommodation (the husband says that he makes contributions where he can to groceries and bills). he also deposed that ms f has assisted him with various living expenses, such as fuel and ctp insurance. again i note that no evidence was provided by ms f in the husband’s case.[17] ta 46. [18] ta 46. [19] see the somewhat extended discussion, including the caution to the husband, at ta 47 – 48. [20] ta 49. [21] ta 57 – 58. [22] ta 59. [23] see ta 64 & 65. [24] ta 67.[25] ta 69. [26] ta 72. [27] ta 73.[28] ta 73. [29] ta 74.[30] ta 76.[31] ta 77 – 78. [32] ta 79.[33] ta 81 – 82. [34] ta 86.[35] ta 94.[36] ta 95. [37] ta 97.[38] tb 15. [39] tb 15 & 16. [40] as with the husband’s evidence, ms d’s evidence was all conducted by microsoft teams. the same was true of any and all oral submissions by counsel for the parties.[41] see tb 43 – 44.[42] references here are to ms d’s affidavit of 19th october 2020 at paragraph 61 ff. [43] tb 44 & 45. [44] tb 45 & 46. [45] tb 47 & 48. [46] tb 52.[47] tb 52 – 53.[48] tb 53.[49] tb 54. [50] tb 57 – 58. [51] tb 61. [52] tb 65 – 66.[53] tb 71. [54] see tb 72 – 74. [55] tb 12. [56] tb 12. [57] the transcript of the examination was annexed to this affidavit. see p.17 of this transcript.[58] n. seddon, seddon on deeds (second edition) (sydney: the federation press, 2022); k.r. handley, estoppel by conduct and election (second edition) (london: sweet & maxwell, 2016). generally, see also halsbury’s laws of england, fourth edition (1975) volume 12, “deeds and other instruments”, especially at par.1509 ff “effect of recitals on construction” p.638 ff.[59] greer v kettle [1938] ac 156.[60] seddon at 228 [5.5].[61] see handley at 124 [7-002] (internal citations omitted). see [7-003] for an extended discussion regarding the extent of the estoppel, including circumstances where equity would intervene to limit enforcement in certain circumstances. in my view, none of the limitations outlined there apply here.[62] thumbiran v silver chef rentals pty ltd [2022] nswca 148.[63] clause 2.5 referred to the payment to the insurer e, in partial settlement, the sum of $50,000.[64] labracon pty ltd v cuturich [2013] nswsc 97.[65] stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108 (“stanford”). see also the discussion by the full court in bevan v bevan [2013] famcafc 116; (2013) 279 flr 1; (2014) 49 fam lr 387.[66] jones v dunkel (1959) 101 clr 298; chang v su [2002] famca 156; (2002) 170 flr 244; (2002) 29 fam lr 406.[67] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.