last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
keats & halloran [2022] fedcfamc2f 1724
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
as explained in the joint reasons in dasreef pty ltd v hawchar, the starting point in determining the admissibility of evidence of opinion is relevance: what is the fact in issue that the party tendering the evidence asserts the opinion proves or assists in proving ...
applicant’s orders sought
final orders sought 1. that all previous parenting orders be discharged. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for [x] born [in] 2009, [y] born [in] 2012, and [z] born [in] 2012 (collectively “the children”). 3. that the children live with the mother. that unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, the children spend time with the father as follows: (a) during school terms, each alternate weekend from 6.00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and (b) during school holidays, for one half of school holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, with the father in the first half of the school holidays in even years and second half of the school holidays in odd years. or in the alternative: 1. that order 5 of the orders made 20 june 2018 be discharged. that orders 15, 16, and 17 in the minute of consent orders annexed to the orders made 20 june 2018 be discharged. that the children, [x] born [in] 2009, [y] born [in] 2012, and [z] born [in] 2012 (collectively “the children”) spend time with the mother as follows: during school terms, each alternate weekend from 6.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, during school holidays, for one half of school holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in even years and second half of the school holidays in odd years. that unless otherwise agreed between the parties, changeovers shall be at [e park] in [town f]. that on wednesdays, the parent who has care of the children facilitate a telephone call with the other parent for one hour as agreed between the parties or failing agreement from 5:00pm to 6:00pm. that during the scheduled video and telephone calls between the children and the parent who does not have care of the children, the parent who has care of the children ensure that the children are afforded privacy, and not interrupt or allow any other person to interrupt the calls. that the father facilitate any other video or telephone calls as reasonably requested by the children with their mother. interlocutory orders sought procedural that leave be granted for the mother’s affidavit filed in support of this application to exceed 10 pages in length. discharge existing orders 2. that order 5 of the orders made 20 june 2018 be discharged. that orders 15, 16, and 17 in the minute of consent orders annexed to the orders made 20 june 2018 be discharged. spend time with that until further order, the children, [x] born [in] 2009, [y] born [in] 2012, and [z] born [in] 2012 (collectively “the children”) spend time with the mother as follows:   during school terms, each alternate weekend from 6.00pm on friday until 5:00pm on sunday, and (b) during school holidays, for one half of school holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, with the father in the first half of the school holidays in even years and second half of the school holidays in odd years.   during school holidays, for one half of school holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, with the father in the first half of the school holidays in even years and second half of the school holidays in odd years.   from the date of these orders until the start of term 1 2023: on the first, third and fifth weekend after the making of these orders, from 10.00am until 4.00pm on saturday, on the seventh, ninth and eleventh weekend after the making of these orders, from 9.00am until 5.00pm on saturday, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 9.00am saturday until 5.00pm sunday. (d) commencing from the start of term 1 2023: during school terms, each alternate weekend from 6.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, during the school holidays following terms 1, 2 and 3 in 2023, for a period of five consecutive nights during each school holiday period, and unless otherwise agreed between the parties, commencing at 6.00pm on friday during the weekend that the children would normally be in the mother’s care pursuant to the preceding subclause. (e) commencing from the school holidays following term 4 2023: during school terms, each alternate weekend from 6.00pm friday until 5.00pm sunday, during school holidays, for one half of school holidays as agreed between the parties, and failing agreement, with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in even years and second half of the school holidays in odd years. the mother shall ensure that her partner, [mr g], or another adult agreed between the parties in writing, is present for the time set out in order 4(a) above and substantially present for the time set out in order 4(b) above. that unless otherwise agreed between the parties, changeovers shall be at [e park] in [town f]. that on wednesdays, the parent who has care of the children facilitate a telephone call with the other parent for one hour as agreed between the parties or failing agreement from 5:00pm to 6:00pm. that during the scheduled video and telephone calls between the children and the parent who does not have care of the children, the parent who has care of the children ensure that the children are afforded privacy, and not interrupt or allow any other person to interrupt the calls. that the father facilitate any other video or telephone calls as reasonably requested by the children.
family report that pursuant to section 62g the of the family law act 1975 (cth) the parties jointly engage [ms h] to prepare an updated family report, whether that be in the capacity as a court child expert (practicing under an appointment as a family consultant) or a privately funded single expert, and that the father bear the costs associated with the preparation of that report. that [ms h] be provided with a copy of the report of [dr b] dated 6 october 2021, any documents filed by the parties in these proceedings, and any other documents as agreed in writing between the parties.
respondent’s orders sought
interlocutory orders sought that these proceedings be jointed with proceeding number pac1187/2015 between [mr keats] and [ms halloran]. that the evidence, including expert reports, admitted in proceeding number pac1187/2015 be evidence in this proceeding number cac2603/2021. that the proceedings are transferred to judge w neville for ongoing case management and determination. that pursuant to section 143 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021 and part 10.3 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 the application filed 16 august 2022 be dismissed. that in the alternative to paragraph 4 hereof, the application filed 16 august 2022 be dismissed, as having failed to demonstrate a change in circumstances for the children justifying reconsideration of the orders made 20 june 2018 and it is not in the best interest of the children for such proceedings to be permitted. that in the alternative to paragraphs 4 and 5 hereof, the application filed 16 august 2022 be dismissed, as such application is brought contrary to the orders made by consent of the parties 20 june 2018. that the applicant pay the respondent’s costs on an indemnity basis.
the applicant mother’s documentary evidence
the mother’s first affidavit (august 2022)  the mother’s primary care of the children prior to the june 2018 orders (this conveniently ignores the reasons why care and protection authorities removed the children from her care), (b) the children have lived with the father and [now] have a meaningful relationship with him (the sub-text here is that the father’s “time” should now somehow expire because he has had enough time with the children but the mother has not, other explanations are possible but not set out), (c) the mother will promote and support the children’s ongoing relationship with the father, (d) her 13 year old daughter x has expressed a view of wanting to live in city k, allegedly saying also that her father said that this could happen when she turns 15. as important as the views of children can be, this is little more than an unsubstantiated assertion. further, none of the matters here noted amount to a relevant change in circumstances (e) the mother’s child from an earlier relationship (p, now q) lives in city k. the mother generally described the incidents of her relationship with q and the support she provided during q’s gender transition. she also deposed that if the children lived with her they would be able to see q more regularly. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (f) the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the children have lived with the father and [now] have a meaningful relationship with him (the sub-text here is that the father’s “time” should now somehow expire because he has had enough time with the children but the mother has not, other explanations are possible but not set out), (c) the mother will promote and support the children’s ongoing relationship with the father, (d) her 13 year old daughter x has expressed a view of wanting to live in city k, allegedly saying also that her father said that this could happen when she turns 15. as important as the views of children can be, this is little more than an unsubstantiated assertion. further, none of the matters here noted amount to a relevant change in circumstances (e) the mother’s child from an earlier relationship (p, now q) lives in city k. the mother generally described the incidents of her relationship with q and the support she provided during q’s gender transition. she also deposed that if the children lived with her they would be able to see q more regularly. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (f) the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother will promote and support the children’s ongoing relationship with the father, (d) her 13 year old daughter x has expressed a view of wanting to live in city k, allegedly saying also that her father said that this could happen when she turns 15. as important as the views of children can be, this is little more than an unsubstantiated assertion. further, none of the matters here noted amount to a relevant change in circumstances (e) the mother’s child from an earlier relationship (p, now q) lives in city k. the mother generally described the incidents of her relationship with q and the support she provided during q’s gender transition. she also deposed that if the children lived with her they would be able to see q more regularly. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (f) the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   her 13 year old daughter x has expressed a view of wanting to live in city k, allegedly saying also that her father said that this could happen when she turns 15. as important as the views of children can be, this is little more than an unsubstantiated assertion. further, none of the matters here noted amount to a relevant change in circumstances (e) the mother’s child from an earlier relationship (p, now q) lives in city k. the mother generally described the incidents of her relationship with q and the support she provided during q’s gender transition. she also deposed that if the children lived with her they would be able to see q more regularly. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (f) the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother’s child from an earlier relationship (p, now q) lives in city k. the mother generally described the incidents of her relationship with q and the support she provided during q’s gender transition. she also deposed that if the children lived with her they would be able to see q more regularly. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (f) the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother said that she had many close friends in town l who had children of similar age(s) to the children here. likewise, she said that her fiancé has a nephew and nieces with whom her children could relate, and similarly with other children “on our street in town l”. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (g) the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother set out her various work endeavours as a carer and educator (which she still does and enjoys), where changeover would or should take place (town f), some general details about her fiancé who has indicated his willingness to assist her with the children, plus some details of his house with four bedrooms. the mother said she could assist the children with their homework because of her previous work as an educator, and she said that she and mr g hope to marry soon but would not do so without the children present. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (h) if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   if the children lived with the mother, she said that they could attend town l public school, and provided details of the school and its facilities (actual and proposed). the mother said that she and mr g have also considered private schools in city k for the children. again it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, (i) the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother noted the children’s hobbies and some of their personality traits. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here, and finally (j) the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.   the mother noted her more recent employment and how she had flexible work hours. it was not explained how, or why, this information could or would constitute “a material change in circumstances” with respect to the children here.
the mother’s second affidavit (october 2022)
i am very concerned that [dr d] and [dr c] diagnosed [ms halloran] as possibly having a personality disorder but [dr b] does not address this in any meaningful way. there is no discussion about this in his report. he also seemed to conclude that [ms halloran] only suffers ptsd in relation to a recent car accident. this is the history that [ms halloran] herself reports to him.   she is engaged to mr g, who is supportive of her in all ways, including the children. mr g is “steadily employed in areas related to the community and is undertaking a course of study in community work”, (b) the mother has secured steady employment, and has flexibility to enable her to be available for the children when they are with her. she is undertaking a tertiary degree, (c) she has previously volunteered with a number of agencies and has made “close friends and mentors in the wider community”, (d) she shares a four bedroom house with her fiancé. the house is in a “family friendly” neighbourhood, (e) the mother deposed that she had successfully sought treatment for mental health issues that have occurred since 2018, namely ptsd from a car accident. but, again, there is no reference anywhere to the diagnoses and treatment recommended by dr c (among others), and (f) she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”   the mother has secured steady employment, and has flexibility to enable her to be available for the children when they are with her. she is undertaking a tertiary degree, (c) she has previously volunteered with a number of agencies and has made “close friends and mentors in the wider community”, (d) she shares a four bedroom house with her fiancé. the house is in a “family friendly” neighbourhood, (e) the mother deposed that she had successfully sought treatment for mental health issues that have occurred since 2018, namely ptsd from a car accident. but, again, there is no reference anywhere to the diagnoses and treatment recommended by dr c (among others), and (f) she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”   she has previously volunteered with a number of agencies and has made “close friends and mentors in the wider community”, (d) she shares a four bedroom house with her fiancé. the house is in a “family friendly” neighbourhood, (e) the mother deposed that she had successfully sought treatment for mental health issues that have occurred since 2018, namely ptsd from a car accident. but, again, there is no reference anywhere to the diagnoses and treatment recommended by dr c (among others), and (f) she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”   she shares a four bedroom house with her fiancé. the house is in a “family friendly” neighbourhood, (e) the mother deposed that she had successfully sought treatment for mental health issues that have occurred since 2018, namely ptsd from a car accident. but, again, there is no reference anywhere to the diagnoses and treatment recommended by dr c (among others), and (f) she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”   the mother deposed that she had successfully sought treatment for mental health issues that have occurred since 2018, namely ptsd from a car accident. but, again, there is no reference anywhere to the diagnoses and treatment recommended by dr c (among others), and (f) she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”   she set out dr b’s three line assessment of her mental health, but which focusses only on “any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.”
the respondent father’s affidavit  par.34 recounted criminal proceedings in 2016 commenced by the mother against the father around the time the children were to be transitioned into his care. ultimately, during the mother’s evidence, the charges were withdrawn and the domestic violence application was dismissed. the father was not required to give evidence. he contended that various text and other messages were in fact sent by the mother to herself, from a phone that was registered in the father’s name, (b) the father said that he always complies with the 2018 orders and makes the children available for skype calls and the like, (c) the father said that the children are “generally ambivalent” to spending time with the mother, and that she has difficulty “engaging with [the children] in an age-appropriate manner”, and that the mother “appears to still be fixated on the children having health conditions that they do not experience.” the mother’s fixation and “treatment” of such matters was part of the reason(s) the children were removed from her care in 2015, (d) the contention that the father cancelled an appointment at j contact centre was denied, and confirmed (by attaching the relevant record, annexure a to the affidavit) that it was cancelled by j contact centre, and (e) the father denied that mr g has ever met the children face-to-face, and opposed any time between him and the children.   the father said that he always complies with the 2018 orders and makes the children available for skype calls and the like, (c) the father said that the children are “generally ambivalent” to spending time with the mother, and that she has difficulty “engaging with [the children] in an age-appropriate manner”, and that the mother “appears to still be fixated on the children having health conditions that they do not experience.” the mother’s fixation and “treatment” of such matters was part of the reason(s) the children were removed from her care in 2015, (d) the contention that the father cancelled an appointment at j contact centre was denied, and confirmed (by attaching the relevant record, annexure a to the affidavit) that it was cancelled by j contact centre, and (e) the father denied that mr g has ever met the children face-to-face, and opposed any time between him and the children.   the father said that the children are “generally ambivalent” to spending time with the mother, and that she has difficulty “engaging with [the children] in an age-appropriate manner”, and that the mother “appears to still be fixated on the children having health conditions that they do not experience.” the mother’s fixation and “treatment” of such matters was part of the reason(s) the children were removed from her care in 2015, (d) the contention that the father cancelled an appointment at j contact centre was denied, and confirmed (by attaching the relevant record, annexure a to the affidavit) that it was cancelled by j contact centre, and (e) the father denied that mr g has ever met the children face-to-face, and opposed any time between him and the children.   the contention that the father cancelled an appointment at j contact centre was denied, and confirmed (by attaching the relevant record, annexure a to the affidavit) that it was cancelled by j contact centre, and (e) the father denied that mr g has ever met the children face-to-face, and opposed any time between him and the children.   the father denied that mr g has ever met the children face-to-face, and opposed any time between him and the children.
the report of dr b
a more pertinent question is whether [ms halloran] represents any current risk to her children, bearing in mind she is not seeking to assume the role of primary carer and indeed has indicated that she would agree to her time with the children being supervised initially. this demonstrates both insight into the children’s needs, into her ex-husband’s concerns as well as a capacity to be realistic...   the mother was well groomed and made good eye contact during the session with him. she was oriented in time, place and person. she was pleasant during the interview. (b) the mother’s speech was “relevant and coherent” with normal volume, tone and tempo. on her own report, the mother said that her mood was good. there were no thought or perceptual abnormalities, the mother denied any delusional thoughts or hallucinations. (c) ms halloran “appeared to have good insight and judgment and understood that she needed to continue with her medication at present.” whether the “judgment” was meant to refer only to the taking of medication was not clarified or confirmed. (d) the mother stated that she “did not believe” she had any issues except her ptsd. (e) according to dr b, the mother presented as a woman with an extensive history of trauma throughout her life, who has been subjected to both physical and sexual abuse. (f) the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   the mother’s speech was “relevant and coherent” with normal volume, tone and tempo. on her own report, the mother said that her mood was good. there were no thought or perceptual abnormalities, the mother denied any delusional thoughts or hallucinations. (c) ms halloran “appeared to have good insight and judgment and understood that she needed to continue with her medication at present.” whether the “judgment” was meant to refer only to the taking of medication was not clarified or confirmed. (d) the mother stated that she “did not believe” she had any issues except her ptsd. (e) according to dr b, the mother presented as a woman with an extensive history of trauma throughout her life, who has been subjected to both physical and sexual abuse. (f) the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   ms halloran “appeared to have good insight and judgment and understood that she needed to continue with her medication at present.” whether the “judgment” was meant to refer only to the taking of medication was not clarified or confirmed. (d) the mother stated that she “did not believe” she had any issues except her ptsd. (e) according to dr b, the mother presented as a woman with an extensive history of trauma throughout her life, who has been subjected to both physical and sexual abuse. (f) the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   the mother stated that she “did not believe” she had any issues except her ptsd. (e) according to dr b, the mother presented as a woman with an extensive history of trauma throughout her life, who has been subjected to both physical and sexual abuse. (f) the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   according to dr b, the mother presented as a woman with an extensive history of trauma throughout her life, who has been subjected to both physical and sexual abuse. (f) the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   the mother does not currently present “with any active symptoms in relation to those except some nightmares and a diagnosis of ptsd in relation to the most recent trauma of a car accident.” (g) dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   dr b concluded his report in the following terms: “i believe that [ms halloran] is currently doing well and has a good prognosis. i also believe that she should continue with her psychiatrist and psychologist and any treatment decisions should be made in conversation with her treating team.” alas, there was (and is) nothing from the mother’s current “treating team” before the court. (h) nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.   nowhere in dr b’s report is there any consideration of the matters set out in the father’s affidavit of 1st june 2018.
written submissions on behalf of the applicant mother
documents relied upon: 1. initiating application filed 16 august 2022, 2. reply filed 18 november 2022, 3. affidavit of [ms halloran] filed 16 august 2022, 4. affidavit of [mr g] filed 16 august 2022, 5. fdr certificate filed 16 august 2022, 6. affidavit of [ms halloran] filed 17 october 2022, and 7. family report of [ms h] dated 18 march 2018. submissions on the respondent husband's application to dismiss these are fresh proceedings commenced by the applicant mother ("the mother") on 16 august 2022, approximately 4 years after the conclusion of previous parenting proceedings finalised on 20 june 2018, though orders were substantially made by consent ("the 2018 orders"). the mother is seeking, on an interim basis, that her time with the children gradually increase and ultimately lead to unsupervised time. on a final basis, the mother is seeking that the children live with her and spend time with the father. the respondent father ("the father") seeks to dismiss both the interim and final application on three purported grounds, summarised at order 6 of orders made 4 october 2022 as: an application for summary dismissal, rice v asplund, and the construction of the previous orders. summary dismissal the father is seeking summary dismissal pursuant to part 10.3 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 ("the rules"). the grounds for applications under this part are: that the court has no jurisdiction (rule 10.09(1)(a)), the other party has no capacity to apply for the orders sought (rule 10.09(1)(b)), it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process (rule 10.09(1)(c)), and there is no reasonable likelihood of success (rule 10.09(1)(d)). presumably, the father is also relying on section 45a of the family law act 1975 (cth). procedurally, in applications for summary dismissal, the court does not undertake a preliminary trial, nor is a detailed hearing of the case on its merits required. instead, the court must take the party resisting the summary dismissal's case at its highest (unless it was inherently incredible or unreliable). it was observed by the full court, in stativa & stativa [2015] famcafc 170, that the court should take a cautious approach to summary dismissal of proceedings. the full court said at [8]:
"the power to summarily dismiss an action must be rarely and sparingly used (see pelerman v pelerman [2000] famca 881, (2000) flc 93-037). the full court discussed the power of the court to summarily dismiss proceedings in bigg v suzi [1998] famca 14, (1998) flc 92-799 at 84,974–84,975 and adopted the articulation of the principles of kirby j in lindon v the commonwealth (no 2) [1996] hca 14, (1996) 70 aljr 541 (“lindon”) at 544–545, which may conveniently be summarised thus: it is a serious matter to deprive a party of access to the courts and the power to do so should be rarely and sparingly used, the party seeking summary dismissal must show that it is clear on the face of the other party’s documents that the other party lacks a reasonable cause of action or is advancing a claim that is clearly frivolous or vexatious, that a case appears weak and unlikely to succeed is of itself not sufficient to satisfy summary dismissal, if there is a serious legal question to be tried, then it should ordinarily be determined at a trial of the issues, where, notwithstanding a defect in the pleadings, if it appears that a party may have a reasonable cause of action which has not been put in proper form, a court will ordinarily allow that party to reframe the pleadings, and • the “guiding principle” is doing what is “just”." it is submitted the mother's case is not inherently incredibly or unreliable. her evidence is that she has had multiple successful face-to-face visits with the children at [j contact centre], her overall mental health prognosis is improved (described by [dr b] as "good"), and her partner is a willing, able and suitable supervisor to facilitate supervised time between her and the children. those matters, it is submitted, support interim orders being made that are different to the current orders. on a final basis, the mother's evidence suggests the father refuses for the mother to have any meaningful relationship with the children. she seeks that the children live with her on a final basis. the evidence underpinning the mother's contention that the father is completely unsupportive of the children having a relationship with her includes: (a) there have been a series of unusual incidents, including anonymous email threats issued to [j contact centre] which have prevented the mother from having contact with the children for a number of years. the father denies that these threats originated from him. however, the emailer was aware that the date and times of the supervised visits and the only other person who was aware of these visits and who would have an incentive to stop the visits is the father. it is submitted the court would want to "get to the bottom of" this issue. (b) when [j contact centre] is unable to facilitate the visits on saturdays as a consequence of those threats and needing more staff, the mother proposes a different supervision service or that the visits be on a different day of the week, the father refuses to agree to those changes.vi (c) the father seeks to summarily dismiss these proceedings and maintain the current arrangements of extremely limited time of 2 hours every two months and continue supervision indefinitely. he refuses to consider different arrangements. if the mother's evidence is taken at its highest then both her interim and final application have "reasonable prospects of success". whilst the court does not have to make a finding on the likelihood of her success at present time, it should be noted "that even if a case is weak, that is insufficient to justify its summary dismissal" – the bar for summary dismissal is high and not met here. respectfully, the suggestion that the application is frivolous, vexatious or otherwise an abuse of process is not reasonably open. four years have passed since the previous proceedings concluded, the 2018 orders provided a process for the mother to recommence proceedings, and she has complied with that process. the bar for finding that an application is vexatious is also very high and not met. for example, in marsden v winch [2013] famcafc 177, the father was repeatedly denied contact with his child due to allegations of public indecency involving young children. although he engaged in persistent litigation between 2004 to 2013, the full court held that "although the father has filed and prosecuted numerous applications in the court, not all of which have been successful, none has been dismissed as being either frivolous or vexatious. similarly, the proceedings before the trial judge were unsuccessful but his honour’s reasons do not suggest that the proceedings were vexatious." and that "his honour was in error in making the order pursuant to s 118(1)(c) or in the alternative r 11.04(1)." section 118 was the predecessor of section 45a of the act, and r 11.04 was the predecessor of the current r 10.09 of the rules.  there have been a series of unusual incidents, including anonymous email threats issued to [j contact centre] which have prevented the mother from having contact with the children for a number of years. the father denies that these threats originated from him. however, the emailer was aware that the date and times of the supervised visits and the only other person who was aware of these visits and who would have an incentive to stop the visits is the father. it is submitted the court would want to "get to the bottom of" this issue. (b) when [j contact centre] is unable to facilitate the visits on saturdays as a consequence of those threats and needing more staff, the mother proposes a different supervision service or that the visits be on a different day of the week, the father refuses to agree to those changes.vi (c) the father seeks to summarily dismiss these proceedings and maintain the current arrangements of extremely limited time of 2 hours every two months and continue supervision indefinitely. he refuses to consider different arrangements.   when [j contact centre] is unable to facilitate the visits on saturdays as a consequence of those threats and needing more staff, the mother proposes a different supervision service or that the visits be on a different day of the week, the father refuses to agree to those changes.vi (c) the father seeks to summarily dismiss these proceedings and maintain the current arrangements of extremely limited time of 2 hours every two months and continue supervision indefinitely. he refuses to consider different arrangements.   the father seeks to summarily dismiss these proceedings and maintain the current arrangements of extremely limited time of 2 hours every two months and continue supervision indefinitely. he refuses to consider different arrangements.
rice v asplund the 2018 orders broadly followed the recommendations of the family report writer [ms h]. one of those recommendations was that "this matter is reviewed hopefully by mediation rather than litigation in 12 months with a view to increasing the children’s time with their mother". order 22 says "both parties have liberty to apply to vary all orders except 1, 2, and 10 on one occasion upon the completion of orders 20 and 21, and this will be the occasion referred to in notation a." notation a says "that notwithstanding the authority of rice v asplund, that once the mother has complied with orders 20 to 21, that the parties be at liberty to seek a variation of all orders except 1, 2, and 10 on one occasion without demonstrating there has been a significant change in circumstances since these orders were made and neither party shall raise that as a reason the court should not hear the application." order 1 provides the father sole parental responsibility, order 2 provides for the father to keep the mother informed about significant illnesses of the children and order 10 provides for the children to live with the father. the mother has complied with orders 20 to 21. accordingly, with respect to her interim application (where she seeks to vary the 2018 orders by increasing her time with the children and does not seek a change of residence nor orders regarding parental responsibility), the 2018 orders specifically give her liberty to apply and there is no need for the mother to meet the threshold test in rice v asplund. even if the mother did not have liberty to apply pursuant to the 2018 orders, it has long been the case that to put long-term supervision arrangements place, there must be cogent reasons for doing so. not allowing the mother liberty to apply to revisit the supervised time arrangements would be an error. in gorman & huffman and anor [2016] famcafc 174, the full court varied the orders made at first instance for indefinite supervised time such that the parties and the icl have liberty to apply to seek a variation of the order for supervised time. with respect to the mother's final application, she sets out several significant changes in her circumstances including her desire to relocate, having obtained stable accommodation, having completed her degree and working as a [professional], having re-partnered, and having obtained a psychological report with a good prognosis. the change in circumstances is remarkably significant. a significant period of time has also passed between the 2018 orders being made and this current application (4 years), whilst it was anticipated that the supervision arrangements would need to be reviewed after 12 months (1 year). furthermore, the father has actively resisted the implementation of the 2018 orders until early 2020. it is submitted that the threshold for the 2018 orders to be reviewed is met, and on a final basis, if the father resists a change in residence that should be a matter for a contested final hearing rather than summarily dismissed at this early stage. construction of previous orders the father also seeks a dismissal on the basis that the mother's application is contrary to the 2018 orders. that aspect of his response is misconceived – the 2018 orders gave the parties "liberty to apply" to vary specific orders and there are no injunctions restraining the mother from seeking different orders, nor do such injunctions exist in the family law act (1975) ("the act"). the mother submits there is no merit to this element of the father's position. submissions on costs the father seeks that the mother pay his costs on an indemnity basis in his response. he has not, however, complied with rule 12.13(4). if the father's application for summary dismissal is wholly unsuccessful that would be a factor in support of an order for costs being made in the mother's favour. the mother's submissions against the application suggest the position adopted by the father was, in all the circumstances of this case, not least of all the mechanism in the current orders and the delay since those orders were made, ill considered.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent father
documents relied upon: response filed 14 september 2022. affidavit of [mr keats] dated 14 september 2022. notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 14 september 2022. report of [dr ad] dated 7 september 2010. report of [dr d] dated 17 march 2016. report of [dr c] dated 20 march 2016. family report of [ms h] dated 18 march 2018. this outline of submissions and tender bundle. submissions on summary dismissal this outline of submissions is filed in accordance with order 7 made 4 october 2022. the respondent’s application is for summary dismissal of the mother’s initiating application filed 16 august 2022. the court’s power to make such an order is found at s.143 of the federal circuit and family court of australia act 2021, s.45a of the family law act 1975 and rule 10.09(1) (c) and (d) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. an application for summary dismissal is not a hearing as to the merits of the case. it is a determination as to whether, taking the applicant’s evidence at its highest, that application has no reasonable prospect or likelihood of success. it is accepted that the court should take a cautious approach to an application for a summary dismissal of proceedings as it is a serious matter to deprive a party of the opportunity to seek orders but the court does have power to summarily dismiss a parenting application. there is no contest as to the history of the matter including involvement and proceedings taken by the director-general, child & youth protection services (dg) and the dg’s involvement in the proceedings in the then federal circuit court. the dg withdrew after orders were made placing the children in the father’s care in [late] 2016. final orders were made (largely) by consent on the first day of trial. the parties were represented by solicitors and counsel, an icl had been appointed, expert evidence before the children’s court ([dr ad], [dr c], [dr d]) was admitted together with a family report from [ms h]. the applicant seeks final orders for a reversal of care and parental responsibility in circumstances where they were removed from her care [in mid] 2015, where she spent no time with children between late 2016 and january 2021, and has only spent approximately 12 occasions of supervised time since. the mother relies upon, and has only belatedly, sought to place the report of [dr b] dated 21 october 2021, properly before the court, such report having previously only been annexed to her affidavit. the applicant files no evidence from any of her previous or current treatment providers. she provides no evidence at all which acknowledges or addresses any of the significant concerns which occupied the minds of the relevant experts in the earlier proceedings. the expert evidence obtained in the earlier proceedings from drs [ad], [ac] and [d] raises significant issues in relation to risk posed to the children in the mother’s care, in relation to her diagnosis, and need for inpatient assessment and treatment. whilst the mother’s evidence is to be considered at its highest, it is not considered in a vacuum. [dr c] states “i have concerns that [ms halloran] may be mentally ill with a [mental health] disorder [...] the condition is subtle and needs further inpatient psychiatric evaluation as it may fluctuate, be well disguised or may be personality based with loss of touch with reality during stress periods...“i believe she needs to be reassessed in an inpatient setting with access to the ..reports...she would benefit from some ongoing support form a psychiatrist and counsellor or psychologist...without insight and if [issues] continue the children may need to be restricted until she is able to demonstrate her ability to not share [her] beliefs with the children..” that the mother’s fails to engage in any way at all with the issues identified in the earlier proceedings is telling. it highlights the very lack of insight previously identified in the expert reports. the mother is a sophisticated litigant. she complains the father has breached orders but fails to bring evidence of contravention applications or letters to support her position. the father has been the primary carer for these children since late 2016. the mother has seen the children on approximately 12 supervised occasions since. an application seeking orders reposing parental responsibility and care of these children in the mother has no reasonable prospects of success. the father should not be put to the stress, expense, and time of further responding to the application. rice & asplund there is no scope for doubting the correctness of rice & asplund. the key issues to be established in a rice & asplund are well settled. the evidence must be taken at its highest however the onus is on the applicant to establish a sufficient change of circumstances to warrant a reconsideration of the parenting arrangements. his honour justice strickland has said: “it also must not be forgotten that even accepting the mother’s evidence at its highest, it is still open to a court, for proper reason, to find that the evidence before the court does not demonstrate a change sufficient to embark on a full rehearing” [dr b]’s report fails to address in any way the substantive issues in the earlier proceedings: the mother’s mental health history, the opinions of the experts, the recommendation for inpatient assessment and treatment and the lack of evidence of when, how, and if the mother has in any way addressed the issues that were then identified. the mother fails to call any current or prior treating professionals whose evidence may establish a change in circumstances. her failure to either seek a review by the previous relevant experts or at least to provide evidence of a considered review of the expert’s opinions, is fatal to her application. the other “changed circumstances” that she deposes to are insufficient to contemplate re-opening a parenting matter that has been finally determined. the court must look at the degree of the change sought to the earlier orders and here the change sought is extreme, noting the children have lived in [town m] almost their entire life and spent time with the mother on approximately 12 occasions since late 2016. construction of the previous orders the orders made did not include an injunction and do not operate as an estoppel or restraint. the jurisdiction of the court cannot be fettered. however, respectfully, the 2018 orders are not of no consequence. they were made at a time when parties were legally represented and knew of the opinion of the experts as to the mother’s mental health. they are relevant insofar as they go to the intention and motives of the parties at the time of entering the orders. the nature of the orders sought by the mother on a final basis ignores the representations made by her, to the father, when entering the 2018 orders, and may therefore amount to an abuse of process contrary to rule 10.09(1)(c).
issues for determination: a. construction and operation of the june 2018 orders
review of arrangements that the mother may submit to an independent psychiatric assessment, involving the provision of a written report. in the event she does so she shall ensure the psychiatrist is provided with copies of the reports previously prepared by [dr c], [dr d], [ms h], the father’s affidavit affirmed 1 june 2018, and the mother’s affidavit affirmed 29 may 2018, and the mother shall make available to the psychiatrist any further material requested by the psychiatrist. the mother must serve a copy of any such psychiatric report on the father by email or by post. both parties have liberty to apply to vary all orders except 1, 2, and 10 on one occasion upon the completion of orders 20 and 21, and this will be the occasion referred to in notation a.
... the principle upon which estoppel in pais is founded is that the law should not permit an unjust departure by a party from an assumption of fact which he has caused another party to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal relations. this is, of course, a very general statement. but it is the basis of the rules governing estoppel. those rules work out the more precise grounds upon which the law holds a party disentitled to depart from an assumption in the assertion of rights against another. one condition appears always to be indispensable. that other must have so acted or abstained from acting upon the footing of the state of affairs assumed that he would suffer a detriment if the opposite party were afterwards allowed to set up rights against him inconsistent with the assumption. ... the real detriment or harm from which the law seeks to give protection is that which would flow from the change of position if the assumption were deserted that led to it...
b. legal principle: experts (the expert report of dr b)
section 76(1) expresses the opinion rule in a way which assumes that evidence of an opinion is tendered ‘to prove the existence of a fact’. that manner of casting the rule does not, as might be supposed, elide whatever distinction can be drawn between ‘opinion’ and ‘fact’ or invoke the very difficult distinction which sometimes is drawn between questions of law and questions of fact. it does not confine an expert witness to expressing opinions about matters of ‘fact’. rather, the opinion rule is expressed as it is in order to direct attention to why the party tendering the evidence says it is relevant. more particularly, it directs attention to the finding which the tendering party will ask the tribunal of fact to make. in considering the operation of s.79(1) it is thus necessary to identify why the evidence is relevant: why it is ‘evidence that, if it were accepted, could rationally affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the proceeding’. that requires identification of the fact in issue that the party tendering the evidence asserts the opinion proves or assists in proving.
in any case in which the admissibility of opinion evidence is in issue, the starting point is to identify precisely the fact in issue to which that evidence is claimed to be relevant. that proposition is trite, yet of fundamental importance. plainly, evidence that is not relevant to the proof of a fact in issue is inadmissible. further and significantly, the precise identification of the issue, to which the proposed opinion evidence is relevant, is necessary in order to determine whether, in fact, the evidence is probative of that fact in issue, and, if so, whether the witness, who is to give the evidence, is qualified to express that opinion, and whether that opinion is wholly or substantially based on the witness’ expert knowledge.
i have concerns that [ms halloran] may be mentally ill with a [mental health] disorder [...][10] the condition is subtle and needs further inpatient psychiatric evaluation as it may fluctuate, be well disguised or may be personality based with loss of touch with reality during stress periods[11]...“i believe she needs to be reassessed in an inpatient setting with access to the ..reports...she would benefit from some ongoing support form a psychiatrist and counsellor or psychologist...without insight and if ongoing paranoid delusions continue the children may need to be restricted until she is able to demonstrate her ability to not share paranoid beliefs with the children[12]..”
rice & asplund ] in my view, reflection on the rule shows that: (i) what the application of the rule can achieve if dealt with as a preliminary matter is different from what it can achieve if dealt with at the end of a full hearing. (ii) in its original formulation, the rule is directed to application as a preliminary matter. yet, contemporaneously with that formulation the court in rice and asplund determined that the rule could equally be applied at the end of a full custody hearing. the consequences of that determination have received little attention. (iii) at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”. (iv) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.   what the application of the rule can achieve if dealt with as a preliminary matter is different from what it can achieve if dealt with at the end of a full hearing. (ii) in its original formulation, the rule is directed to application as a preliminary matter. yet, contemporaneously with that formulation the court in rice and asplund determined that the rule could equally be applied at the end of a full custody hearing. the consequences of that determination have received little attention. (iii) at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”. (iv) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  ) in its original formulation, the rule is directed to application as a preliminary matter. yet, contemporaneously with that formulation the court in rice and asplund determined that the rule could equally be applied at the end of a full custody hearing. the consequences of that determination have received little attention. (iii) at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”. (iv) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  i) at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a manifestation of the “best interests principle”. (iv) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  ) discussion in terms that the rule may be applied as a “preliminary matter” or the primary application be first heard “on the merits” may be unhelpful, particularly because of the implication that, if the rule is applied as a preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with “on the merits”. (v) the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.   the application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of, change sought to the earlier order. (vi) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  ) “shorthand” statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication. (vii) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  i) any application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set out in part vii of the act, in particular the objects of the part, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required by the act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that regard.  ] ...in my view when the threshold question described in rice and asplund is determined as a preliminary matter, it remains a determination “on the merits”. where an application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown to justify embarking on a hearing. though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.
it may be, however, that neither the expressions “summary dismissal” or “striking out” is the best term to describe the procedure when, in a parenting case, the rule in rice and asplund is considered at a preliminary stage. this is because, as we seek to emphasise, at whatever stage the rule in rice and asplund is applied, the court is bound to take into account best interests considerations and also because specific requirements, including legislative requirements, apply.  ] in our view, that passage [at [81] in sps & pls] need not be taken as saying that the only way in which the rule in rice and asplund can be applied at a preliminary stage is on the basis that the case of the applicant for parenting orders is taken at its highest. [82] ... the qualitative question of whether a change that has occurred is or is not sufficiently significant to justify a full further hearing of a parenting issue may be one much more difficult to answer in a preliminary hearing involving resolution of only some disputed facts. [83] this observation may be behind the approach that either the case of the applicant for parenting orders is, at a preliminary stage, taken at its highest, or the hearing embarked upon is an enquiry into all matters relating to the best interests of the child or children. [84] on the other hand, there is authority to suggest that these are not the only legitimate procedures....  ] ... the qualitative question of whether a change that has occurred is or is not sufficiently significant to justify a full further hearing of a parenting issue may be one much more difficult to answer in a preliminary hearing involving resolution of only some disputed facts. [83] this observation may be behind the approach that either the case of the applicant for parenting orders is, at a preliminary stage, taken at its highest, or the hearing embarked upon is an enquiry into all matters relating to the best interests of the child or children. [84] on the other hand, there is authority to suggest that these are not the only legitimate procedures....  ] this observation may be behind the approach that either the case of the applicant for parenting orders is, at a preliminary stage, taken at its highest, or the hearing embarked upon is an enquiry into all matters relating to the best interests of the child or children. [84] on the other hand, there is authority to suggest that these are not the only legitimate procedures....  ] on the other hand, there is authority to suggest that these are not the only legitimate procedures....
nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at: the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
if applied on a preliminary basis, the issue is whether the circumstances as disclosed by the evidence reveal a change of such significance that the best interests of the child require a revisiting of earlier orders.
... we are far from persuaded that the hurdles that have to be overcome to found a successful challenge on the basis of the weight afforded to the evidence have been scaled. it has consistently been held that where no error of fact or law is present, disagreement only on matters of weight cannot alone justify appellate interference....
this analysis leads us to the view that where the principle in rice & asplund is being considered, it will not be appropriate or necessary to discretely address many of the factors in section 60cc of the act in determining where the best interests of the child might lie.
in a case where the principle in rice arises for consideration, there are two circumstances which are central to the decision. first, there will already exist a parenting order and, axiomatically, the terms of that order will reflect the best interests of the child or children at the time of its making. second, the fact that an order has been made reflects that disputation between parties to a parenting dispute, such dispute being inherently contrary to the best interests of the child whilst it exists, has been brought to an end by a curial order. those twin circumstances dictate the conclusion that it cannot logically be in the best interests of the child to embark upon further litigation enquiring as to the child’s best interests unless it is first demonstrated that a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred since the parenting order was made.
thus, it is entirely understandable, and in our view, not erroneous, for his honour to address the issue of “best interests” by reference to whether it is in the interests of the child for there to be the further litigation proposed by the mother. indeed, we note that this was how the issue was framed in the mother’s outline of argument presented to his honour at the commencement of the hearing. she said this (at paragraph 3):
the central question for consideration by the court was encapsulated by warnick j in the following terms (para 81, at page 310):
“... though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought to be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.” ] where the question of whether a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred is to be determined as a matter preliminary to the hearing of the application, it is accepted that the applicant’s evidence should be taken at its highest. [52] it was argued for the mother that his honour erred in finding that she had failed to demonstrate a sufficient change in circumstances to justify re-opening the parenting proceedings. [53] his honour concluded at [100] that the facts did not establish “a new and vital change in the circumstances”, and found that it was “obvious” that amber had been anxious for some time and that anxiety had from time to time manifested itself in her refusing to go to school. he went on to offer what he considered to be the reasons for this, including that she had recently commenced high school. he thus found at [111] that the mother’s evidence did not establish a material change of circumstances in the necessary sense. [54] the bar to appellate intervention where the challenge is to a judge’s fact finding is set high. see edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296. [55] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] it was argued for the mother that his honour erred in finding that she had failed to demonstrate a sufficient change in circumstances to justify re-opening the parenting proceedings. [53] his honour concluded at [100] that the facts did not establish “a new and vital change in the circumstances”, and found that it was “obvious” that amber had been anxious for some time and that anxiety had from time to time manifested itself in her refusing to go to school. he went on to offer what he considered to be the reasons for this, including that she had recently commenced high school. he thus found at [111] that the mother’s evidence did not establish a material change of circumstances in the necessary sense. [54] the bar to appellate intervention where the challenge is to a judge’s fact finding is set high. see edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296. [55] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] his honour concluded at [100] that the facts did not establish “a new and vital change in the circumstances”, and found that it was “obvious” that amber had been anxious for some time and that anxiety had from time to time manifested itself in her refusing to go to school. he went on to offer what he considered to be the reasons for this, including that she had recently commenced high school. he thus found at [111] that the mother’s evidence did not establish a material change of circumstances in the necessary sense. [54] the bar to appellate intervention where the challenge is to a judge’s fact finding is set high. see edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296. [55] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] the bar to appellate intervention where the challenge is to a judge’s fact finding is set high. see edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296. [55] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] in order to succeed in challenging his honour’s finding that there had been no change in circumstances, it is necessary to demonstrate that the finding was not open to his honour on the evidence before him. [56] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] thus it was argued that, had his honour indeed taken the mother’s evidence at its highest it was not open to him to find that there had been no material change in circumstances. it was further argued that both his honour’s conclusion that the child had always been anxious, and that her present refusal to attend school was a manifestation of a pre-existing condition and was probably due to her attending a new school, were findings unsupported by the evidence. [57] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] his honour’s finding that the child’s present anxiety and refusal to attend school was unsupported by the evidence. however, it was a conclusion reasonably open to his honour given the accepted increase in her refusing to attend school and anxiety generally with the beginning of a new school regime. it could not be said that the conclusion was not open to his honour. his honour’s findings clearly accept the parties’ position that amber’s anxiety and school refusal had escalated. the issue for his honour was whether these circumstances led to the conclusion that there had been a material change in circumstances. his honour found that they did not. that was a determination open to him and i find no error in his conclusion. this challenge is not made out.  ] in any event, while the arguments in support of the contention are framed as challenges to “principles” relating to the rule, they are, in essence, challenges to the weight which his honour attached to aspects of the evidence. [84] in my view, the findings made by his honour were entirely open to him on the evidence and it was entirely open to his honour to include the matters to which his honour made reference in reaching a determination that a material change in circumstances was not established.  ] in my view, the findings made by his honour were entirely open to him on the evidence and it was entirely open to his honour to include the matters to which his honour made reference in reaching a determination that a material change in circumstances was not established.  ] in that respect, it has been held recently that:
... plainly a circumstance can only constitute a relevant 'change' if it is a circumstance which was outside or beyond the contemplation or consideration of the parties and the court at the time the original parenting orders were made. put another way, if the current circumstances were within the contemplation of the parties and were considered by the court at the time the original parenting orders were made, there is no basis upon which they can be said to constitute a change which would justify the prospect of continuing litigation with respect to parenting arrangements, given the adverse effect which uncertainty and unpredictability with respect to parenting arrangements can be assumed to have upon the interests of the child concerned...[21]  ] in my view his honour made no error as asserted on behalf of the mother.  0] the exercise of those discretions will depend, like all discretionary decisions, on a multiplicity of factors. however, the decisions will include a consideration of the nature and cogency of the evidence as to material change and the nature and extent of the orders sought to be changed. the decisions will also ordinarily involve a consideration of the notorious fact – accepted as such both by authority and by mr north in his arguments – that continued litigation and the re-agitation of contested issues about children has the potential to cause significant harm to them. [111] in some cases, those factors, and perhaps others, will persuade a court that further evidence is required before reaching a decision on the rice & asplund question. the obtaining of a family report in an appropriate case might be an example of such further evidence, although it once again needs to be pointed out that family reports do not decide cases, courts do. [112] however, the court’s decision as to the evidence necessary to decide the application of “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter also involves the exercise of discretion. the exercise of that discretion will also have as its central question whether it is “more powerfully in the child[ren’s] welfare” to permit the obtaining of the further evidence – and what might be involved for the children in doing so – than to determine the application of the rule as a preliminary matter without that evidence. that can be seen to have particular importance when the evidence sought is a family report or the interventions of other experts that involve the participation of the children. [113] it should also be pointed out (as it was by this court in miller & harrington), that the relevant discretions must now be exercised within the mandatory principles and other provisions contained within division 12a of the act. in that respect two of the mandatory principles which must be applied by a court by reference to s 69zn of the act bear quotation:  1] in some cases, those factors, and perhaps others, will persuade a court that further evidence is required before reaching a decision on the rice & asplund question. the obtaining of a family report in an appropriate case might be an example of such further evidence, although it once again needs to be pointed out that family reports do not decide cases, courts do. [112] however, the court’s decision as to the evidence necessary to decide the application of “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter also involves the exercise of discretion. the exercise of that discretion will also have as its central question whether it is “more powerfully in the child[ren’s] welfare” to permit the obtaining of the further evidence – and what might be involved for the children in doing so – than to determine the application of the rule as a preliminary matter without that evidence. that can be seen to have particular importance when the evidence sought is a family report or the interventions of other experts that involve the participation of the children. [113] it should also be pointed out (as it was by this court in miller & harrington), that the relevant discretions must now be exercised within the mandatory principles and other provisions contained within division 12a of the act. in that respect two of the mandatory principles which must be applied by a court by reference to s 69zn of the act bear quotation:  2] however, the court’s decision as to the evidence necessary to decide the application of “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter also involves the exercise of discretion. the exercise of that discretion will also have as its central question whether it is “more powerfully in the child[ren’s] welfare” to permit the obtaining of the further evidence – and what might be involved for the children in doing so – than to determine the application of the rule as a preliminary matter without that evidence. that can be seen to have particular importance when the evidence sought is a family report or the interventions of other experts that involve the participation of the children. [113] it should also be pointed out (as it was by this court in miller & harrington), that the relevant discretions must now be exercised within the mandatory principles and other provisions contained within division 12a of the act. in that respect two of the mandatory principles which must be applied by a court by reference to s 69zn of the act bear quotation:  3] it should also be pointed out (as it was by this court in miller & harrington), that the relevant discretions must now be exercised within the mandatory principles and other provisions contained within division 12a of the act. in that respect two of the mandatory principles which must be applied by a court by reference to s 69zn of the act bear quotation:   the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. (4) the second principle is that the court is to actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings.  4] in my view, contrary to the submissions made by mr north, well settled authority is entirely consistent with his honour having the power to apply “the rule in rice & asplund” as a preliminary matter “... even where the evidence demonstrates a material change since the previous order”. [115] secondly, again contrary to mr north’s submissions, it is in my view not correct to characterise his honour’s actions or decisions as a failure or refusal to exercise jurisdiction in proceedings for parenting orders properly invoked by the mother. the refusal by his honour to contemplate the obtaining of a family report (or, perhaps, other evidence) so as to inform the rule at a preliminary stage was not a failure of judicial process but a discretionary decision performed within a mandatory statutory context and arrived at by reference to the children’s best interests for reasons which his honour gave. [116] it is not established that his honour erred in law, that he failed to take account of relevant considerations, that he took account of irrelevant considerations or committed any other discretionary error. no error in the exercise of his honour’s discretion is pleaded nor can any be seen in his honour’s reasons.  5] secondly, again contrary to mr north’s submissions, it is in my view not correct to characterise his honour’s actions or decisions as a failure or refusal to exercise jurisdiction in proceedings for parenting orders properly invoked by the mother. the refusal by his honour to contemplate the obtaining of a family report (or, perhaps, other evidence) so as to inform the rule at a preliminary stage was not a failure of judicial process but a discretionary decision performed within a mandatory statutory context and arrived at by reference to the children’s best interests for reasons which his honour gave. [116] it is not established that his honour erred in law, that he failed to take account of relevant considerations, that he took account of irrelevant considerations or committed any other discretionary error. no error in the exercise of his honour’s discretion is pleaded nor can any be seen in his honour’s reasons.  6] it is not established that his honour erred in law, that he failed to take account of relevant considerations, that he took account of irrelevant considerations or committed any other discretionary error. no error in the exercise of his honour’s discretion is pleaded nor can any be seen in his honour’s reasons.
i consider any differences between the two phrases as semantic and not substantial. as the authorities make clear, the essential point in the application of the rule in rice and asplund is the balancing of the new circumstances against the undesirability of further litigation involving the child. the nature of that exercise will depend very much upon the nature of the changes relied upon. obviously enough, if there are no changes or if the changes are insignificant or unsubstantial, there will be little to justify reconsideration of the earlier orders.
these authorities make clear that a change in circumstances is not itself the answer to the question as to whether the earlier parenting orders should be reconsidered, but that those new matters, in all of the circumstances, must be sufficient to justify or to provide for such a hearing.  ] the first thing to note is that although there is no doubt that the rule in rice & asplund is a “manifestation of the best interests principle” (sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16, (2008) 39 fam lr 295 at [48]), his honour’s task under the rule was to determine whether there had been a significant change in circumstances since the initial order was made such that it would be in the best interests of the children to reopen the litigation. that process involves the weighing of the significance or sufficiency of the changes against the potential detriment to the children caused by the litigation itself. that potential detriment extends to all that would be involved in reopening the litigation, including the exercise of obtaining a family report.
... we should emphasise that the magnitude of the variation of the parenting orders sought to be achieved in the fresh proceedings, necessarily informs the nature of change of circumstances sufficient to justify that re-litigation. here, the mother was seeking a complete reversal of the child’s living arrangements, rather than merely some minor tinkering or slender change to the new zealand orders. therefore, the nature of the change in circumstances needed to be of sufficient gravity to warrant the wholesale re-litigation of the child’s living arrangements. on no view did the mother’s claims come close to demonstrating a sufficient change. taking her case at its highest, it had no reasonable likelihood of success.   the mother’s multiple courses are all for her own benefit. they are not shown in any way to be relevant to the children, (b) the mother’s detailed outline of her various study and work situations, again relate essentially to her life situations at various times. as such, there is nothing out of the ordinary here. they are part and parcel of regular or ordinary changes in a person’s life, (c) the same is basically true regarding her relationship with mr g, and their living situation. relationships change, as do living situations. again, there is nothing out of the ordinary here that would relevantly bring the mother’s application remotely close to a “significant [or material] change in circumstances”, (d) the mother’s accounts of skype and other virtual discussions with the children are nothing out of the ordinary. the same is true of the more recent, but still quite limited, both as to time and to frequency, supervised time with the children at j contact centre, and (e) the expression of the mother’s concerns about the operation of the existing orders is nothing out of the ordinary. among the range of omissions in her evidence, the delay between the june 2018 orders and the commencement of supervised time with the children receives little to no appropriate attention, (f) much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   the mother’s detailed outline of her various study and work situations, again relate essentially to her life situations at various times. as such, there is nothing out of the ordinary here. they are part and parcel of regular or ordinary changes in a person’s life, (c) the same is basically true regarding her relationship with mr g, and their living situation. relationships change, as do living situations. again, there is nothing out of the ordinary here that would relevantly bring the mother’s application remotely close to a “significant [or material] change in circumstances”, (d) the mother’s accounts of skype and other virtual discussions with the children are nothing out of the ordinary. the same is true of the more recent, but still quite limited, both as to time and to frequency, supervised time with the children at j contact centre, and (e) the expression of the mother’s concerns about the operation of the existing orders is nothing out of the ordinary. among the range of omissions in her evidence, the delay between the june 2018 orders and the commencement of supervised time with the children receives little to no appropriate attention, (f) much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   the same is basically true regarding her relationship with mr g, and their living situation. relationships change, as do living situations. again, there is nothing out of the ordinary here that would relevantly bring the mother’s application remotely close to a “significant [or material] change in circumstances”, (d) the mother’s accounts of skype and other virtual discussions with the children are nothing out of the ordinary. the same is true of the more recent, but still quite limited, both as to time and to frequency, supervised time with the children at j contact centre, and (e) the expression of the mother’s concerns about the operation of the existing orders is nothing out of the ordinary. among the range of omissions in her evidence, the delay between the june 2018 orders and the commencement of supervised time with the children receives little to no appropriate attention, (f) much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   the mother’s accounts of skype and other virtual discussions with the children are nothing out of the ordinary. the same is true of the more recent, but still quite limited, both as to time and to frequency, supervised time with the children at j contact centre, and (e) the expression of the mother’s concerns about the operation of the existing orders is nothing out of the ordinary. among the range of omissions in her evidence, the delay between the june 2018 orders and the commencement of supervised time with the children receives little to no appropriate attention, (f) much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   the expression of the mother’s concerns about the operation of the existing orders is nothing out of the ordinary. among the range of omissions in her evidence, the delay between the june 2018 orders and the commencement of supervised time with the children receives little to no appropriate attention, (f) much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   much of the mother’s affidavit material recounts her aspirational views and intentions (or hopes), if and when the children come into her full-time care. hopes and intentions are insufficient to warrant the matter being re-opened, and (g) the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.   the change in residence final orders sought by the mother, together with the rest of her orders, are a radical change proposed by her. she acknowledges this as such in her material. such a complete and far-reaching proposal is unsupported by her evidence in any relevant way. the magnitude of the proposed change, together with the utterly flawed and inadequate evidence the mother put before the court (as well as the significant omissions in her evidence), is such that, as the full court observed in mahoney & dieter at [49], it effectively doomed her application to fail.
c. summary dismissal ] at the conclusion of that paragraph is a footnote which refers to lindon v the commonwealth (no 2) [1996] hca 14, (1996) 70 aljr 541. [43] it is unfortunate that the primary judge did not direct her attention to r 10.12 of the family law rules (2004) (cth) (“the rules”), which deals with applications for summary dismissal. that rule provides as follows:  ] it is unfortunate that the primary judge did not direct her attention to r 10.12 of the family law rules (2004) (cth) (“the rules”), which deals with applications for summary dismissal. that rule provides as follows:
a party may apply for summary orders after a response has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response, that: (a) the court has no jurisdiction, (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   the court has no jurisdiction, (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.   there is no reasonable likelihood of success.  ] as to the reference in the rules to “no reasonable likelihood of success” in ebner & pappas [2014] famcafc 229, (2014) flc 93-619 at [59]–[62] the full court said:
the phrase “no reasonable likelihood of success” is, at least in relation to the test to be applied in the summary dismissal proceedings, of relatively recent origin. in bretton & bondai [2013] famcafc 168 finn and strickland jj at [59], and may j at [122], considered this is a conceptually different test to the “doomed to fail” test. in spencer v commonwealth of australia [2010] hca 28, (2010) 241 clr 118, referring to a federal court rule in similar terms to rule 10.12, hayne, crennan, kiefel and bell jj said at [56]:
because s 31a(3) provides that certainty of failure (“hopeless” or “bound to fail”) need not be demonstrated in order to show that a plaintiff has no reasonable prospect of prosecuting an action, it is evident that s 31a is to be understood as requiring a different enquiry from that which had to be made under earlier procedural regimes. it follows, of course, that it is dangerous to seek to elucidate the meaning of the statutory expression “no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceeding” by reference to what is said in those earlier cases.
the applicable test was considered by another intermediate court of appeal, the victorian court of appeal in lysaght building solutions pty ltd (t/as highline commercial construction) v blanalko pty ltd [2013] vsca 158. at that time the relevant legislative test in victoria was “no real prospect of success”. there at [27] warren cj and nettle ja said:
... whatever might be the practical effect of the new test, it is difficult to disagree with mcmurdo j in gray v morris and mcmurdo p in the commissioner of taxation v salcedo that it should be applied by reference to its own language, without paraphrase or comparison with the previous rule, always bearing in mind the principle that the power to award summary judgment is only to be exercised with caution and, therefore, not unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried. (footnotes omitted)
their honours continued at [35]:
upon the present state of authority: (a) the test for summary judgment under s 63 of the civil procedure act 2010 is whether the respondent to the application for summary judgment has a ‘real’ as opposed to a ‘fanciful’ chance of success, (b) the test is to be applied by reference to its own language and without paraphrase or comparison with the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail test’ essayed in general steel, (c) it should be understood, however, that the test is to some degree a more liberal test than the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail’ test essayed in general steel and, therefore, permits of the possibility that there might be cases, yet to be identified, in which it appears that, although the respondent’s case is not hopeless or bound to fail, it does not have a real prospect of success, (d) at the same time, it must be borne in mind that the power to terminate proceedings summarily should be exercised with caution and thus should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried, and that is so regardless of whether the application for summary judgment is made on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action (and the defect cannot be cured by amendment) or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process or where the application is supported by evidence.   the test for summary judgment under s 63 of the civil procedure act 2010 is whether the respondent to the application for summary judgment has a ‘real’ as opposed to a ‘fanciful’ chance of success, (b) the test is to be applied by reference to its own language and without paraphrase or comparison with the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail test’ essayed in general steel, (c) it should be understood, however, that the test is to some degree a more liberal test than the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail’ test essayed in general steel and, therefore, permits of the possibility that there might be cases, yet to be identified, in which it appears that, although the respondent’s case is not hopeless or bound to fail, it does not have a real prospect of success, (d) at the same time, it must be borne in mind that the power to terminate proceedings summarily should be exercised with caution and thus should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried, and that is so regardless of whether the application for summary judgment is made on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action (and the defect cannot be cured by amendment) or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process or where the application is supported by evidence.   the test is to be applied by reference to its own language and without paraphrase or comparison with the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail test’ essayed in general steel, (c) it should be understood, however, that the test is to some degree a more liberal test than the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail’ test essayed in general steel and, therefore, permits of the possibility that there might be cases, yet to be identified, in which it appears that, although the respondent’s case is not hopeless or bound to fail, it does not have a real prospect of success, (d) at the same time, it must be borne in mind that the power to terminate proceedings summarily should be exercised with caution and thus should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried, and that is so regardless of whether the application for summary judgment is made on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action (and the defect cannot be cured by amendment) or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process or where the application is supported by evidence.   it should be understood, however, that the test is to some degree a more liberal test than the ‘hopeless’ or ‘bound to fail’ test essayed in general steel and, therefore, permits of the possibility that there might be cases, yet to be identified, in which it appears that, although the respondent’s case is not hopeless or bound to fail, it does not have a real prospect of success, (d) at the same time, it must be borne in mind that the power to terminate proceedings summarily should be exercised with caution and thus should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried, and that is so regardless of whether the application for summary judgment is made on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action (and the defect cannot be cured by amendment) or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process or where the application is supported by evidence.   at the same time, it must be borne in mind that the power to terminate proceedings summarily should be exercised with caution and thus should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried, and that is so regardless of whether the application for summary judgment is made on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action (and the defect cannot be cured by amendment) or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process or where the application is supported by evidence.  ] by reference to that discussion we are reasonably comfortable in concluding that her honour’s reference to “a reasonable cause of action” is analogous to the reference in r 10.12(d) to “no reasonable likelihood of success”. even if that is not so, to the extent that the test as articulated by the primary judge may encompass other matters, it does so in a way that was prejudicial to the father, rather than the mother. [46] after articulating the test at [54], the primary judge thereafter applied it by considering whether the changes in circumstances contended for by the mother warranted re-litigation, and found that they did not. ultimately her honour concluded that “[t]he mother has no reasonable cause of action” (at [58]). as we have said above, to the extent that conclusion does not incant the wording of r 10.12(d), it was a deviation only favourable to the mother.  ] after articulating the test at [54], the primary judge thereafter applied it by considering whether the changes in circumstances contended for by the mother warranted re-litigation, and found that they did not. ultimately her honour concluded that “[t]he mother has no reasonable cause of action” (at [58]). as we have said above, to the extent that conclusion does not incant the wording of r 10.12(d), it was a deviation only favourable to the mother.
d. summary
... the condition is subtle and needs further inpatient psychiatric evaluation as it may fluctuate, be well disguised or may be personality based with loss of touch with reality during stress periods[27]...“i believe she needs to be reassessed in an inpatient setting with access to the ... reports ...
e. costs ] section 117(1) of the act provides: “[s]ubject to subsection (2), subsection 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa, 117ab, 117ac and 118, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs.” [63] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:  ] section 117(2) of the act provides that if, in proceedings under the act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, it may, subject to sub-ss (2a), (4) and (5), and the applicable rules, make such order as to costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as it considers just. [64] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:  ] section 117(2a) of the act provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made under s 117(2), the court shall have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (g). in fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123 the full court (kay, warnick and boland jj), referring to s 117(2a), said at 130 [41]:
a number of factors are then listed in the subparagraphs. the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings is the first mentioned factor. nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs. ] as to the relationship between s 117(1) and s 117(2) of the act in penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, in joint reasons, stephen, mason, aickin and wilson jj said at 315:
it is an accurate description of s. 117 (1) to say that it expresses a general rule, provided that it is firmly understood that the sub-section is not paramount to s. 117 (2). as sub-s. (1) is expressed to be subject to sub-s. (2) the former must yield whenever a judge finds in a particular case that there are circumstances justifying the making of an order for costs. sub-section (2) requires a finding of justifying circumstances as an essential preliminary to the making of an order. beyond this there is nothing in the subject matter or in the interrelationship of the two provisions which imposes any additional or special onus on an applicant for an order for costs. consequently, with respect to their honours in the family court, we do not agree with the suggestion made in the judgment under appeal that an order can only be made under s. 117 (2) in “a clear case”. (emphasis added) ] as to the nature of the hearing of an application pursuant to s 117 of the act in penfold their honours said at 315-16:
sub-section (2) does not in our view as a matter of law require the judge to specify the circumstances which justify the making of an order. it does not expressly say so, and in the context of the making of an order for costs there is no sufficient basis for making an implication. judges very frequently make orders for costs without giving reasons or making findings, even when costs are in issue. the absence of reasons or findings does not in itself indicate that a judge has erroneously exercised his discretion to award costs, though it will place an appellate court in the position of examining the circumstances and of determining for itself whether the circumstances show that the discretion was erroneously exercised (kent v. kent [(1970) 92 w.n. (nsw) 503, at p. 505]). accordingly, in the absence of some positive legislative indication we should not attribute to parliament the requirement that a judge must make particular findings in relation to an order for costs.  ] we also observe that in re jjt, ex parte victoria legal aid (1998) 195 clr 184 the majority of the high court (gaudron, gummow, hayne and callinan jj, kirby j dissenting) held that s 117(2) of the act referred to costs in the conventional sense and thus to the payment by one party to litigation of money by way of a partial indemnity for professional legal fees and expenses actually incurred by another party in the course of the litigation: see hayne j at 219. an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in litigation and is not punitive in nature. costs are not a penalty or damages: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534 per mason cj at 543 and mchugh j at 567, ruddock and ors v vadarlis and ors (2001) 188 alr 143 per full court of the federal court at [12] and brott and joachim [2006] famca 256, (2006) flc 93-259 per full court (holden, warnick and boland jj) at 80,403-404.
an order for costs may be made on an indemnity basis, subject to a judicial determination capable of being made that there ought to be a departure from the usual basis that costs be payable on the party and party basis. for a discussion of the jurisdiction to order indemnity costs and its exercise see colgate palmolive co and another v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, (1993) 118 alr 248 per sheppard j at 256-257 and nmfm property pty ltd and others v citibank ltd (no 2) (court’s “nmfm” judgment no 11) [2011] fca 480, (2001) 109 fcr 77 per lindgren j at [53] to [90].
it seems to me that the following principles or guidelines can be distilled out of the authorities to which i have referred:- the problem arises in adversary litigation, i.e. litigation as between parties at arm's length. different considerations apply where parties may be found to be entitled to the payment of their costs out of a fund or assets being administered by or under the control of a trustee, liquidator, receiver or person in a like position, eg. a government agency or statutory authority. the ordinary rule is that, where the court orders the costs of one party to litigation to be paid by another party, the order is for payment of those costs on the party and party basis. in this court the provisions of order 62, rules 12 and 19 and the second schedule to the rules will apply to the taxation. in many cases the result will be that the amount recovered by the successful party under the order will fall short of (in many cases well short of) a complete indemnity. this has been the settled practice for centuries in england. it is a practice which is entrenched in australia. either legislation (perhaps in the form of an amendment to rules of court) or a decision of an intermediate court of appeal or of the high court would be required to alter it. no doubt any consideration of whether there should be any change in the practice would require the resolution of the competing considerations mentioned by devlin lj in berry v. british transport commission and handley ja in cachia v. hanes on the one hand and by rogers j in qantas on the other. the relevant passages from the respective judgments have been earlier referred to. in consequence of the settled practice which exists, the court ought not usually make an order for the payment of costs on some basis other than the party and party basis. the circumstances of the case must be such as to warrant the court in departing from the usual course. that has been the view of all judges dealing with applications for payment of costs on the indemnity or some other basis whether here or in england. the tests have been variously put. the court of appeal in andrews v. barnes (39 ch d at 141) said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as between solicitor and client "as and when the justice of the case might so require." woodward j in fountain selected meats appears to have adopted what was said by brandon lj (as he was) in preston v. preston ((1982) 1 all er at 58) namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to justify the court in departing from the ordinary practice. most judges dealing with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with the circumstances of that case and finding in it the presence or absence of factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure from the usual rule. but as french j said (at 8) in tetijo, "the categories in which the discretion may be exercised are not closed". davies j expressed (at 6) similar views in ragata. notwithstanding the fact that that is so, it is useful to note some of the circumstances which have been thought to warrant the exercise of the discretion. i instance the making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant allegations of fraud (both referred to by woodward j in fountain and also by gummow j in thors v. weekes (1989) 92 alr 131 at 152, evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the court and to other parties (french j in tetijo), the fact that the proceedings were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (davies j in ragata) or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (woodward j in fountain and french j in j-corp), the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (davies j in ragata), an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise (eg messiter v. hutchinson (1987) 10 nswlr 525, maitland hospital v. fisher (no. 2) (1992) 27 nswlr 721at 724 (court of appeal), crisp v. keng (supreme court of new south wales, 27 september 1993, unreported, court of appeal)and an award of costs on an indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg megarry v-c in emi records). other categories of cases are to be found in the reports. yet others to arise in the future will have different features about them which may justify an order for costs on the indemnity basis. the question must always be whether the particular facts and circumstances of the case in question warrant the making of an order for payment of costs other than on a party and party basis. it remains to say that the existence of particular facts and circumstances capable of warranting the making of an order for payment of costs, for instance, on the indemnity basis, does not mean that judges are necessarily obliged to exercise their discretion to make such an order. the costs are always in the discretion of the trial judge. provided that discretion is exercised having regard to the applicable principles and the particular circumstances of the instant case its exercise will not be found to have miscarried unless it appears that the order which has been made involves a manifest error or injustice.   the full costs of the father’s counsel are to be paid by the mother no later than 14th february 2023, and (b) two-thirds of the father’s solicitor’s costs are to be paid by the mother by the end of february 2023. if there is any dispute regarding those costs, the parties are to provide a single page of submissions to chambers by the end of january 2023 and i will determine the amount on the basis of those submissions in the light of these reasons and the evidence referred to in them.   two-thirds of the father’s solicitor’s costs are to be paid by the mother by the end of february 2023. if there is any dispute regarding those costs, the parties are to provide a single page of submissions to chambers by the end of january 2023 and i will determine the amount on the basis of those submissions in the light of these reasons and the evidence referred to in them.
e. excursus: the icl issue
associate: dated: 15 december 2022
dated: 15 december 2022
annexure a
family law act 1975
in the federal circuit court of australia
file no: (p)pac1187/2015
between: mr keats (applicant) and: ms halloran (respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer
mr keats (applicant) and: ms halloran (respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer  plicant) and: ms halloran (respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer
and: ms halloran (respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer
ms halloran (respondent) and: independent children’s lawyer  spondent) and: independent children’s lawyer
and: independent children’s lawyer
independent children’s lawyer
before: judge neville
date: 20 june 2018
made at: city k
upon application made to the court by ms aa of counsel for the applicant, mr ae of counsel for the respondent and ms af as the independent children’s lawyer.
on a final basis, the court orders by consent that:
the court notes that:
on a final basis, the court further orders that:   tell the children or any of them that the person they know as p is now known as q, (b) tell the children or any of them that the person they know as p is now living as a woman, (c) tell the children or any of them that the person they knew as p has gender dysphoria, (d) talk to them generally about gender dysphoria, and (e) show the children or any of them a photograph of p as a woman.   tell the children or any of them that the person they know as p is now living as a woman, (c) tell the children or any of them that the person they knew as p has gender dysphoria, (d) talk to them generally about gender dysphoria, and (e) show the children or any of them a photograph of p as a woman.   tell the children or any of them that the person they knew as p has gender dysphoria, (d) talk to them generally about gender dysphoria, and (e) show the children or any of them a photograph of p as a woman.   talk to them generally about gender dysphoria, and (e) show the children or any of them a photograph of p as a woman.   show the children or any of them a photograph of p as a woman.
family law act 1975 federal circuit court of australia at city k pac 1187/2015 between: mr keats applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
federal circuit court of australia at city k pac 1187/2015 between: mr keats applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
at city k pac 1187/2015 between: mr keats applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
between: mr keats applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
mr keats applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
applicant and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
and: ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
ms halloran respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
respondent and: independent children’s lawyer
before the honourable justice neville on the 20th day of june 2018 appearances: ms aa for applicant mr ae for respondent ms af as the independent children’s lawyer it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
on the 20th day of june 2018 appearances: ms aa for applicant mr ae for respondent ms af as the independent children’s lawyer it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
appearances: ms aa for applicant mr ae for respondent ms af as the independent children’s lawyer it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
mr ae for respondent ms af as the independent children’s lawyer it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
ms af as the independent children’s lawyer it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
it is ordered by consent: parental responsibility
parental responsibility   x born in 2009, (b) y born in 2012, and (c) z born in 2012.   y born in 2012, and (c) z born in 2012.   z born in 2012.
living arrangements
communication
face to face time
photographs
review of arrangements
notation:
[1] dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21; (2011) 243 clr 588 (“dasreef”) especially at [31].[2] honeysett v the queen (2014) 253 clr 122.[3] the email from the father of 18th april 2022 is annexure b to the mother’s affidavit.[4] aon risk services australia ltd v australian national university [2009] hca 27; (2009) 239 clr 175 especially at [5] and [6] (french cj) and at [113] and [114] (plurality of gummow, hayne, crennan, kiefel and bell jj).[5] miller v harrington [2008] famcafc 150; (2009) 39 fam lr 654 at [100] – [101] (“miller”).[6] miller at [115] and [117].[7] grundt v great boulder proprietary gold mines ltd [1937] hca 58; (1937) 59 clr 641 (especially the judgement of dixon j at 674-677); sidhu v van dyke [2014] hca 19; (2014) 251 clr 505.[8] honeysett v the queen (2014) 253 clr 122.[9] jacobs (a pseudonym) v the queen [2019] vsca 285.[10] dr c 20/3/16 page 17 line 706.[11] dr c 20/3/16 page 17 line 717-719.[12] dr c 20/3/16 page 18-19 line 777-785.[13] rice & asplund [1978] famcafc 128; (1979) flc 90-725.[14] sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16; (2008) 217 flr 164; (2008) flc 93–363; [2008] famcafc 16; (2009) 39 fam lr 295. warnick j was sitting as the full court.[15] warnick j’s comments in sps & pls were cited with approval by the full court (bryant cj, finn & cronin jj) in marsden v winch (2010) 42 fam lr 1 at [46] and [47].[16] miller v harrington [2008] famcafc 150; (2008) 220 flr 300; (2009) 39 fam lr 654.[17] marsden v winch (2010) 42 fam lr 1. see also the full court’s pared down, two-step, process at [58]: (i) a requirement of there being established a prima facie case of a significant change in circumstances, and (ii) consideration of whether that change is sufficient to justify embarking on a hearing.[18] poisat & poisat (2014) flc 93-597.[19] carriel v lendrum [2015] famcafc 43; (2015) 53 fam lr 157.[20] walter & walter [2016] famcafc 56.[21] cdw v lve [2015] wasca 247, at [88] per martin cj. [22] see further, the comments by the full court in shan & prasad [2020] famcafc 189; (2020) 61 fam lr 440.[23] banham v banham (2021) 64 fam lr 361.[24] mahoney & dieter [2020] famcafc 88. such matters were originally canvassed by warnick j in sps & pls [2008] famcafc 16; (2008) 217 flr 164 especially at [48].[25] birkett & birkett [2017] fcca 2503; spencer v commonwealth [2010] hca 28; (2010) 241 clr 118.[26] generally, see jones dunkel (1959) 101 clr 298.[27] dr c 20/3/16 page 17 line 717-719[28] stephens v stephens [2010] famcafc 172; (2011) 44 fam lr 117.[29] colgate-palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536; (1993) 46 fcr 225.[30] porter v dyer (2022) 402 alr 659. see also charisteas & charisteas [2022] fedcfamc1a 160.