last updated: 28 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bahri & lannick [2022] fedcfamc2f 1753
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
2. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children. 3. that the children spend no time with the father. that the father and/or his agents are restrained by injunction from communicating with, contacting or attempting to contact the children and/or the mother. that the father, and/or his agents, are restrained by injunction from attending any school which the children attend. the mother is to ensure that [x] continues to attend upon all appointments as scheduled by all of [x]’s mental health care practitioners, until such time as those practitioners recommend otherwise and comply with al recommendations given by those practitioners. pending further order, the mother and the father, and his/her servants and/or agents, be and are hereby restrained by injunction from removing or attempting to remove the children [x] born [in] 2014 and [y] born [in] 2016 from the commonwealth of australia. the marshall and all officers of the australian federal police and of the police forces of the various states and territories are requested and empowered to take all necessary steps to give effect to these orders, including all things necessary to include and retain the said children, [x] born [in] 2014 and [y] born [in] 2016 on the airport watchlist in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and to maintain the children’s name on the watchlist until further order of the court.   the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children live with the mother, (c) the children spend no time with the father,   the children live with the mother, (c) the children spend no time with the father,   the children spend no time with the father,
and she sought proposed final orders 4, 5, 6 as set out in her response filed 27 november 2020: certain restraints against the father and an airport watchlist order.
3.1. with the father:
3.1.1. on father’s day from 10:00am to 6:00pm, 3.1.2. on the father’s birthday from 10:00am to 6:00pm, 3.1.3. on each of the children’s birthdays, in odd numbered years if it falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school to 8:00pm, or if it falls on a non-school day from 12:00pm to 8:00pm, and 3.1.4. from 3.00pm on the day of eid-ul-fitr until 3.00pm three days later, 3.1.5. from 3.00pm on the day of eid-ul-adha, until 3.00pm three days later, and 3.1.6. from 3.00pm on christmas eve until 3.00pm on christmas day in odd numbered years and from 3.00pm on christmas day until 3.00pm boxing day in even numbered years.
3.2. with the mother on:
3.2.1. on mother’s day from 10:00am to 6:00pm, 3.2.2. on the mother’s birthday if it falls on a school day from 3:00pm to 7:30pm, or if it falls on a non-school day from 10:00am to 6:00pm, 3.2.3. on each of the children’s birthdays, in even numbered years if it falls on a school day, from the conclusion of school to 8:00pm, or if it falls on a non-school day from 12:00pm to 8:00pm, and 3.2.4. from 3pm on christmas eve until 3pm on christmas day in even numbered years and from 3pm on christmas day until 3pm boxing day in odd numbered years. that for the purposes of the father’s time with the children in accordance with orders 2 and 3, changeover occur on non-school days at [suburb c] mcdonalds, on [b street, suburb c]. that both parties be at liberty to contact the children by telephone or other electronic means on the mondays, wednesdays and sundays between 5:00pm and 6:00pm, that the children are not in their care, and the other parent is to provide the children with privacy during such communication with their parents. that both parties are to inform the other party as soon as possible in the event that a medical emergency involving the children occurs whilst the children are in their care. that both parties are to keep the other party informed of their mobile phone number and current residential address and to notify the other within 48 hours of a change to their mobile telephone number or residential address. that the parties are injuncted and restrained from denigrating the other parent or any member of the other parent’s family or associates in the presence or hearing of the children, and will use their best endeavours to prevent any third party from doing so. that the parties will both be entitled to attend all events involving the children that parents are ordinarily invited to attend, including but not limited to:
9.1. sporting fixtures 9.2. extra curricular activities 9.3. school functions and events including but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports days, parent and teacher interviews, canteen duties and social functions. that the parties both be entitled to contact the school to inform themselves in relation to the children’s schooling and to receive all documents that are parents ordinarily receive, including school reports, newsletters and school information. that both parties do all things necessary to ensure that the children attend islamic religious classes at their primary school. that each parent be permitted to travel with the children out of the commonwealth of australia, provided such period of proposed travel takes place during the time the child/ren are living with that parent pursuant to these orders unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing via email and also provided that: 12.1. so far as practical the occasions on which the parent takes the children out of australia are to coincide with the school holidays of public schools in new south wales 12.2. the parent proposing such holiday shall notify the other parent no less than 30 days prior to the departure date of such proposed trip, and shall provide to the other parent at this time:
12.2.1. particulars including the proposed itinerary and proposed period of such trip, 12.2.2. at least 10 days before departure, a final itinerary including contact telephone numbers and full street addresses of where the child/ren will be staying, 12.2.3. copies of return airline tickets and details of flights once booked and irrespectively at least 10 days before departure.
material relied upon  case outline filed 30 september 2022, (b) initiating application filed 9 october 2020, (c) affidavit filed 9 october 2020, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   initiating application filed 9 october 2020, (c) affidavit filed 9 october 2020, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   affidavit filed 9 october 2020, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   family report dated 24 september 2021.   response filed 27 november 2020, (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 27 november 2020, (c) affidavit filed 11 november 2021, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 27 november 2020, (c) affidavit filed 11 november 2021, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   affidavit filed 11 november 2021, (d) family report dated 24 september 2021.   case outline filed 21 june 2022, (b) family report dated 24 september 2021, (c) tender bundle of the icl.   family report dated 24 september 2021, (c) tender bundle of the icl.   tender bundle of the icl.   exhibit a: family report dated 24 september 2021 and child dispute conference memorandum dated 2 december 2020, (b) exhibit b: icl tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: valentine’s day card from the mother to the father dated 2015, (d) exhibit d: photograph of the mother and father on a roller-coaster, (e) exhibit e: photographs of the mother and children, (f) exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit b: icl tender bundle, (c) exhibit c: valentine’s day card from the mother to the father dated 2015, (d) exhibit d: photograph of the mother and father on a roller-coaster, (e) exhibit e: photographs of the mother and children, (f) exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit c: valentine’s day card from the mother to the father dated 2015, (d) exhibit d: photograph of the mother and father on a roller-coaster, (e) exhibit e: photographs of the mother and children, (f) exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit d: photograph of the mother and father on a roller-coaster, (e) exhibit e: photographs of the mother and children, (f) exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit e: photographs of the mother and children, (f) exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit f: cops entries, (g) exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit g: photos of the parties, (h) exhibit h: suburb c local court file.   exhibit h: suburb c local court file.
evidence
affidavit of the father
affidavit of the mother
oral evidence of the father
oral evidence of the mother
exhibits
...although [ms lannick] and [mr bahri] are separated, [mr bahri] does visit the children daily...[y] has been hospitalized for a total of 1 month over the previous few weeks due to failure to thrive. [ms lannick] was required to be away from [x] during this time and was cared for primarily by her father.
child dispute conference
family report
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  on about 20 march 2013 (being a few months prior to the beginning of the parties’ relationship), ms h, the mother of the father’s child g, had reported to police the father’s telephoning her to see this child, (b) on about 1 august 2013 an incident occurred between the father and ms h in a car (and in which car the child g was present) involving ms h spitting at the father and the father becoming very angry and upset and holding ms h to calm her down, with the father attending upon police to give his version of the incident, (c) the mother leaving the family home with f and x in december 2014 and thereafter living with the children and f in separate premises from the father, (d) the father’s statements to the mother, after separation in december 2014, that the mother was still his wife islamically having participated in an islamic marriage ceremony, (e) the father admits to sexual activity with the mother after december 2014, the father gave evidence that on the basis of that activity he believed the parties were still in a relationship, (f) the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   on about 1 august 2013 an incident occurred between the father and ms h in a car (and in which car the child g was present) involving ms h spitting at the father and the father becoming very angry and upset and holding ms h to calm her down, with the father attending upon police to give his version of the incident, (c) the mother leaving the family home with f and x in december 2014 and thereafter living with the children and f in separate premises from the father, (d) the father’s statements to the mother, after separation in december 2014, that the mother was still his wife islamically having participated in an islamic marriage ceremony, (e) the father admits to sexual activity with the mother after december 2014, the father gave evidence that on the basis of that activity he believed the parties were still in a relationship, (f) the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the mother leaving the family home with f and x in december 2014 and thereafter living with the children and f in separate premises from the father, (d) the father’s statements to the mother, after separation in december 2014, that the mother was still his wife islamically having participated in an islamic marriage ceremony, (e) the father admits to sexual activity with the mother after december 2014, the father gave evidence that on the basis of that activity he believed the parties were still in a relationship, (f) the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the father’s statements to the mother, after separation in december 2014, that the mother was still his wife islamically having participated in an islamic marriage ceremony, (e) the father admits to sexual activity with the mother after december 2014, the father gave evidence that on the basis of that activity he believed the parties were still in a relationship, (f) the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the father admits to sexual activity with the mother after december 2014, the father gave evidence that on the basis of that activity he believed the parties were still in a relationship, (f) the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the father assaulted the mother’s brother mr m in january 2017 (which had resulted in the child x being inadvertently hit on her lip and injured). the mother had then contacted the police who had issued an advo against the father for the protection of mr m, (g) on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   on about 2 december 2017 an incident occurred outside ms h’s residence with the father having attended her residence unannounced to see the child g. ms h was shouting and screaming at the father because the father had requested to see this child. the father admitted that every fortnight, unannounced, he would attend ms h’s residence to spend time with this child yet ms h would tell him to go away. the police had issued an avo against the father for the protection of ms h, (h) in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   in about march 2018 the father assaulted the mother. the father admitted having raised his voice at the mother because of who she was with on the evening of the assault. the police were contacted by the mother and the father was arrested and charged with assault and later convicted of assault against the mother. a two year final advo was made against the father for the protection of the mother which expired on 16 may 2020, (i) in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   in october 2019, the father had grabbed f and threw her aggressively back into a car as a result of which this child’s arm struck the frame of the car, after which incident the mother ceased facilitating the children spending time with the father, (j) on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   on about 24 february 2020 and 4 june 2020 the father had attended, unannounced, upon ms h’s residence to see the child g, despite the opposition of ms h, and ms h had reported the father to the police, (k) on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   on 5 june 2020, the father had gone to the children’s school unannounced and had seen the children briefly, (l) the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the father admitted to having become angry towards his previous partners “to a certain stage”, (m) the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.   the father’s former partner ms t, in 2020, had contacted the police in relation to the father, following which an advo was made against the father for the protection of this woman, this woman had complained to the police that the father had become quick to anger, had begun to exert controlling behaviours towards her, and had also verbally abused her.
mr pickering: that’s okay. because you had referred to a potential hypothesis in terms of taking the father to the airport or picking the father up from the airport – you said one hypothesis was that it may have enabled her to – the mother to present as continuing in the relationship, but it provided her an opportunity to depart from the relationship... [ms ac]: ...if the court finds that there is coercive, controlling violence, as i mentioned in my report, it’s not uncommon for the victims in that dynamic to do what they can to keep themselves and their children safe. and if there was a continuing dynamic of monitoring behaviours as is reported by [ms lannick], then certainly it wouldn’t be – it wouldn’t be farfetched in my mind that – that she may continue to act as though things are okay in order to then have an opportunity to – to be safer. okay?----so just in terms of understanding that dynamic, that would not be unusual because we know that victims do what they can to keep themselves safe. ... mr pickering: you would have heard reference to a thesis in the mother’s evidence that she kept up this image in order to placate the father. would you say that she would have been unlikely to do that for five years? [ms ac]: it’s difficult to say how long someone who may – may have been a victim of coercive and controlling violence might keep up a façade of – of things being okay for the sake of – of the children. my understanding is that coercive, controlling violence is something that can continue on after separation. it’s something the mother has – has indicated to me in interview. so in terms of her motivations, it may be that for the purposes of keeping herself and the children safe, she has had family gatherings of some kind in a context where she might have had some assessment of, “well, this is okay for the moment.” our understanding of this type of violence is that victims of violence often are quite hypervigilant and aware of any changes in maybe the perpetrator’s behaviour and might make decisions about safety in the moment based on a perpetrator’s behaviour. so if in one moment she felt it was potentially okay to meet for the children to see their father, then that might have been an assessment that she in and of herself had to make. in terms of your other question with regards to there not being an understanding – any – the finding – if there hadn’t been any finding of violence, then that would have been something families would – would likely have done was to – to meet. but i’m – i’m coming from this from the perspective of there’s some concerns that have been raised. my awareness is that victims still might maintain some contact until they’re – they’re able to leave safely, and that might have been the context here. and i’m aware that the court might obviously need to – to look at those allegations to find whether that has or has not occurred.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.  m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
parental responsibility
summary
associate: dated: 16 december 2022
dated: 16 december 2022