last updated: 14 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hemming & hemming [2022] fedcfamc2f 1824
orders
the court orders that:
property settlement   the husband shall do all acts and things to transfer the property known as and situate at b street, suburb c (“b street, suburb c”) with the title reference lot ..., to the wife, (b) the wife shall discharge the joint anz mortgage with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...31 on b street, suburb c and/or refinance it into her sole name, (c) the wife shall resign as director of d pty ltd pty ltd (“d pty ltd”) and transfer her shares, right, title and interest in the company to the husband, (d) the husband shall refinance the following joint mortgages into the name of d pty ltd pty ltd or into his sole name or into his name together with another person or entity: (i) anz home loan with the bsb ...70 and a/c. no. ...18 secured against e1 street, suburb f (“e1 street, suburb f”) and with the title reference lot .... (ii) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   the wife shall discharge the joint anz mortgage with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...31 on b street, suburb c and/or refinance it into her sole name, (c) the wife shall resign as director of d pty ltd pty ltd (“d pty ltd”) and transfer her shares, right, title and interest in the company to the husband, (d) the husband shall refinance the following joint mortgages into the name of d pty ltd pty ltd or into his sole name or into his name together with another person or entity: (i) anz home loan with the bsb ...70 and a/c. no. ...18 secured against e1 street, suburb f (“e1 street, suburb f”) and with the title reference lot .... (ii) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   the wife shall resign as director of d pty ltd pty ltd (“d pty ltd”) and transfer her shares, right, title and interest in the company to the husband, (d) the husband shall refinance the following joint mortgages into the name of d pty ltd pty ltd or into his sole name or into his name together with another person or entity: (i) anz home loan with the bsb ...70 and a/c. no. ...18 secured against e1 street, suburb f (“e1 street, suburb f”) and with the title reference lot .... (ii) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   the husband shall refinance the following joint mortgages into the name of d pty ltd pty ltd or into his sole name or into his name together with another person or entity: (i) anz home loan with the bsb ...70 and a/c. no. ...18 secured against e1 street, suburb f (“e1 street, suburb f”) and with the title reference lot .... (ii) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   anz home loan with the bsb ...70 and a/c. no. ...18 secured against e1 street, suburb f (“e1 street, suburb f”) and with the title reference lot .... (ii) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.  ) anz home loan with the bsb ...02 and a/c. no. ...38 secured against e1 street, suburb f. (iii) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.  i) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...25 secured against e2 street, suburb f (“e2 street, suburb f”) with the title reference lot .... (iv) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.  ) anz home loan with the bsb ...93 and a/c. no. ...69 secured against g street, suburb h (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot .... (v) the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   the wife shall transfer all her right, title and interest in g street, suburb h and e2 street, suburb f to the husband.   g street, suburb h, (“g street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot ..., (b) his shares in d pty ltd being the corporate entity which operates as trustee for the hemming family trust, (c) his interest in e1 street, suburb f, (d) his interest in e2 street, suburb f, (e) his motor vehicle 1, (f) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   his shares in d pty ltd being the corporate entity which operates as trustee for the hemming family trust, (c) his interest in e1 street, suburb f, (d) his interest in e2 street, suburb f, (e) his motor vehicle 1, (f) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   his interest in e1 street, suburb f, (d) his interest in e2 street, suburb f, (e) his motor vehicle 1, (f) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   his interest in e2 street, suburb f, (e) his motor vehicle 1, (f) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   his motor vehicle 1, (f) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in his possession, (g) his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   his tools, building materials, plant and equipment currently in his possession, (h) the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   the cash at bank or cash at hand in his name or in the name of any entity under his direction or control, (i) the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   the balance of the insurance funds received by the parties from company j in respect of damage to e2 street, suburb f, (j) any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   any funds owed by ms k to the parties, (k) any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   any funds owed by ms l to the parties, (l) any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   any superannuation balances remaining in his name after the superannuation split to the wife has been executed by the trustee of super fund 1.   any costs or capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfer of the wife’s interest in d pty ltd and/or the hemming family trust to the husband, (b) any liabilities arising from the corporate status of “d pty ltd” and or the “the hemming family trust”, (c) any liabilities owed by d pty ltd or the hemming family trust as at the date of these orders or in future, (d) any tax liabilities or other liabilities owed by the husband to any third parties, (e) any capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfers of property interests between the parties pursuant to these orders.   any liabilities arising from the corporate status of “d pty ltd” and or the “the hemming family trust”, (c) any liabilities owed by d pty ltd or the hemming family trust as at the date of these orders or in future, (d) any tax liabilities or other liabilities owed by the husband to any third parties, (e) any capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfers of property interests between the parties pursuant to these orders.   any liabilities owed by d pty ltd or the hemming family trust as at the date of these orders or in future, (d) any tax liabilities or other liabilities owed by the husband to any third parties, (e) any capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfers of property interests between the parties pursuant to these orders.   any tax liabilities or other liabilities owed by the husband to any third parties, (e) any capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfers of property interests between the parties pursuant to these orders.   any capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfers of property interests between the parties pursuant to these orders.   m street, suburb h (“m street, suburb h”) with the title reference lot ..., (b) b street, suburb c (“b street, suburb c”) with the title reference lot ..., (c) her motor vehicle 2, (d) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in her possession, (e) the cash at bank or cash at hand in her name or in the name of any entity under her direction or control, (f) her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   b street, suburb c (“b street, suburb c”) with the title reference lot ..., (c) her motor vehicle 2, (d) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in her possession, (e) the cash at bank or cash at hand in her name or in the name of any entity under her direction or control, (f) her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   her motor vehicle 2, (d) the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in her possession, (e) the cash at bank or cash at hand in her name or in the name of any entity under her direction or control, (f) her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   the furniture, furnishings and personal effects currently in her possession, (e) the cash at bank or cash at hand in her name or in the name of any entity under her direction or control, (f) her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   the cash at bank or cash at hand in her name or in the name of any entity under her direction or control, (f) her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   her contingent or vested interest in the estate of the late mr o, (g) any superannuation balances in her name.   any superannuation balances in her name.   any costs or capital gains tax liabilities arising from the transfer of the husband’s interest in 6 b street, suburb c to the wife, (b) any liabilities arising from her role as executor of the estate of the late mr o and/or from the distribution of assets from the estate.   any liabilities arising from her role as executor of the estate of the late mr o and/or from the distribution of assets from the estate.   whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90me of the act becomes payable to or on behalf of mr hemming from his interest in the super fund 1, the respondent wife, ms hemming is entitled to be paid by super fund 1, being the trustee of super fund 1 (“the trustee”), the amount calculated in accordance with part 6 of the family law (superannuation) regulations 2001, using a base amount of $62,095.50 and, (b) there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the applicant husband, mr hemming would have had but for these orders.   there is a corresponding reduction in the entitlement the applicant husband, mr hemming would have had but for these orders.
parenting settlement   during school terms, each alternate weekend from the end of the school day on wednesday until return to school on monday, if the monday is a public holiday or a pupil free day then until return of school on tuesday. such alternate weekend time shall commence on the second wednesday of each school term. (b) during the terms 1 and 3 school holidays from the end of the last day of school until 6pm on the second saturday of the school holidays. (c) during the term 2 school holidays from the end of the last day of school until 6pm on the second wednesday of the school holidays. (d) during the term 4 school holidays the children shall spend time with the father as follows: (i) in odd-numbered years: from 4pm 8th december until 4pm on 15th december, from 4pm on 22nd december until 4pm on 29th december, from 4pm on 5th january until 4pm on 12th january, from 4pm on 19th january until 4pm on 26th january. (ii) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year. (e) on the weekend of father’s day from 3pm on saturday until return to school on monday. (f) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   during the terms 1 and 3 school holidays from the end of the last day of school until 6pm on the second saturday of the school holidays. (c) during the term 2 school holidays from the end of the last day of school until 6pm on the second wednesday of the school holidays. (d) during the term 4 school holidays the children shall spend time with the father as follows: (i) in odd-numbered years: from 4pm 8th december until 4pm on 15th december, from 4pm on 22nd december until 4pm on 29th december, from 4pm on 5th january until 4pm on 12th january, from 4pm on 19th january until 4pm on 26th january. (ii) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year. (e) on the weekend of father’s day from 3pm on saturday until return to school on monday. (f) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   during the term 2 school holidays from the end of the last day of school until 6pm on the second wednesday of the school holidays. (d) during the term 4 school holidays the children shall spend time with the father as follows: (i) in odd-numbered years: from 4pm 8th december until 4pm on 15th december, from 4pm on 22nd december until 4pm on 29th december, from 4pm on 5th january until 4pm on 12th january, from 4pm on 19th january until 4pm on 26th january. (ii) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year. (e) on the weekend of father’s day from 3pm on saturday until return to school on monday. (f) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   during the term 4 school holidays the children shall spend time with the father as follows: (i) in odd-numbered years: from 4pm 8th december until 4pm on 15th december, from 4pm on 22nd december until 4pm on 29th december, from 4pm on 5th january until 4pm on 12th january, from 4pm on 19th january until 4pm on 26th january. (ii) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year. (e) on the weekend of father’s day from 3pm on saturday until return to school on monday. (f) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   in odd-numbered years: from 4pm 8th december until 4pm on 15th december, from 4pm on 22nd december until 4pm on 29th december, from 4pm on 5th january until 4pm on 12th january, from 4pm on 19th january until 4pm on 26th january. (ii) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year.  ) in even-numbered years: from the end of school on the last day of the school year until 4pm on 8th december, from 4pm on 15th december until 4pm on 22nd december, from 4pm on 29th december until 4pm on 5th january, from 4pm on 12th january until 4pm on 19th january, from 4pm on 26th january until 4pm on the day before either of the children are due to commence school for the new academic year.   on the weekend of father’s day from 3pm on saturday until return to school on monday. (f) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   on the weekend of mother’s day from 3pm on saturday until the start of school on monday. (ii) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.  ) on each of the children’s birthdays as follows, in even-numbered years from 3pm on the eve of the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day and in odd-numbered years from 3pm on the child’s birthday until the start of school or 3pm the next day.   emergency medical treatment, attendance by nsw ambulance or referral to a specialist. (b) a period of self-isolation due to covid19 or another illness requiring the child to self-isolate.   a period of self-isolation due to covid19 or another illness requiring the child to self-isolate.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
the hearing  outline of case document filed 4 february 2022, (b) draft minute of order which was tendered as exhibit 1, (c) affidavit of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms l (the husband’s sister) filed 1 february 2022, (f) affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   draft minute of order which was tendered as exhibit 1, (c) affidavit of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms l (the husband’s sister) filed 1 february 2022, (f) affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   affidavit of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms l (the husband’s sister) filed 1 february 2022, (f) affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   financial statement of the husband filed 1 february 2022, (e) affidavit of ms l (the husband’s sister) filed 1 february 2022, (f) affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   affidavit of ms l (the husband’s sister) filed 1 february 2022, (f) affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   affidavit of ms k (the husband’s mother) filed 1 february 2022, (g) affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   affidavit of ms q (a relative of the husband who gives evidence in relation to the husband’s inheritances) filed 1 february 2022, and (h) family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   family report of dr r, clinical psychologist, dated 20 february 2020, which was tendered and marked as exhibit 2.   outline of case document filed 7 february 2022, (b) draft minute of order which was tendered as exhibit 3 but later superseded by exhibit 17, (c) affidavit of the wife filed 4 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 4 february 2022, and (e) family report of dr r referred to previously.   draft minute of order which was tendered as exhibit 3 but later superseded by exhibit 17, (c) affidavit of the wife filed 4 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 4 february 2022, and (e) family report of dr r referred to previously.   affidavit of the wife filed 4 february 2022, (d) financial statement of the wife filed 4 february 2022, and (e) family report of dr r referred to previously.   financial statement of the wife filed 4 february 2022, and (e) family report of dr r referred to previously.   family report of dr r referred to previously.
part i - property settlement proceedingsthe law  i will identify and value the property, liabilities, and financial resources of the parties (the balance sheet), (b) i will consider whether it is just and equitable to make any property settlement order adjusting the parties’ respective interests therein, (c) if it is, i will then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets, pursuant to section 79 of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (d) i will identify and assess the relevant “future factors”, as i would colloquially refer to them, as set out in section 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), 79(4)(f), and 79(4)(g) of the act. i will then determine what, if any, adjustment for future factors is warranted in respect of each party’s contributions-based entitlement, (e) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any property settlement order i am contemplating is “just and equitable.”   i will consider whether it is just and equitable to make any property settlement order adjusting the parties’ respective interests therein, (c) if it is, i will then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets, pursuant to section 79 of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (d) i will identify and assess the relevant “future factors”, as i would colloquially refer to them, as set out in section 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), 79(4)(f), and 79(4)(g) of the act. i will then determine what, if any, adjustment for future factors is warranted in respect of each party’s contributions-based entitlement, (e) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any property settlement order i am contemplating is “just and equitable.”   if it is, i will then identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets, pursuant to section 79 of the act. for convenience, each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement will be expressed in percentage terms, (d) i will identify and assess the relevant “future factors”, as i would colloquially refer to them, as set out in section 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), 79(4)(f), and 79(4)(g) of the act. i will then determine what, if any, adjustment for future factors is warranted in respect of each party’s contributions-based entitlement, (e) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any property settlement order i am contemplating is “just and equitable.”   i will identify and assess the relevant “future factors”, as i would colloquially refer to them, as set out in section 75(2) of the act, including any relevant matters arising pursuant to section 79(4)(d), 79(4)(f), and 79(4)(g) of the act. i will then determine what, if any, adjustment for future factors is warranted in respect of each party’s contributions-based entitlement, (e) lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any property settlement order i am contemplating is “just and equitable.”   lastly, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that any property settlement order i am contemplating is “just and equitable.”
step 1 – the balance sheet
realisable “cash” assets
value
1
g street, suburb h (joint) - 2 residential units rented out
$715,000
2
m street, suburb h (wife)
$700,000
3
e2 street, suburb f (husband)
$410,000
4
e1 street, suburb f (d pty ltd as trustee for hemming family trust)
5
b street, suburb c (d pty ltd as trustee for hemming family trust)
$550,000
6
anz account #...94 (husband)
$2,306
7
anz account #...39 (husband)
$3,695
8
anz account #...17 (husband) – includes interim property distribution moneys of $193,047
$196,889
9
anz account #...45 (husband)
$2,580
10
anz account #...65 (husband)*
$39,693
11
bank s (wife)
$4,080
12
interest in her late father’s estate (wife)*
$516,666
assets subtotal
$3,838,179
notional assets (addbacks)
13
donations to church s (husband)*
$nil
14
partial property settlement moneys already spent (wife)*
15
partial property settlement moneys already spent (wife)
16
difference in spent legal costs (husband)
$49,658
17  ank)
18
19
addbacks subtotal
liabilities
20
joint anz mortgage #...69 (g street, suburb h)
$193,583
21
joint anz mortgage #...25 (e2 street, suburb f)
$264,669
22
joint anz mortgage #...18 (e1 street, suburb f)
$180,428
23
joint anz mortgage #...38 (e1 street, suburb f)
$59,018
24
“d pty ltd” anz mortgage #...31 (b street, suburb c)
$205,515
25
land tax debt (b street, suburb c)
$5,136
26
27
repairs to e2 street, suburb f (anticipated)*
28
wife’s hecs / help fees (outstanding debt)*
$4,733
liabilities subtotal
$952,775
superannuation
29
super fund 1 (husband)
$182,457
30
super fund 2 (husband)
$1,474
31
super fund 3 (wife)
$59,740
superannuation subtotal
$243,671
total net assets
$3,178,733
items 10 & 27 – bank account and anticipated repair costs  the repair payout from company j was compensatory by nature. that is, the payment was not a payment intended to reap a profit for the husband but, rather, to compensate him for the reasonable repair costs, as assessed by company j, and (b) it is agreed that the husband will retain e2 street, suburb f at the conclusion of the proceedings, therefore (c) if the husband is able to save some of the repair moneys, it will solely be a products of his own efforts in either doing the work himself, or finding a tradesman willing to do the work at a cheaper price than allowed for by company j. it is just and equitable that he retain any such savings himself, in those circumstances because (d) likewise, if there is any future problem relating to the quality of the repair work, it is just and equitable – if not inevitable – that the husband will be responsible for any associated losses, including potential loss of rental income while rectification work is carried out.   it is agreed that the husband will retain e2 street, suburb f at the conclusion of the proceedings, therefore (c) if the husband is able to save some of the repair moneys, it will solely be a products of his own efforts in either doing the work himself, or finding a tradesman willing to do the work at a cheaper price than allowed for by company j. it is just and equitable that he retain any such savings himself, in those circumstances because (d) likewise, if there is any future problem relating to the quality of the repair work, it is just and equitable – if not inevitable – that the husband will be responsible for any associated losses, including potential loss of rental income while rectification work is carried out.   if the husband is able to save some of the repair moneys, it will solely be a products of his own efforts in either doing the work himself, or finding a tradesman willing to do the work at a cheaper price than allowed for by company j. it is just and equitable that he retain any such savings himself, in those circumstances because (d) likewise, if there is any future problem relating to the quality of the repair work, it is just and equitable – if not inevitable – that the husband will be responsible for any associated losses, including potential loss of rental income while rectification work is carried out.   likewise, if there is any future problem relating to the quality of the repair work, it is just and equitable – if not inevitable – that the husband will be responsible for any associated losses, including potential loss of rental income while rectification work is carried out.
item 12 – wife’s interest in her late father’s estate  at the same time as the wife ensured that her siblings received their one-third share, she in fact overpaid them, each to the tune of around $34,000. it seems there may be some confusion on the wife’s part – or on the part of her advisors – in that the overpayment appears to have been by way of a mistake, and not to have taken into account some taxes, or other charges. in any event, she has not only overpaid them, but (b) and this is the second point which is curious – the wife has received nothing herself from the estate. the wife effectively says in her affidavit that she has accidentally overpaid her siblings, and that the balance that is left over to distribute to her is less than the amounts already distributed to her siblings and so “i will then have to decide whether i want to commence legal proceedings against them to get the overpayments back.”   and this is the second point which is curious – the wife has received nothing herself from the estate. the wife effectively says in her affidavit that she has accidentally overpaid her siblings, and that the balance that is left over to distribute to her is less than the amounts already distributed to her siblings and so “i will then have to decide whether i want to commence legal proceedings against them to get the overpayments back.”
item 13 – donations to church s
item 14 – wife’s partial property settlement
item 28 – wife’s hecs/help fees
step 2 – is it “just and equitable” to make a property settlement order?
step 3 – assessment of contributions
initial contributions
contributions during the marriage
i held back all but the least amount of money to live on.  re is a typo in the letter. the word “least” reads as “lease”. that is clearly a typographical error and the word “least” is what was intended.)   a deposit of $22,500, which i accept can be traced back to the wife’s pre-existing savings (that is, her savings before the marriage), (b) the first homeowner’s grant, which was either $7,000 or $14,000. i am unable to make a finding either way, but it does not matter much in the grand scheme of this case, (c) the above inheritances of the husband, totalling $116,186, (d) the balance purchase moneys of $79,314 was funded in a way that, oddly enough, neither party can explain.   the first homeowner’s grant, which was either $7,000 or $14,000. i am unable to make a finding either way, but it does not matter much in the grand scheme of this case, (c) the above inheritances of the husband, totalling $116,186, (d) the balance purchase moneys of $79,314 was funded in a way that, oddly enough, neither party can explain.   the above inheritances of the husband, totalling $116,186, (d) the balance purchase moneys of $79,314 was funded in a way that, oddly enough, neither party can explain.   the balance purchase moneys of $79,314 was funded in a way that, oddly enough, neither party can explain.   the husband’s inheritance of $151,346, (b) an $18,000 interest-free loan from the husband’s mother, ms k: see exhibit 15. i note here that, as an offset, the husband did some renovation and repair work to ms k’s home over the next eight (8) years or so, and deducted the cost of materials purchased by him from such debt. i accept her evidence that he repaid $9,572 to her in this manner, (c) the sum of $68,533, being proceeds of the sale of the husband’s shares in company ad, company ae, company af, company ag, company ah – collectively totalling $53,203 – and company aj $15,330. to be clear, although the husband had acquired those shares and managed them, obviously in a profitable way, the shares were matrimonial property that, effectively, arose out of the joint labours of the parties, (d) the balance of the purchase price was made up out of the parties’ savings, together with a loan of $15,000 from the husband’s uncle although, ultimately, this was “buffer money” only, and the parties did not, in fact, need to draw upon it, and it was able to be repaid to the uncle.   an $18,000 interest-free loan from the husband’s mother, ms k: see exhibit 15. i note here that, as an offset, the husband did some renovation and repair work to ms k’s home over the next eight (8) years or so, and deducted the cost of materials purchased by him from such debt. i accept her evidence that he repaid $9,572 to her in this manner, (c) the sum of $68,533, being proceeds of the sale of the husband’s shares in company ad, company ae, company af, company ag, company ah – collectively totalling $53,203 – and company aj $15,330. to be clear, although the husband had acquired those shares and managed them, obviously in a profitable way, the shares were matrimonial property that, effectively, arose out of the joint labours of the parties, (d) the balance of the purchase price was made up out of the parties’ savings, together with a loan of $15,000 from the husband’s uncle although, ultimately, this was “buffer money” only, and the parties did not, in fact, need to draw upon it, and it was able to be repaid to the uncle.   the sum of $68,533, being proceeds of the sale of the husband’s shares in company ad, company ae, company af, company ag, company ah – collectively totalling $53,203 – and company aj $15,330. to be clear, although the husband had acquired those shares and managed them, obviously in a profitable way, the shares were matrimonial property that, effectively, arose out of the joint labours of the parties, (d) the balance of the purchase price was made up out of the parties’ savings, together with a loan of $15,000 from the husband’s uncle although, ultimately, this was “buffer money” only, and the parties did not, in fact, need to draw upon it, and it was able to be repaid to the uncle.   the balance of the purchase price was made up out of the parties’ savings, together with a loan of $15,000 from the husband’s uncle although, ultimately, this was “buffer money” only, and the parties did not, in fact, need to draw upon it, and it was able to be repaid to the uncle.
post-separation contributions  the fact that the payslip is dated 31 december 2016 or thereabouts, (b) that up to that point in time, he should have earned $36,000 gross in accordance with his usual salary, but (c) the payslip shows that he had in fact earned $55,000: see exhibit 14. the wife did not accept the payslip, even going as far as to suggest that “her 14 year-old son could have generated” it. i reject the wife’s challenge and accept that the husband’s documents are accurate.   that up to that point in time, he should have earned $36,000 gross in accordance with his usual salary, but (c) the payslip shows that he had in fact earned $55,000: see exhibit 14. the wife did not accept the payslip, even going as far as to suggest that “her 14 year-old son could have generated” it. i reject the wife’s challenge and accept that the husband’s documents are accurate.   the payslip shows that he had in fact earned $55,000: see exhibit 14. the wife did not accept the payslip, even going as far as to suggest that “her 14 year-old son could have generated” it. i reject the wife’s challenge and accept that the husband’s documents are accurate.
weighing up contributions
step 4 – adjustments for future factors
step 5 – considering the effect of my findings and ensuring a just & equitable outcome
conclusion & orders
part ii – the parenting proceedingsthe law
primary considerations   the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
additional considerations   additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
best interests
section 60cc(2)(a) – meaningful relationships
section 60cc(2)(b) – protecting against risks of harm
section 60cc(3)(a) – views of the children
section 60cc(3)(b) – nature of relationships
section 60cc(3)(c) – parental participation
section 60cc(3)(ca) – maintenance of the children
section 60cc(3)(d) – likely effect of changes in circumstances
section 60cc(3)(e) – practical difficulty & expenses
section 60cc(3)(f) & s 60cc(3)(i) – parental capacity and attitudes
“i had sex with you starting when you were asleep, which you did not like.”
“i hated every second and every minute of these sexual encounters. i felt very physically abused, disrespected, emotionally manipulated and physically sick in the lead up to, during and after each of these sexual encounters that [mr hemming] engineered.”
“i found this action completely humiliating. it is still really humiliating to think about, but i can’t even remember exactly what happened that day because i’ve tried to block most of it out.”
“making other people sick to get attention.”
section 60cc(3)(g) – childrens’ characteristics
section 60cc(3)(j) & s 60cc(3)(k) – family violence and related orders
section 60cc(3)(l) – future litigation
section 60cc(3)(m) – other relevant facts or circumstances
weighing up the competing proposals
associate: dated: 19 december 2022
dated: 19 december 2022