last updated: 6 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
westcott & larson [2022] fedcfamc2f 1782
orders
the court orders:
until further or other order:  abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party to, with or in the presence or hearing of the child and from permitting any other person to do so, (b) from utilising or subjecting the children to any form of chastising or physical discipline or from permitting any other person to do so, (c) from changing the child’s primary residence outside of the adelaide metropolitan area.   from utilising or subjecting the children to any form of chastising or physical discipline or from permitting any other person to do so, (c) from changing the child’s primary residence outside of the adelaide metropolitan area.   from changing the child’s primary residence outside of the adelaide metropolitan area.   the applicant to attend at 9.00am, (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am, and (c) microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.   the respondent to attend at 10.30am, and (c) microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.   microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.   any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child, and (f) an observed interaction between the parties and the child.   identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child, and (f) an observed interaction between the parties and the child.   any views expressed by the child and any matters (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child, and (f) an observed interaction between the parties and the child.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the child, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child, and (f) an observed interaction between the parties and the child.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the child, and (f) an observed interaction between the parties and the child.   an observed interaction between the parties and the child.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge brown:
introduction
background
you definitely do not have my permission to do so. i do not agree that because you are having financial difficulties that you have to take the kids with you. they’re happy and settled now and receive more than enough love and support from you and i and our families. if you like, you can leave the children here with me, and you can move and improve your life. i would love to have them, and i promise i would let you see and talk to them whenever you wish.[2]
we have moved interstate. the kids are happy and safe. i will let you be able to call them a couple of times a week.[3]
any previous occasions when i’ve mentioned court proceedings, my allocated time with my children is taken away from me and i’m threatened that i will never see the children again.[4]
the only information i’ve received from my ex-partner is that my children are living interstate. i’ve not been able to see or speak to my children since 10 october. i don't know where they are or who is caring for them. i am very worried about them.[5]
grandparents’ at least once a month and always at school holidays. we usually have lunch or tea at nan and pap’s every couple of weeks.[6]
dear [ms larson], my name is judge brown. i’m a judge of the federal circuit and family court of australia based in adelaide. this afternoon, i have an application before me from your former partner, [mr larson]. he is asking me to make an order that the police remove [x] and [y] from your care and deliver them to him. i am satisfied that you know about this application and that the court case is listed now. unless you contact me within the next 15 minutes, i will make the order that [mr westcott] is seeking. it is in your interests to contact the court to discuss these issues directly. you can do so by dialling in using the number below.
i did not do this move lightly as i thought it is the best direction for my children as [x] was getting beside himself with the way his father was treating him.
risk assessment comprises two elements – the first requires prediction of the likelihood of the occurrence of harmful events, and the second requires consideration of the severity of the impact caused by those events. in our view, the assessment of risk in cases involving the welfare of children cannot be postponed until the last piece of evidence is given and tested, and the last submission is made. we accept, however, that it is always a question of degree depending on the evidence that is before the court.
“dad doesn’t like it when i’m at mum’s, and mum doesn’t like it when i’m at dad’s.” when i asked how [x] knows this, [x] responded, “because mum acts mad when dad is picking me up.” when i asked what this looks like, [x] stated, “she tells me all this stuff,” and stated, “mum said no one can know except the family.” when i asked why, [x] said, “dad can’t know.” [x] paused and stated, “mum told us she is going to take me and my baby sister to a judge.” when i asked what this means, [x] stated, “mum is taking us to melbourne.” when i asked why, [x] stated, “mum thinks it’s not safe with dad.” when i asked if this was for a holiday or to live, [x] said, “we’re moving there, but i accidentally told dad, and now dad is going to take us away.” [x] said, “i want mum to take dad to the judge, but i don't want dad to take mum.”
legal principles applicable iolent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family or causes the family member to be fearful.
discussion
conclusion
associate: dated: 22 december 2022
dated: 22 december 2022
[1] hereinafter referred to as “the act”.[2] see annexure 1 to affidavit of mr westcott filed 2 november 2022.[3] see annexure 4 to affidavit of mr westcott filed 2 november 2022.[4] see questionnaire parenting of mr westcott filed 2 november 2022 at page 3.[5] see questionnaire parenting of mr westcott filed 2 november 2022 at page 3.[6] see questionnaire parenting of mr westcott filed 2 november 2022 at page 6.[7] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 at [61].[8] see eaby & speelman [2015] famcafc 104; (2015) flc 93-654 at 85,332 [21] per ryan j.