last updated: 9 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
martoulis & valas [2022] fedcfamc2f 1781
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
final orders made
the defended hearing
material relied upon
w1
husband’s s2 bank accounts (july 2005 - september 2010) (pages 1034-1035 of cb)
w2
husband’s s1 bank accounts (august 2007 - november 2007) (pages 916-946 of cb)
w3
husband’s tax return 2013-14 (pages 1038-1057 of cb)
w4
wife’s tax return 2013-14 (pages 1269-1307 of cb)
w5
husband’s bank account (31 august 2013 - 30 september 2013)
h1
photographs from realestate.com.au of the suburb g property
the relevant law
standard of proof: burden of proof  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.  ] the grave allegation of untruthfulness and its concomitant finding of abuse of child x as essential aspects of the determination of the case constituted, in accordance with s 140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), a factual conclusion that required persuasion, itself, on the balance of probabilities. it was not established on the mere failure by the appellant to prove that the behaviours had in fact occurred to that same standard. [40] while the failure to accept a witness’s evidence is a necessary component of a finding of untruthfulness or fabrication, such mere failure is less than a finding of untruthfulness, untruthfulness is a further fact that is required to be found.  ] while the failure to accept a witness’s evidence is a necessary component of a finding of untruthfulness or fabrication, such mere failure is less than a finding of untruthfulness, untruthfulness is a further fact that is required to be found.
in the full court of the federal court judgment of communications, electrical, electronic, energy, information, postal, plumbing & allied services union of australia v australian competition & consumer commission (2007) 162 fcr 466, 242 alr 643, [2007] fcafc 132 (weinberg, bennett and rares jj) it was observed at [31]:
even though he spoke of the common law position, dixon j’s classic discussion in briginshaw v briginshaw (1938) 60 clr 336, [1938] hca 34 at 361–363 of how the civil standard of proof operates appositely expresses the considerations which s 140(2) of the evidence act now requires a court to take into account. dixon j emphasised that when the law requires proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be found. he pointed out that a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independent of any belief in its reality, cannot justify the finding of a fact.
...subsequently, in qantas airways ltd v gama (2008) 167 fcr 537, 247 alr 273, [2008] fcafc 69, branson j (with whom french and jacobson jj agreed at [110]) simply observed at [139] that:
references to, for example, "the briginshaw standard" or "the onerous briginshaw test" ... have a tendency to lead a trier of facts into error. the correct approach to the standard of proof in a civil proceeding in a federal court is that for which s 140 of the evidence act provides.
... ...in 2010, the court of appeal in morley v australian securities & investments commission (2010) 247 flr 140, 5 bfra 364, [2010] nswca 331 stated at [750]–[753]:
references in the authorities to "actual persuasion" should be understood as equivalent to the state of "satisfaction", as that word is used in s 140. it should not be understood as requiring a subjective "belief". ... in order to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities, within the meaning of s 140, the tribunal of fact must reach an affirmative conclusion, or a definite conclusion, or an actual persuasion.
... similarly, the victorian court of appeal has emphatically adopted the view that this provision [section 140] embraces the "briginshaw principle", notwithstanding the language used and the clearly stated view of the alrc to the contrary. in nom v director of public prosecutions (2012) 38 vr 618, [2012] vsca 198, redlich ja, harper ja and curtain aja, after a discussion of the authorities, concluded at [124] that there is now a "settled" view that a "[m]ere mechanical comparison of probabilities independent of a reasonable satisfaction will not justify a finding of fact. the fact finder must feel an actual persuasion of the occurrence or existence of the fact in issue before it can be found”.
reliability & credibility ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events...  tations omitted)
key authorities
the main issue in this case is whether the proposed proceedings for property settlement will be proceedings arising out of the marital relationship within the meaning of paragraph (ca)(i) of the definition of “matrimonial cause'' in section 4(1). it is reasonably clear on the evidence that the marital cohabitation of the parties was very short indeed and it may be conceded that, had the wife brought her proceedings immediately following the dissolution of the marriage she would not have received much, if anything, by way of property settlement. however, the cohabitation of the parties following the dissolution of the marriage was substantial even if one disregards the period from 1974 to 1980 when the parties occupied separate households. ...
...if that proposition were to be accepted as the law it would follow that any claim based for the main part on contributions arising out of post-marital cohabitation would lack the sufficient nexus. in our view this cannot possibly be the law. in the first place it conflicts with the view expressed by the high court in williams v williams [1985] hca 52, (1985) flc 91-628 that contributions to the welfare of the family do not cease upon the termination of cohabitation or for that matter the dissolution of the legal marital tie: see dadic and dadic [1987] famca 41, (1987) flc 91-825. it also would sit uneasily with the well-established proposition that contributions made during pre-marital cohabitation can be taken into account even when the period of pre-marital cohabitation by far exceeds the period of marriage: collins and collins (1977) flc 90-286, olliver and olliver [1978] famca 24, (1978) flc 90-499. ... a more logical and consistent approach is one which is based on the proposition that once a marriage has been celebrated between the parties, the entire relationship between the parties whether arising out of contributions before, during or after the formal tie of marriage was entered into or dissolved, falls within the ambit of part viii of the family law act 1975. this principle explains why contributions made between cohabitants who later marry are judged according to the criteria set out in the family law act 1975 and not according to those set out in the property law act 1958 (vic) or the de facto relationships act 1984 (nsw). it is also consistent with the proposition that post-separation and post-divorce contributions continue to be taken into account. these parties are before the family court because they were once married and hence the proceedings can be said to arise out of the marital relationship, even if the property, the subject of such proceedings, does not. as ross-jones j remarked in dadic at p 76,214:
‘a resumption of cohabitation after dissolution... between parties who have previously been married to each other is clearly distinguishable from a de facto relationship as such where the parties have never been married to each other.’
...the decision and the reasoning of the full court in skoflek and baftirovsky is inconsistent with the principle we have arrived at in this case and must be regarded as overruled. once it is determined that the proceedings fall within paragraph (ca) of the definition of “matrimonial cause” and the whole of the relationship can be taken into consideration including the post-marital cohabitation from 1980 up to the date of the husband's hospitalization, the other grounds of appeal raised by the husband, such as that the wife was unlikely to receive much or was unable to explain the delay, must also fail. (emphasis added)  ) proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, being proceedings: (i) arising out of the marital relationship,   arising out of the marital relationship,
...
proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, being proceedings: (i) arising out of the marital relationship, (ii) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings between those parties... importantly, this claim cannot subsequently lose its character as a matrimonial cause as a result of the outcome of, or a determination made in, the proceedings, for example, as here, a refusal to grant leave. that is what nygh j in rennie and higgon was referring to in describing the application for leave as a procedural provision, only affecting the remedy but not the right (see [89] above, see also dmw v cgw [1982] hca 73, (1982) 151 clr 491). thus, as a result of the proceedings instituted by the wife being a matrimonial cause, vcat has no jurisdiction to entertain either the claim already made by the husband, or any claim that may be sought to be made by the wife.  arising out of the marital relationship, (ii) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings between those parties...  ) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed divorce or validity of marriage proceedings between those parties...
de facto financial cause means: (a) proceedings between the parties to a de facto relationship with respect to the maintenance of one of them after the breakdown of their de facto relationship, or   proceedings between the parties to a de facto relationship with respect to the maintenance of one of them after the breakdown of their de facto relationship, or   proceedings between:  a party to a de facto relationship, and (ii) the bankruptcy trustee of a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship, with respect to the maintenance of the first‑mentioned party after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, or (c) proceedings between the parties to a de facto relationship with respect to the distribution, after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, of the property of the parties or either of them, or  ) the bankruptcy trustee of a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship,   proceedings between the parties to a de facto relationship with respect to the distribution, after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, of the property of the parties or either of them, or   proceedings between:  a party to a de facto relationship, and (ii) the bankruptcy trustee of a bankrupt party to the de facto relationship, with respect to the distribution, after the breakdown of the de facto relationship, of any vested bankruptcy property in relation to the bankrupt party, or (e) without limiting any of the preceding paragraphs, proceedings with respect to a part viiiab financial agreement that are between any combination of: (i) the parties to that agreement, and (ii) the legal personal representatives of any of those parties who have died, (including a combination consisting solely of parties or consisting solely of representatives), or (f) third party proceedings (as defined in section 4b) to set aside a part viiiab financial agreement, or (g) any other proceedings (including proceedings with respect to the enforcement of a decree or the service of process) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed proceedings of a kind referred to in any of the preceding paragraphs.   without limiting any of the preceding paragraphs, proceedings with respect to a part viiiab financial agreement that are between any combination of:  ) the legal personal representatives of any of those parties who have died,   third party proceedings (as defined in section 4b) to set aside a part viiiab financial agreement, or (g) any other proceedings (including proceedings with respect to the enforcement of a decree or the service of process) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed proceedings of a kind referred to in any of the preceding paragraphs.   any other proceedings (including proceedings with respect to the enforcement of a decree or the service of process) in relation to concurrent, pending or completed proceedings of a kind referred to in any of the preceding paragraphs.
de facto property settlement or maintenance proceedings means proceedings with respect to: (a) the distribution of the property of the parties to a de facto relationship or of either of them, or (b) the distribution of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to a de facto relationship, or   the distribution of the property of the parties to a de facto relationship or of either of them, or (b) the distribution of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to a de facto relationship, or   the distribution of the vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party to a de facto relationship, or   the maintenance of a party to a de facto relationship.
de facto relationship has the meaning given by section 4aa.
meaning of de facto relationship (1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if: (a) the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis. paragraph (c) has effect subject to subsection (5). working out if persons have a relationship as a couple (2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following: (a) the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship. (3) no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case. (5) for the purposes of this act: (a) a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship. when 2 persons are related by family (6) for the purposes of subsection (1), 2 persons are related by family if: (a) one is the child (including an adopted child) of the other, or (b) one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them). for this purpose, disregard whether an adoption is declared void or has ceased to have effect.   the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   one is the child (including an adopted child) of the other, or (b) one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).  ] relying on observations made by thackray j in l and c (2006) dfc 95-327, her honour answered this question in the following way: [63] in essence, it seems to me, that if two people commence or renew a relationship, then absent something extraordinary, they are renewing or recommencing the same relationship they had earlier. it would appear to be a fiction to suggest that two earlier intimates commenced a new relationship, rather than entering a new phase of their lapsed or previous relationship. and it would seem, that within the realms of human experience, having another intimate relationship for either a short or longer time, in the midst of another relationship, is not of itself extraordinary. (footnote omitted)  ] in essence, it seems to me, that if two people commence or renew a relationship, then absent something extraordinary, they are renewing or recommencing the same relationship they had earlier. it would appear to be a fiction to suggest that two earlier intimates commenced a new relationship, rather than entering a new phase of their lapsed or previous relationship. and it would seem, that within the realms of human experience, having another intimate relationship for either a short or longer time, in the midst of another relationship, is not of itself extraordinary. (footnote omitted)  ] it was open for the primary judge to find on the evidence that the parties resumed their de facto relationship at some point after 28 november 2006, but not before. ground 1 succeeds.  ] it was open for the primary judge to find on the evidence that the parties resumed their de facto relationship at some point after 28 november 2006, but not before. ground 1 succeeds. [85] consequently, it is necessary to remit the proceedings for re-hearing, though the remitter will be conditional, so as to align with these reasons for judgment. the supreme court judgment still stands and the parties cannot go behind it. the residual dispute under pt viiiab of the act must be confined to any period of the parties’ de facto relationship which occurred after the supreme court judgment was entered on 28 november 2006. the parties agreed a different judge should re-hear the matter.  ] consequently, it is necessary to remit the proceedings for re-hearing, though the remitter will be conditional, so as to align with these reasons for judgment. the supreme court judgment still stands and the parties cannot go behind it. the residual dispute under pt viiiab of the act must be confined to any period of the parties’ de facto relationship which occurred after the supreme court judgment was entered on 28 november 2006. the parties agreed a different judge should re-hear the matter.
the husband’s case
that there be a property settlement, including superannuation splitting orders, pursuant to sections 79 or 90sm and section 90xt of the family law act 1975 (cth) (the ‘act’) and the applicant de facto husband be excused from particularising the final orders sought by him... (emphasis added)
1.1.1. the parties separated in about june 2005, 1.1.2. they divorced in or about 2006, 1.1.3. consent property orders were made on or about 3 may 2006, and were carried out according to their terms, 1.1.4. the parties reconciled, and resumed cohabitation, in or about july 2007, and 1.1.5. the parties’ cohabitation continued from 2007 to 2020.
1.4 the reasoning in kowalski has been applied with approval, and considered in details in cases since judgment was handed down, and remains good law. (citations omitted)
section 79a setting aside of orders altering property interests ... (1a) a court may, on application by a person affected by an order made by a court under section 79 in property settlement proceedings, and with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings in which the order was made, vary the order or set the order aside and, if it considers appropriate, make another order under section 79 in substitution for the order so set aside.
2.1.8 in mccabe & mccabe, the full court dealt with a case where the parties separated in 1989 and shortly afterwards consent property orders were made. two months later the parties reconciled without taking any steps to implement the terms of the orders which had been made. the parties separated four years later, and the wife instituted proceedings under s 79a of the fla to have the consent property orders set aside. the husband opposed her application and sought to have it dismissed on the ground that it disclosed no reasonable or arguable cause of action. the husband's application for summary dismissal of the wife's application was dismissed. 2.1.9 the full court said:
“in cases of this nature conclusions about intention which should be attributed to the parties will depend upon the particular circumstances of each case. that material would not necessarily be confined to the initial decision to reconcile or, as in this case, to write to the court. their intention may crystallise into a more precise form as time progresses and as the parties' reconciliation continues and they conduct their lives together, including their financial affairs, so that it becomes inconsistent with any other conclusion... there is no reason to doubt that parties can expressly or by their conduct consent to the discharge of prior orders so as to enable the court to make a fresh property order. indeed, this would be a more likely conclusion in most cases of this type.”  tations omitted)
1.5. however, it may be that there is now, in all jurisdictions where ‘referring states’ have devolved power to deal with de facto property settlement to the [c]ommonwealth to deal with property settlement, a “distinction without a difference”, as it were, by reason of part viiiab of the fla inculcating a regime of de facto property indistinguishable in any material respect from the principles previously applicable only to marriages. accordingly:
1.5.1. judicial comments to the effect of the differences between marriages and de facto property settlement regimes, predicated upon the (then applicable) proposition that there were different laws applicable to the two situations, are now moot, 1.5.2. in this present case, it is clear that part viiiab of the fla would apply to the parties’ post-reconciliation relationship, in any event, it being the case (if the applicant’s contentions as to the fact are accepted) that the ‘post-reconciliation relationship’ manifested every characteristic of the de facto relationship within the meaning of s 4aa of the fla.
mr testart: yes. and so by the first half of 2005 when you decided that you wanted to end the marriage, you had a depressed, mentally unstable, financially irresponsible, preoccupied and disengaged parental support person in your spouse- - -? the wife: correct. mr testart: - - -that you needed to get rid of. correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: and it took some getting rid of him, didn’t it? according to your version of events, you went to the law firm, h law firm? the wife: i went to the law firm, h law firm, yes. mr testart: yes. [the husband] didn’t get legal representation, did he? the wife: that is incorrect. mr testart: he had legal representation? the wife: that’s my understanding. mr testart: and your lawyers nutted things out, did they? the wife: my understanding, that he had legal representation. mr testart: “[the husband] was very difficult during the negotiations, but we eventually agreed to a resolution.” that’s paragraph 15 of your affidavit of november 2020? the wife: correct. mr testart: you filed an application for consent orders? the wife: that’s correct. mr testart: and then in 2007, you filed an application for divorce- - -? the wife: yes. mr testart: - - -and you formally got a divorce? the wife: correct. mr testart: it was very important to you to obtain a final property settlement against [the husband], wasn’t it? the wife: it was a divorce process, so that was the final stage. mr testart: no, no. listen carefully. it was very important to you to get a final property settlement with [the husband] because you wanted your financial relationship with [the husband] to end? the wife: correct. mr testart: you wanted there to be a break between you and [the husband] financially? the wife: correct. mr testart: you wanted to be protected from [the husband] financially? the wife: correct. mr testart: and you wanted to make sure that [the husband]’s behaviour financially didn’t impinge upon you? the wife: upon my family, yes. mr testart: or your family? the wife: yes. mr testart: your evidence is that from 2005 to 2012 – a seven-year period, you didn’t have much to do with [the husband]? the wife: correct. mr testart: during that time that you didn’t have much to do with [the husband], you saw develop, or you saw continuing to develop the problems that [the husband] had with [[child ms f]] and [[child mr u]], didn’t you? the wife: yes. mr testart: and they progressed to get worse, according to your evidence? the wife: correct. mr testart: to the extent that you took them to see the child psychologist, [[ms j]] – paragraph 20 of the affidavit, i’m referring to, your honour? the wife: correct. mr testart: you were able – notwithstanding the fact that you weren’t having anything to do with [the husband], you were able to get him to go to some sessions with [[ms j]]? the wife: correct. mr testart: when you separated, the children were six and- - -? the wife: four. mr testart: four. and by the time [the husband] moved into [the [suburb g] property] with you – according to your evidence, they were early teens? the wife: correct. mr testart: correct. and in that seven-year period, they had increasing problems in their relationship with their dad, according to your evidence? the wife: correct. mr testart: [the husband] was not a responsible parent, according to you? the wife: correct. mr testart: he would transport the children inappropriately. correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: he would not follow up [[mr u]]’s nut allergy – this is paragraph 21? the wife: correct. mr testart: yes. and come 2012, things had progressed to the stage where you say: “i could see [the husband] was really struggling.” paragraph 27? the wife: correct. mr testart: you noticed that he had a different car, truck or van, and that you concluded from that that he was finding it difficult to hold down a job. correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: and you got the impression he didn’t even have permanent accommodation? the wife: correct. mr testart: yes. he was obviously experiencing poor mental health. obviously, according to you? the wife: yes. mr testart: is that correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: that’s not an exaggeration? the wife: no. mr testart: so the first nine-and-a-half years of your cohabitation, from 1995 to 2005, [the husband] develops a series of difficult behavioural issues and mental health issues. correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: he’s not much of a parent? the wife: correct. mr testart: he’s difficult with money, and he exposes you and your family to financial losses? the wife: correct. mr testart: and as a result of that, you decide to bring the relationship to an end? the wife: correct. mr testart: and it gets worse? the wife: correct. mr testart: it gets worse. in what universe could it possibly be to your children’s benefit to have a person like that brought back into your home under any circumstances? the wife: i’m not quite sure what you mean. ... mr testart: so, you see, the impression that you’re giving to his honour – i’m going to suggest this to you. the impression that you’re giving to his honour is that [the husband] is so dangerous – so dangerous that he would manipulate the whole of the legal system to stymie you – to the detriment of your children, unless you let him back into the house? the wife: correct. mr testart: and can i suggest to you that that’s entirely fanciful. it’s just entirely fanciful, just a made-up thing by you to explain the circumstance that you lived together under the one roof for, on your version of events, at least eight years- - -? the wife: i disagree. mr testart: - - -after you got divorced? the wife: i disagree. mr testart: you see, on your version of events, [the husband] was – and continued to be, a viper in your family. he continued to damage your children, didn’t he? the wife: yes. mr testart: and you let him do that? the wife: yes.  ] by around 2006, i came to realise my mistake in forsaking my family for my admittedly radical beliefs and i wanted to reconcile with the respondent. i missed my children greatly and missed being involved daily in their lives, as i had been before the separation. the respondent reciprocated my feelings for reconciliation, and we started seeing each other again romantically around early 2007. essentially, we were dating – while i lived in my apartment in [suburb k], the respondent and our children lived in the [suburb g] property. i visited the respondent and the children over the weekends when the children were home or for dinners during the week and the respondent visited my apartment in [suburb k] during the daytime hours during the week, where we were intimate. on other occasions, the respondent and i had restaurant dinners and move dates. there were times when the respondent even stayed overnight at my apartment in [suburb k] while her mother cared for our children in the [suburb g] property. [26] from sometime in early 2007, during one of my visits with the children at the [suburb g] property, the respondent and i decided to reconcile. i apologised to the respondent for my mistaken beliefs and agreed to reconcile to live together as a family once more. i reassured the respondent that i left the [u] group entirely, which i genuinely did, and that i no longer wanted any part of those previous beliefs that i once held. the respondent accepted my apology and remorse. [27] we made up, enjoyed sexual intimacy at the [suburb g] property and recommitted ourselves to our family and relationship. i started living with the respondent and our children at the [suburb g] property from mid-2007.  ] from sometime in early 2007, during one of my visits with the children at the [suburb g] property, the respondent and i decided to reconcile. i apologised to the respondent for my mistaken beliefs and agreed to reconcile to live together as a family once more. i reassured the respondent that i left the [u] group entirely, which i genuinely did, and that i no longer wanted any part of those previous beliefs that i once held. the respondent accepted my apology and remorse. [27] we made up, enjoyed sexual intimacy at the [suburb g] property and recommitted ourselves to our family and relationship. i started living with the respondent and our children at the [suburb g] property from mid-2007.  ] we made up, enjoyed sexual intimacy at the [suburb g] property and recommitted ourselves to our family and relationship. i started living with the respondent and our children at the [suburb g] property from mid-2007.
reconciliation – mid-2007  ] even though we had a sexual intimacy and decided to live together again, the respondent was still cautious about protecting the assets and finances. i was more concerned that my family (the respondent and our children) was not lacking financially, and so i put my family’s interests ahead of my own preservation of assets. i did not bring up the topic of any remarriage, or amalgamation of assets. i was content simply to again be a family and to again be involved in our children’s lives and invest in our relationship.  phasis added]  ] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [the children] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] i deny the contents of paragraph 25. following our separation, we did not ever rekindle a romantic relationship and there was certainly never any reconciliation between us. i only went to [the husband]'s apartment in [suburb k] twice and on both occasions this was for contact changeover. i was never intimate with [the husband] at his apartment or at any other location. i never stayed overnight at his place, nor did we go on any dates. the contents of this paragraph are a complete fabrication. [62] i deny the contents of paragraph 28. i deny there was ever any sexual intimacy between us following separation or that we started living together again.  ] i deny the contents of paragraph 28. i deny there was ever any sexual intimacy between us following separation or that we started living together again.
dr smith: and those property orders which provided for you to receive that payment of $77,000 and the transfer of the [suburb g] – house in [suburb g], they were complied with, weren’t they? you received a cheque and your former wife received – you all executed whatever documents that were required to transfer the property to her? the husband: yes. dr smith: and then it’s common ground, then, that you certainly for the rest of 2006, remain separated, correct? the husband: yes. ... dr smith: you say you realised you had made a big mistake and you want to reconcile with your former wife? the husband: yes. dr smith: you then say at paragraph 26, from sometime in early 2007, the two of you did indeed decide to reconcile? the husband: yes. dr smith: can you be a bit more precise about that, sir? when you say sometime in early 2007, is that 2 january or is that 5 may? can you give us a sort of a - - -? the husband: it was the very early part of 2007. dr smith: very early part of 2007, so sort of january/february sort of time? the husband: yes. dr smith: you then say – so you’ve decided to reconcile, but in your case you don’t – this is at now the end of paragraph 27 – you don’t then move back into [suburb g] until mid-2007? the husband: yes. dr smith: again, can you be a bit more precise with us in relation to that? what do we call mid-2007? is that sort of june time or later or a bit earlier? the husband: july 2007. dr smith: july 2007. bear with me. also, it must have come as a bit of a shock to you, then, when you were served with an application for divorce on 10 april? the husband: no. dr smith: it didn’t? the husband: no. ... dr smith: would you agree with me, being served with an application for divorce two/three months after that, seems to be the complete antithesis of the two of you deciding to reconcile? the husband: yes. ... dr smith: at no point did you contact the court or make an application with the court to say, “well, hang on, we have, in fact, already reconciled”? the husband: no. dr smith: well, could the answer to that be because you simply weren’t reconciled at all, in whether it’s early or mid-2007? the husband: no, it could not be. ... dr smith: that’s why i was trying to clarify. i will put it to you this way in the old-fashioned way. i put it to you, the reason why you didn’t contest the divorce, the reason is because you weren’t, in fact, reconciled at that point? the husband: at that – at that point in time, we were on the path to reconciliation, formalised by my vacating the [suburb k] property, which by – whereby the lease expired around about that time in july. so we were in the process of reconciliation.
dr smith: you say:
“... about december 2007, around the christmas period.” that’s what you wrote in your affidavit at paragraph 21 of your october affidavit?
the husband: yes. dr smith: now, that’s very different, again, to what you’re currently relying upon ...certainly inconsistent between the two affidavits, isn’t it, sir? the husband: yes. dr smith: what has changed between the evidence that you swore in october and the evidence that you’ve sworn in february? the husband: documents i obtained from the residential tenancy bond authority, which weren’t clear to me at the time, i obtained those later. and that assisted with my memory of the exact – of the exact time frames. [emphasis added] ... dr smith: seems to me, sir – well, i will start from the top again. you swore an affidavit – you swore your affidavit in october? the husband: yes. dr smith: you obviously took a lot of care in drafting that affidavit? the husband: yes. dr smith: you had assistance from your lawyers, i assume, in drafting it. it’s not a criticism, it just looks like it has been drafted by a lawyer? the husband: yes. dr smith: you gave appropriate instructions to your lawyer about it? the husband: yes. dr smith: and you went through it very carefully? the husband: yes. dr smith: when you swore it, you understood that you were swearing or affirming a document that would ultimately be relied on in court? the husband: yes. dr smith: and the contents of it, from the best of your knowledge, were true and correct? the husband: to the best of my recollection and knowledge were true and correct, yes. dr smith: yes. well, i’m putting to you, sir, is that one of the reasons why you said on the 21st – in paragraph 21, you could – you were – you recall it as being december in your mind because it was around the christmas period? the husband: yes. dr smith: that’s your evidence. yes? the husband: yes. dr smith: that’s different, isn’t it, to now saying, “well, it wasn’t, in fact, around christmas, because i’ve got other documents that conflict with that, so it must have been earlier”? the husband: yes. so i’ve corrected myself. dr smith: well, i’m going to put to you, sir, is, in fact, that was wrong from the outset as well, wasn’t it? paragraph 21, that you had reconciled in december. complete fabrication? the husband: no.
7. within 30 days of the date of these orders:-...   the wife will pay to the husband the sum of $77,000 as follows,  $7,000 paid to the husband [on] 14 june 2005, (ii) $70,000 upon full compliance with subparagraph (s) below, (s) the husband will transfer to the wife at the expense of the wife all his right title and interest in the real property situate at and known as [the suburb m property] (t) the wife will be solely responsible for and indemnify the husband in respect of the mortgage with the [[n] building] secured against the [suburb m property] together with all rates, taxes and like apportionable outgoings relating to the said property...   the husband will transfer to the wife at the expense of the wife all his right title and interest in the real property situate at and known as [the suburb m property] (t) the wife will be solely responsible for and indemnify the husband in respect of the mortgage with the [[n] building] secured against the [suburb m property] together with all rates, taxes and like apportionable outgoings relating to the said property...   the wife will be solely responsible for and indemnify the husband in respect of the mortgage with the [[n] building] secured against the [suburb m property] together with all rates, taxes and like apportionable outgoings relating to the said property...  ] i contributed about $60,000.00 of my $70,000.00 'payout' from our family law consent orders settlement back into the family finances and genuinely invested totally into our family unit. i did not retain any significant savings or separate bank account or finances for myself. we used all of my funds for the family expenses - around the time of reconciliation, the respondent had plans to subdivide the [suburb g] property. the earliest bank statements i have are my disclosed [bank o] statements, from 2012. at that time, i had only about $2,000.00 in my sole accounts - i invested everything else back into the family, without retaining anything for myself.  ] as to paragraph 30, i deny [the husband] contributed $60,000 - $70,000 or any other portion of the payment he had received in our settlement back into the family finances. [the husband] told me when he moved into the [[suburb g]] that he had lost a significant portion of the settlement funds he received on the share market and had only $35,000 remaining just one year later. [the husband] and i maintained separate bank accounts following separation. to the best of my knowledge, [the husband] spent the remaining funds on personal expenses, including interstate travel, a collection of expensive watches, clothing and dining out with family and friends. after he moved into [the [suburb g] property] as a boarder, he paid me board on a sporadic basis. in all, he paid $49,805 over the period he lived in my home.
dr smith: the orders provided for you to receive $77,000, correct? the husband: correct. dr smith: you, in fact, end up receiving a cheque in july for $60,000 – gets paid into your bank account, is that right? the husband: yes. dr smith: was there another [$17,000] that went somewhere? was it to pay lawyers or something? where did the other [$17,000] go? the husband: i don’t know. dr smith: okay. but actually, that cheque for $60,000 that arrives in your bank account in july, that’s the payment for these – pursuant to the orders, correct? the husband: yes. ... dr smith: so this is your s2. do you agree with that? the husband: well, it states s2 but nothing underneath it. yes. dr smith: well, then, it has all the transactions starting on 1 june, the opening balance of one cent, and then the sixth – on 14 july 2006, we have $60,000 come in. so on page 1, sir. you see in the middle of the page there- - ? the husband: yes. dr smith: - - -we have credit, $60,000, being the cheque deposit? the husband: yes. dr smith: on 14 july 2006. that’s the cheque for the property settlement coming in, isn’t it, sir? the husband: yes. dr smith: okay. and if we follow that through, turn over the page, then, sir. you will see by 17 july 2007, there’s nothing in the account. then you get paid a little bit of interest, and then there’s nothing in the account again. agree with me there? the husband: 17 july. dr smith: do you agree with that? by 17 july, there’s a couple of – withdrawal for $6,288, and it goes down to nothing. ... dr smith: i will ask the question. do you accept then, sir, that across those two accounts you had a little less than $14,000 as at the middle of july 2007? the husband: that’s what it shows. dr smith: and to the best of your recollection, does that sound about right? if you don’t know, you don’t know, sir. i’m not – we’re not trying to fabricate your evidence? the husband: i don’t know. dr smith: and you’ve not produced any other accounts that you had at that time, did you – have you? the husband: no. dr smith: okay. now, i’m right in saying the only person who had access to these accounts was you – the s1 and the s2 account? the husband: you are right, yes. ... dr smith: ...no one else had a – it is correct to say no one else had a secondary card or something similar? the husband: it is correct.  ] on or about july 2005, when [[ms f]] was about 7 and [[mr u]] was about 5, the respondent and i decided to separate, as she did not agree with my views and beliefs pertaining to a common-law movement called [[p]] that i had become enamoured with. in hindsight, i agree that i was mistaken in my beliefs. the respondent was concerned to protect her financial security for herself and the children, as she believed that my beliefs could pose a risk to our joint property and assets.  phasis added)  ] as to paragraph 22, the children were in fact aged 6 years and 4 years when we separated. i agree that [the husband]’s involvement in [[p]]. was a cause of friction between us which contributed towards the breakdown of our marriage, although it was not the only factor which led to our separation. [the husband]'s abusive, coercive and controlling behaviour, his inability to hold down any kind of employment for extended periods, his financial risk-taking and mismanagement of investment properties were other factors.
dr smith: okay. is it fair to say that you continued to – well, i will take a few steps back then. the property settlement happens in 2006, yes? the husband: yes. dr smith: of which, at that point, joint bank accounts, if there were any, were closed? the husband: yes. dr smith: the joint tenancy you had on the [suburb m] property was transferred solely into your wife’s name? the husband: yes. dr smith: were there any joint assets that you can think of that you had in 2006 that remained after you had done all those things in accordance with the property laws? the husband: no. dr smith: in fact, that’s consistent with your – what you then say is, in fact, that you continued to keep your finances relatively separate- - -? the husband: yes. dr smith: - - -up to and including today? the husband: yes. we had separate bank accounts. dr smith: did you ever open a joint bank account at all in this 13-odd year period? the husband: no. dr smith: in fact, other than this lease, i’m not aware of you jointly being involved in anything at all, is that right, financially, property wise? the husband: correct. ... dr smith: well, it’s fair to say that having separate finances was an important point to your former wife, wasn’t it? the husband: i don’t know. dr smith: well, are you saying that in the 13 years or so that the two of you were together you never spoke about having a joint bank account? the husband: we never spoke about having a joint bank account.  ] on or about may 2011, we sold [the [suburb m] property] for about $640,000.00. we purchased the [[suburb g] property] in august 2011 ... for about $537,000.00. the [[suburb g] property] was bought solely in the respondent's name. i did not question the respondent as to why the [[suburb g] property] was bought solely in her name, as i understood her reservations from earlier in our relationship about my financial views. i was just happy that she was happy, and even though i was not formally on the title, i always considered the [[suburb g] property] as 'our home' . we contributed our joint funds towards the purchase of the [[suburb g] property] and secured a loan of about $100,000.00 for renovations. i continued making the monthly payments to the respondent's bank account, of about $800.00 per month. i also paid for utility bills and council rates for the [[suburb g] property].  ] i deny the contents of paragraph 36. [the husband] and i were living separately and apart during this period. in no way did i involve him in my decision to sell the [[suburb m] property] or purchase the [[suburb g] property]. i liaised exclusively with the agent to advertise and market the [suburb m property] and dealt with the conveyancer to complete the sale without any assistance or input from [the husband]. i searched for a property in the area surrounding my parents' home in [[suburb q]] as i wanted to stay close to them particularly with my dad having cancer. my mother and i attended the auction for the [[suburb g] property] and i made a bid. the property was passed in at auction, but i was able to buy it under private contract a short time later. i did not discuss the purchase of this property with [the husband] and only told him i had acquired it after the fact. [the husband] did not make any financial or other contribution towards the purchase of the [[suburb g] property]. i contributed all of the funds to complete the purchase. i then borrowed a further $100,000 to carry out renovations before moving into the property. annexed hereto and marked " 5" is a copy of my loan application dated 18 november 2011 which on page 2 confirms my marital status as "divorced". after [the husband] moved into the [[suburb g] property] as a boarder in august 2012, our agreement was for him to pay $800 per month but in fact he generally paid less than that. on a couple of occasions, [the husband] paid utility bills in lieu of board.
dr smith: that was in may of 2011? the husband: yes. dr smith: so at that point, on your evidence, you had been together for just shy of four years, again? the husband: yes. dr smith: did the topic of putting the property into joint names come up at all? the husband: no. dr smith: you didn’t say, “hey, while we’re walking around looking at all these houses, is it going to be in a single name or a joint name”? the husband: that’s right. dr smith: why not? the husband: it wasn’t of principle importance to me. i was more concerned and interested in family and being a partner. dr smith: but, sir, surely at some point, if the two of you are in a committed relationship now for, what, on one version, four years, on another version, for many many more than that albeit with an 18 month hiccup in the middle, why wasn’t a conversation about joint finances happening, certainly, at the time you were purchasing a property? the husband: i don’t know. ... dr smith: sir, were you present when the wife signed the contract of sale? the husband: i don’t remember. dr smith: okay. did you go and inspect [the [suburb g] property] at any time prior to its purchase? the husband: yes. i was aware of the property. dr smith: okay. do you want to answer my question now? did you go and inspect it at any time prior to its purchase? the husband: i may have seen photographs and images of it on the internet but not physically. ... dr smith: so that i get the timeline right, again, on your case, you got back together in july of 2007? the husband: yes. dr smith: in 2009 you moved to [the [suburb l] property], and you were living together as a family in 2009? the husband: yes. dr smith: 2011, your now committed partner of some four years, and, in fact – at that point, your committed relationship of over 20 years, considering that you got together in 1995 – sorry, twelve years – on your case, you were moving into a new house in [[suburb g] suburb], yes? the husband: yes. dr smith: and you never took the time to go and see it? the husband: we – well, with respect to that particular property – may not have inspected it physically beforehand because it was a – a short term decision by – by [the wife] to – to attend this auction, and i may not have had the – the time to go and inspect it as there may not have been an open for inspection that was suitable for me to – to view. dr smith: you didn’t attend the auction? the husband: no. dr smith: why not? the husband: probably work commitments from my memory.
spouse details did you have a spouse- married or de facto- at any time from 1 july 2014 to 30 june 2015
the evidence of ms b (the husband’s sister) ] during their short separation, i was still on speaking terms with [the wife]. [the wife] confessed to me that she still loved [the husband] and missed him. i knew that [the husband] still loved [the wife] and missed her and the children. neither [the husband] nor [the wife] were seeing anyone else, and i told both of them that they were both still in love with each other. i told [the wife] that [the husband] had left his [[p]] beliefs, that he was remorseful about how those beliefs caused the breakdown of their marriage, and that he seemed to be back to his happy, normal self. [19] around 2007, [the husband] told me with great excitement and happiness that he and [the wife] had started going on dates together, and that they were on talking terms again. [the wife], too, seemed to be happy and excited. later that year, they reconciled and [the husband] moved back in to their former home in [[suburb m]]. [the husband] told myself and our parents, very excitedly and very happily, that they were back together as a couple again. my parents and i were very happy for [the husband] and the family. [20] during the short period of their separation, i state that [the husband] did not live in any other rental property, other than his apartment in [[suburb k]]. he left the [[suburb m]] property around 2005 , lived in [[suburb k]] until about 2007, and then returned to [the [suburb m] property] with [the wife] and the family around 2007.  ] around 2007, [the husband] told me with great excitement and happiness that he and [the wife] had started going on dates together, and that they were on talking terms again. [the wife], too, seemed to be happy and excited. later that year, they reconciled and [the husband] moved back in to their former home in [[suburb m]]. [the husband] told myself and our parents, very excitedly and very happily, that they were back together as a couple again. my parents and i were very happy for [the husband] and the family. [20] during the short period of their separation, i state that [the husband] did not live in any other rental property, other than his apartment in [[suburb k]]. he left the [[suburb m]] property around 2005 , lived in [[suburb k]] until about 2007, and then returned to [the [suburb m] property] with [the wife] and the family around 2007.  ] during the short period of their separation, i state that [the husband] did not live in any other rental property, other than his apartment in [[suburb k]]. he left the [[suburb m]] property around 2005 , lived in [[suburb k]] until about 2007, and then returned to [the [suburb m] property] with [the wife] and the family around 2007.  ] on or about 2009, [the husband] and the family moved together to a rental property in [[suburb l]]. it was a very small 3-bedroom property, as they were house-hunting for their new home, and did not want to waste too much money on rental while they were looking. once again, i observed that [the husband] and [the wife] set up the master bedroom to share between themselves, as i saw [the wife]'s clothes and [the husband’s] clothes set up in the master bedroom wardrobes. the children had their own bedrooms.  ] after [the wife], [the husband] and the children moved into the [[suburb g] property], [the wife] showed me the beautiful, large master bedroom with the ensuite. the bedroom was all set up and [the wife] showed off her fancy bedsheets, linen and set up. once again, i observed that the wardrobes were filled with both [the wife] and [the husband]'s clothes, and i did not see anything that would suggest that they were not sleeping together.  ] as far as i am aware, [the husband] and [the wife] had a largely happy and normal marriage relationship from 1995 to about 2020, but for the short 2-year separation in 2005 to 2007. the second portion of their relationship was as happy as the first, and overall, both [the wife] and [the husband] seemed to get along well. i certainly did not see any difference in their relationship in the period from before 2005 to the period from after 2007 to 2020. [30] they always presented to family and functions as a couple, were affectionate like a couple when we were at dinners and celebrations, and presented their family as just that - a happy family. there was never any awkwardness as is often the case where the parents were separated but both are in attendance at a family gathering for the children's benefit, because [the husband] and [the wife] were often affectionate and happy around each other, and [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] were happy and relaxed around their parents.  ] they always presented to family and functions as a couple, were affectionate like a couple when we were at dinners and celebrations, and presented their family as just that - a happy family. there was never any awkwardness as is often the case where the parents were separated but both are in attendance at a family gathering for the children's benefit, because [the husband] and [the wife] were often affectionate and happy around each other, and [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] were happy and relaxed around their parents.
dr smith: madam, i will put it to you that your affidavit has been drafted between you and your brother with the assistance of his solicitor. i’m by no means disparaging him but it has been drafted in a way that reflects his case rather [than] your actual recollections? ms b: no. dr smith: i have no further questions, your honour.
the wife’s case ] in general, disbelief in a witness's evidence does not establish the contrary [48]. similarly, disbelief in the case presented by the moving party does not necessarily permit the court to conclude that the positive case of the opposing party is correct. in particular cases it may not be possible to reach a conclusion either way:
“[t]he judge is not bound always to make a finding one way or the other with regard to the facts averred by the parties. he has open to him the third alternative of saying that the party on whom the burden of proof lies in relation to any averment made by him has failed to discharge that burden."
a failure to find a matter alleged does not establish the truth of the contrary of that which is alleged...   the respondent responds to the applicant's contentions of fact as follows:
3.1. as to paragraph 1.1, the wife:
3.1.1. denies that the husband 'courted' the wife in early 2007 or otherwise post-separation in 2005, 3.1.2. agrees that the husband moved into the wife's home in or about august 2012, 3.1.3. says at all times the husband was a boarder in the wife's home, 3.1.4. to the extent that 'cohabitation' implies the recommencement of a marriage or marriage-like relationship, or a de facto relationship, denies same.
3.2 as to paragraph 1.2, the wife denies that the husband contributed any monies or any significant monies 'into the family' whether from his payment under the property settlement orders or otherwise.
3.7 as to paragraph 1.7, the wife:
3.7.1. accepts that the bank statements have [the [suburb l] property] has the husband's postal address, 3.7.2. denies that this equates to evidence that the husband lived in [the [suburb l] property],
3.8. as to paragraph 1.8, the wife:
3.8.1. accepts that the bank statements have [suburb r] has the husband's postal address, 3.8.2. denies that this equates to evidence that the husband lived in [the [suburb g] property].
3.9 as to paragraph 1.9, the wife denies:
3.9.1. the parties shared a bedroom in [the [suburb m] property] post-separation in 2005, 3.9.2. the parties shared a bedroom in [the [suburb l] property], 3.9.3. the parties shared a bedroom in [the [suburb g] property].  the wife contends that at all material times the parties acted consistently with maintaining the final property settlement orders, keeping their finances separate.  ] further, it is clear based on the husband’s evidence, that he is claiming that the money he received as part of the original property settlement orders forms part of (indeed a significant part of) his claim with respect to contributions. it is therefore clear that his claim relates to 'proceedings between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, being proceedings ... arising out of the marital relationship' as contemplated by paragraph (ca)(i) of the definition of a matrimonial cause. [17] respectfully, the husband’s contentions on this point misconstrue the issue. the issue is not whether the parties' relationship meets the definition of a 'de facto relationship' as found in s 4aa (although the wife disputes that it does). rather, the issue for the court is the jurisdictional basis and the power which the court is being asked to exercise. [18] in circumstances where the evidence put by the husband clearly points to property proceedings arising out of the marital relationship, the claim must fall within the court's exclusive jurisdiction with respect to matrimonial causes. in the present case, that can only be with respect to part viii of the family law act.  ] respectfully, the husband’s contentions on this point misconstrue the issue. the issue is not whether the parties' relationship meets the definition of a 'de facto relationship' as found in s 4aa (although the wife disputes that it does). rather, the issue for the court is the jurisdictional basis and the power which the court is being asked to exercise. [18] in circumstances where the evidence put by the husband clearly points to property proceedings arising out of the marital relationship, the claim must fall within the court's exclusive jurisdiction with respect to matrimonial causes. in the present case, that can only be with respect to part viii of the family law act.  ] in circumstances where the evidence put by the husband clearly points to property proceedings arising out of the marital relationship, the claim must fall within the court's exclusive jurisdiction with respect to matrimonial causes. in the present case, that can only be with respect to part viii of the family law act.  ] in matthews & matthews [2006] famca 1453, (2006) flc 93-298, carmody j considered the concept of consent in this context and noted:  ] the court has no power to even consider making a new order altering the current property interests of the parties without relief under s 79a(ja) being granted with the consent of both parties. [32] the relevant concept of 'consent) is not confined to a subsisting agreement as at the date of hearing but may be established by evidence of a prior express written or oral statement of intention which remains binding or inferred from conduct: bourke (no 2) (1994) flc 92-479. the consent required by subsection (1a) is simply to have a pre-existing s 79 order set aside. it does not have to relate to the making of a new one. [33] used in this context consent means concurrence not consensus. it implies authority) approval or permission and denotes something more than merely acquiescing in or accepting a settled situation. it may include but is more than submission. [34] the term 'consent’ suggests that the consenting party knows what is being consented to and the consequences of doing so. it involves a deliberate choice demonstrated in some positive or affirmative way either by what is said or done which clearly conveys the impression) to an objective onlooker) that consent has been given. [35] while both parties must consent) they do not have to do so in the same way, at the same time or for the same reasons.
... [24] murphy j stated in waterman & waterman [2017] famcafc 23 that:  ] ... [t]he relevant inquiry ... is whether the post-reconciliation circumstances over the time frame of the reconciliation establish an inference that the parties intend the orders to not bring an end to their financial relationships) and, consequently) an end to a later determination of later contributions made within that relationship.  ] in the present case, the husband asserts that the parties reconciled and this amounts to the consent required for s 79a(1a). this is denied by the wife. in any event, mere reconciliation is not sufficient. as murphy j stated in waterman:  ] reconciliation is not) of itself sufficient for a finding that the parties had impliedly consented to the setting aside of as 79 consent order. [31] rather, any such finding is made by reference to the miscellany of circumstances pertaining to the parties’ relationship by which the relevant intention is to be referred.  ] critical to the husband's case (and the wife contends fatal to it) is that he accepts that the parties kept their respective finances separate. indeed, he appears to accept that the parties largely conducted their lives consistent with the final orders made by the court.  ] in 2007, i decided to subdivide [the [suburb m] property] and, in december 2018, sold the subdivided block .... the new owner built a unit on the block. the children and i remained living at [the [suburb m] property]. [22] in 2009, i decided to move with the children into a rental property in [suburb [suburb l]] because of the lack of good secondary school options in the [suburb [suburb m]] area at the time. i rented out [the [suburb m] property] and applied the rental income towards my rental property in [ [suburb l]]. [23] in may 2011, i sold [the [suburb m] property], with settlement taking place at the end of june 2011. [24] in july 2011, i purchased [the [suburb g] property]. prior to the children and i moving in, i substantially renovated the property. i borrowed money from the bank to finance the renovations. the children and i moved into [the [suburb g] property] after the renovations were completed in december 2011. [25] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] in 2009, i decided to move with the children into a rental property in [suburb [suburb l]] because of the lack of good secondary school options in the [suburb [suburb m]] area at the time. i rented out [the [suburb m] property] and applied the rental income towards my rental property in [ [suburb l]]. [23] in may 2011, i sold [the [suburb m] property], with settlement taking place at the end of june 2011. [24] in july 2011, i purchased [the [suburb g] property]. prior to the children and i moving in, i substantially renovated the property. i borrowed money from the bank to finance the renovations. the children and i moved into [the [suburb g] property] after the renovations were completed in december 2011. [25] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] in may 2011, i sold [the [suburb m] property], with settlement taking place at the end of june 2011. [24] in july 2011, i purchased [the [suburb g] property]. prior to the children and i moving in, i substantially renovated the property. i borrowed money from the bank to finance the renovations. the children and i moved into [the [suburb g] property] after the renovations were completed in december 2011. [25] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] in july 2011, i purchased [the [suburb g] property]. prior to the children and i moving in, i substantially renovated the property. i borrowed money from the bank to finance the renovations. the children and i moved into [the [suburb g] property] after the renovations were completed in december 2011. [25] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] over the period from separation until 2012, [the husband] and i had very little to do with each other. i would see him briefly at contact changeovers, and i would also invite [the husband] (and his parents if they were available) to the children's birthday celebrations. my brother also invited [the husband] to his wedding in 2009 to avoid the scenario of [the husband] refusing to agree to [[ms f]] and [[mr u]] being there if the wedding fell on his weekend with the children.  ] i felt i would be able to better protect the children and they would cope better overall if they were spending time with their father under my roof and decided to propose that [the husband] move into [the [suburb g] property] as my boarder. after listening to one of [the husband]'s monologues at contact changeover one evening, i suggested that, as a temporary measure, he could rent out one of the rooms in my new house. [29] [the husband] agreed to my proposal and moved in around august 2012. we agreed that [the husband] would pay me board of $800 per month and he initially agreed to sign something in writing to that effect. however, when i later prepared something he refused to do so and told me i should be able to trust him. [30] [the [suburb g] property] is divided into two distinct living areas, with a bedroom, en-suite and separate living area at the front of the house, and the main living area at the back of the house. the kitchen, study and my bedroom are in the middle of the house whilst the children's rooms are next to the main living area at the back of the house. we agreed that [the husband] would occupy the front bedroom and have the exclusive use of the en-suite and front living area. we agreed that he could also use the kitchen area, and the study where he had his computer. my bedroom was strictly off-limits to [the husband], and he did not usually venture down to the main living area.  ] [the husband] agreed to my proposal and moved in around august 2012. we agreed that [the husband] would pay me board of $800 per month and he initially agreed to sign something in writing to that effect. however, when i later prepared something he refused to do so and told me i should be able to trust him. [30] [the [suburb g] property] is divided into two distinct living areas, with a bedroom, en-suite and separate living area at the front of the house, and the main living area at the back of the house. the kitchen, study and my bedroom are in the middle of the house whilst the children's rooms are next to the main living area at the back of the house. we agreed that [the husband] would occupy the front bedroom and have the exclusive use of the en-suite and front living area. we agreed that he could also use the kitchen area, and the study where he had his computer. my bedroom was strictly off-limits to [the husband], and he did not usually venture down to the main living area.  ] [the [suburb g] property] is divided into two distinct living areas, with a bedroom, en-suite and separate living area at the front of the house, and the main living area at the back of the house. the kitchen, study and my bedroom are in the middle of the house whilst the children's rooms are next to the main living area at the back of the house. we agreed that [the husband] would occupy the front bedroom and have the exclusive use of the en-suite and front living area. we agreed that he could also use the kitchen area, and the study where he had his computer. my bedroom was strictly off-limits to [the husband], and he did not usually venture down to the main living area.  ] we did not go out together as a family, nor did [the husband] and i socialise together or present to family and friends as a couple. the only times we were present at the same social engagements over the period [the husband] lived at [the [suburb g] property] were the following: (a) we would celebrate the children's birthdays together each year. (b) if [the husband] was in the home at christmas time, i would invite him to have a drink with my family. he generally declined but on a couple of occasions joined us very briefly. (c) we both attended [[ms f]]'s university graduation in 2019. at [[ms f]]'s request, we also had a family dinner together afterwards. (d) we attended [the husband’s] brother-in-law's 50th birthday at [[venue s]] in around 2016/2017 as we had both been invited and it seemed sensible to travel in the one car rather than go separately. (e) we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.   we would celebrate the children's birthdays together each year. (b) if [the husband] was in the home at christmas time, i would invite him to have a drink with my family. he generally declined but on a couple of occasions joined us very briefly. (c) we both attended [[ms f]]'s university graduation in 2019. at [[ms f]]'s request, we also had a family dinner together afterwards. (d) we attended [the husband’s] brother-in-law's 50th birthday at [[venue s]] in around 2016/2017 as we had both been invited and it seemed sensible to travel in the one car rather than go separately. (e) we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.   if [the husband] was in the home at christmas time, i would invite him to have a drink with my family. he generally declined but on a couple of occasions joined us very briefly. (c) we both attended [[ms f]]'s university graduation in 2019. at [[ms f]]'s request, we also had a family dinner together afterwards. (d) we attended [the husband’s] brother-in-law's 50th birthday at [[venue s]] in around 2016/2017 as we had both been invited and it seemed sensible to travel in the one car rather than go separately. (e) we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.   we both attended [[ms f]]'s university graduation in 2019. at [[ms f]]'s request, we also had a family dinner together afterwards. (d) we attended [the husband’s] brother-in-law's 50th birthday at [[venue s]] in around 2016/2017 as we had both been invited and it seemed sensible to travel in the one car rather than go separately. (e) we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.   we attended [the husband’s] brother-in-law's 50th birthday at [[venue s]] in around 2016/2017 as we had both been invited and it seemed sensible to travel in the one car rather than go separately. (e) we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.   we attended a house party in [[suburb t]] together in 2017. again, [the husband] and i each had a close relationship with the parties hosting this event and, given the distance from [[suburb g]] to [[suburb t]], it made sense for us to go in the one car.  ] we kept our finances completely separate. i continued to operate my own bank account and continued to be solely responsible for all expenses relating to [the [suburb g] property]. on a couple of occasions, [the husband] paid utilities bills instead of paying board.
the evidence of mr e (the wife’s brother)
the evidence of ms f (the parties’ daughter)
the evidence of mrs d (the wife’s mother)
significant events
the photographs and the events in the photographs ] the respondent continued to remain vigilant about our finances, as was her nature, and i continued to be relaxed about the finances, being content to trust the respondent with the management of our savings and assets. i have many photos of our family at dinners, holidays (both international and locally), [[mr u]]'s soccer games, school projects, birthdays, [[ms f]]'s graduation and other special dates. in addition, we attended church as a family, celebrated christmas and easter luncheons or dinners with our respective extended families, alternating with our parents each year, and enjoyed many extended family gatherings, at our home and the family members' homes, throughout the years. there are many more pictures of our family over the years in albums at [the [suburb g] property]. i deny the respondent's assertion in her lawyer's letter of 1 september 2020 that i was only a ' boarder'. now annexed hereto and marked with the letters "-4" is a sample of some pictures of our family.  ] i deny the contents of paragraph 39 and refer to and repeat the contents of paragraph 34 of this my affidavit. most of the photos annexed to [the husband]'s affidavit were taken at the children's birthday events and [[mr u]]'s university graduation which were the only times we socialised as a family following separation. the photograph of me in the top right-hand corner of the first page of photographs was in fact taken prior to our separation. i was not present when the photograph was taken of [the husband], the children and [the husband]'s mother which is also on the first page of photographs. the photograph with the christmas tree in the background was taken on christmas day one year when [the husband] was offered a drink and [[mr u]] asked to take a photograph of the 3 of us. the. 3 photographs at the bottom of the third page of photographs were taken at a birthday celebration for [[ms f]] at [[venue s]]. on this occasion, [[ms f]] asked to take a photograph of [the husband] and me together and we obliged. [the husband] did not attend [[mr u]]'s graduation as he was attending a [quasi-religious group] retreat in [city v]. after separation, we did not attend church as a family, nor did we celebrate easter or christmas together (apart from me inviting [the husband] to have a drink with us which he sometimes agreed to do). the children and i would go to easter service in the orthodox church without [the husband]. after i moved to [the suburb g property], i usually hosted christmas and my parents (just my mother after my father passed away in 2013) and my brother and his family would attend. [the husband] attended christmas events with his parents, occasionally taking the children with him. i would sometimes collect the children from his parents' place on boxing day after they spent time with [the husband] and his parents for christmas.
2008 event #1 of the -14 photos taken in suburb w at husband’s parents’ home
2009-2011 event #2 of the -14 photos taken at suburb l rental property.
the husband and the wife as co-tenants 6] as to paragraph 59.1.2, i deny we lived together at [the [suburb l] property]. it is the case that [the husband]'s name appeared on the lease as a co-tenant. i had been struggling to secure rental accommodation for around 6 months and the property manager at [[x real estate]] had suggested that, as a single parent, in order to improve my chances of securing a lease it would be a good idea to add the name of another co-tenant. i asked [the husband] if he would be prepared to put his name on the lease and he agreed. [the husband] never stayed at [the [suburb l] property] and i paid all rental payments through direct bank transfers from my bank account to [x real estate]].
dr smith: so the question was, do you accept that for that two year period the rental payments were made by a bank account in my client’s name? the husband: i have no knowledge of that. dr smith: how can you not have knowledge of that? on your version, you two were in a committed relationship and had been for some years? the husband: i didn’t sight her bank accounts.
2012 event #3 of the -14 photos taken at wife’s parents home in 2012
2012 event #4 of the s-14 photos taken at the wife’s parents home
20 october 2012 event #5 of the -14 photos at suburb g property
25 december 2012 event #6 of the -14 photos at y hotel
31 december 2012 event #7 of the -14 photos at location z
mr testart: it’s photograph number 17 in the exhibit of photographs, next to [the husband]’s affidavit. you recall seeing these photographs before, don’t you, [wife]? the wife: yes. mr testart: yes. this photograph of you and your two children is taken on new year’s eve in 2012, isn’t it? the wife: i remember it being taken new year’s eve. i don’t know if it was 2012. mr testart: all right. so you recall it was new year’s eve- - -? the wife: yes. mr testart: - - -but not sure 2012? the wife: i don’t. yes. ... mr testart: right. yes. all right. all right. that shows you smiling at the person who is taking the photo, whoever that might be. but you can’t say that it was [the husband]? the wife: no. mr testart: right. let’s go to the next photo [18], please. if you wouldn’t mind, [associate].
that’s the same location, is it not?
the wife: i would imagine so, yes. ... mr testart: yes. all right. so at that time, you had been divorced from [the husband] for a number of years. and you recall the evidence you gave at length, on the previous occasion you were at court, that [the husband] was a person who had been domestically violent towards you, correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: and domestically violent towards the children, correct? the wife: correct. mr testart: and of doubtful employment? he had been unemployed a number of times, according to you? the wife: yes. that’s my understanding. mr testart: yes. he had been floating around with his living arrangements. you didn’t know much about them? the wife: yes. mr testart: you were always concerned about his financial irresponsibility? yes? the wife: yes. mr testart: you were always concerned about the threats that you say he made towards you? yes? the wife: yes. mr testart: yes. and yet, there you are in photograph 18, the one down from this one. that photograph would require you – the look on your face, the general attitude that you’ve got towards [the husband], that would require you to be a great actress, wouldn’t it? because i suggest to you that there’s genuine warmth between you and [the husband] in that photograph. and that’s the case, isn’t it? the wife: no. ... mr testart: your answer was no. all right. and so what’s to explain your apparent demeanour towards [the husband] in that photograph? the wife: as i’ve stated, it was new year’s eve. and people wish all the best to everybody, and that was my demeanour. mr testart: just a happy snap? the wife: it was to wishing well for the new year for himself. mr testart: i see. all right. and the next photograph. ... mr testart: yet you were there for the new year’s eve celebrations? the wife: my children and i, yes. mr testart: yes. and at the time, where were you living? the wife: trying to recall now. it would have been either [the [suburb l] property] at this – at that – at that stage- - - mr testart: [[suburb l]]. and this is at a time when...? the wife: - - -roughly, or i would – i would have entered [[suburb g] ]. it depends on what- - - mr testart: i’m sorry, i didn’t hear that? the wife: it was either [[suburb l]] or [[suburb g] suburb]. mr testart: [[suburb l]] or [[suburb g]]. now, if it was at [[suburb l]], it’s your case that [the husband] wasn’t living with you at that stage? the wife: correct. correct. mr testart: yes. so despite the fact that he wasn’t living with you, he ends up at the new year’s eve celebration with you, [[ms f]] and [[mr u]]? the wife: that is correct- - - mr testart: yes? the wife: - - -and there’s a reason for that. mr testart: right. okay. and in this particular photograph that we’re looking at now, photograph 19, you - - - for him to get close to you and put his arm around you? the wife: my daughter wanted to take a photo of her parents. mr testart: i’m sorry? the wife: my daughter wanted to take a photo of her parents. ... mr testart: okay. up until the time you separated from [the husband], leading to the divorce and the property settlement, it’s your case that [[mr u]] had complained to you of difficulties in her relationship with her father? the wife: yes. mr testart: yes. and it’s your case that [[mr u]] had complained to you, subsequent to the initial separation with [the husband], that her relationship with her father continued to be difficult, isn’t that correct? the wife: yes. mr testart: and, indeed, it is your case that [[mr u]] has, effectively, continued those complaints after your resumed cohabitation, and when i say cohabitation, i simply mean after you let [the husband] back into your household. she continued to complain about difficulties in her relationship with her dad? the wife: she did. mr testart: yes. and, here, she is, on this particular occasion, wanting a family snap of her mum and dad together, is that right? the wife: she did. mr testart: yes. and you decided to cooperate with her, is that right? the wife: correct. mr testart: and that’s the only reason you look as happy and affectionate as you clearly do in that photograph? the wife: no. mr testart: okay. what’s the other reason or reasons? the wife: i disagree with your statement. mr testart: that you look happy and affectionate? the wife: i disagree with that statement. mr testart: so you tell his honour how he should take that photograph to be? the wife: as i’ve stated before, your honour, it was during that period of celebration, so it was new year’s eve. we would constantly exchange new year’s eve every year, so there would be a changeover. so it would either be me with the children or [the husband] with the children. on this particular occasion, there was a changeover, so we actually had that changeover at the [location z] during that, sort of, firework, you know, presentation that occurred that night, and i – i did oblige with the photo because my daughter wanted a photo with her parents. so there was nothing more to that. mr testart: so it’s just, really, a fake photograph from your point of view? you’re putting it on? the wife: i – i don’t know what you mean. i’m sorry. mr testart: well, this looks like a photograph of two parents who have closeness and affection for each other, doesn’t it? the wife: i disagree.
1 jan 2013 event #8 of the -14 photos at suburb g property
mr testart: now, he is either at the head or the foot of the table, is he not? the wife: yes, he is. mr testart: and the place that is empty is your place, is it not- - -? the wife: correct. mr testart: - - -either at the head or the foot of the table, depending on which way you want to call it, correct? the wife: yes. yes. mr testart: yes. and you’re the person taking that photograph?---i understand i probably would have. mr testart: yes. which christmas was that? the wife: i don’t recall, i’m sorry. it would have been before 2013 because my father passed in two – in – just before christmas 2012. mr testart: yes. and where’s the location? his honour: just hang on. has your son got the same shirt on that he had in the new year’s eve photo that we first looked at? the wife: it’s – yes. it was the same shirt, yes. mr testart: does that help date it? the wife: i’m just trying to think back, your honour. i’m just – it would’ve definitely been before 2012, only because my dad passed away in 2012, and he wasn’t doing too well, so- - - ... mr testart: the only way he could have been at that christmas celebration was at your invitation, correct? the wife: he wasn’t invited. mr testart: he wasn’t invited, but he just turned up, did he? the wife: it was during a christmas changeover with the children, and his parents were with him so they can actually take the children to the christmas changeover. and what was requested of my father was that he’d invite the – the parents in for a christmas drink because it’s greek culture not to do that, and if you don’t do that, that – it’s disrespectful, so - - - mr testart: so that photo depicts a whole lot more than a christmas drink, doesn’t it? the wife: in – with greek culture – with respect, your honour, with greek culture, it does involve maybe sitting down and having a drink with somebody. it’s not just – yes. so we will invite somebody in to the home as part of that gesture. mr testart: the table is set for eight people for lunch, isn’t it? the wife: yes. but i actually do have my brother come every christmas, so we were expecting my brother. mr testart: so the table was set for eight people for christmas lunch? the wife: i was expecting my brother. mr testart: the cooking was made – it was done for a large number of people, wasn’t it? the wife: yes. we actually cook quite a lot for christmas. mr testart: and, indeed, there were eight people who actually sat down to lunch on christmas day as this photo depicts, isn’t that right? the wife: there were eight people that were sitting there at the time. ... mr testart: what that looks like is you and [the husband], your children and your respective parents around christmas lunch? you agree with that, don’t you? that’s what it looks like? the wife: yes. that’s right. mr testart: yes. and i suggest to you that’s precisely what it was? the wife: no. it wasn’t as it seems. ... mr testart: okay. i’ve just been instructed that my cross-examination has been founded on a misleading proposition. this photo was, in fact, taken on 1 january 2013, according to my client’s evidence. his honour: thank you. mr testart: paragraph 5.20 of my client’s affidavit in reply, court book page 162. and i apologise to the witness for the confusion. ... mr testart: so i apologise to you, [wife], for that. very confusing. i was confused by the christmas tree, and i jumped to a conclusion. so i want to scratch your evidence about christmas day. i want to talk to you about new year’s day, 1 january. that photo was taken on 1 january, was it? the wife: i - - - ... his honour: i just want to give you a chance to read the evidence about photo 20? the wife: my answer to that, your honour, is i vehemently disagree. there was never any time that his parents attended my home on new year’s day. absolutely no way.
dr smith: just remind me, [wife], when did you say your father passed away? the wife: my father passed away in 2012. dr smith: 2012. so the – and it was photo – i will flip to that just to make sure it’s the right one i’m talking about. photo 20 was the one that depicted your father in the – the right of the screen, holding the drink. so it follows that that photo had to have been before – or that date was incorrect because your father had passed away by 1 january 2013? the wife: 1 january. yes. so – yes.
his honour: yes, mr testart. mr testart: [the wife], your father, in fact, passed away in 2013 and not 2012, isn’t that right? the wife: ... mr testart: paragraph 82 of your affidavit, which you swore...? the wife: it was ... that my father passed away. and 2013. yes. that is correct. i – i recalled. sorry. i – yes. ... mr testart: so, 2013? the wife: that is correct. yes. mr testart: yes. all right. thank...? the wife: 2013. that’s correct. yes. mr testart: thank you. not 2012, as you previously said? the wife: that’s correct. yes. mr testart: all right. thank you. i have no further questions, your honour.
7 april 2013 event #9 -14 photo at location ab
5.21 photo 21 was taken on my old canon compact camera, at [location ab] on a family outing on 7 april 2013 at 3.54pm. [[ms f]], [the wife] and [[mr u]] are in the picture. i am taking the photograph.
5 may 2013 event #10-14 photo at wife’s parents home
2013 event #11 -14 photos at y hotel
5 to 7 september 2013 event #12 -14 photos at location ac: alleged family holiday
2013 event #13 -14 photos at wife’s relatives wedding
31 december 2013 event #14 -14 photos at suburb g property
4 january 2014 event #15 -14 photos at y hotel
2 march 2014 event #16 -14 photos at y hotel
2015 event #17 -14 photos at husband’s parent’s home (x’s 17th birthday)
2016 event #18 -14 photos at restaurant for x’s birthday
2018 event #19 -14 photos at restaurant
mr testart: you disagree. all right. picture number 52, please, your honour. page 187 – 197, i’m sorry.
that’s another photograph of you and [the husband]. that was taken in 2014, was it?– sorry, i correct myself. 2018. can we make that a little bit bigger, madam associate. you recognise the venue?
the wife: yes. mr testart: yes. what is it? the wife: it was [location ad]. mr testart: [location ae]? the wife: yes, along there. yes. mr testart: and taken on [the husband]’s camera? the wife: i don’t recall whose camera it was taken on. mr testart: and, again, you and [the husband] appear to be giving off every appearance of closeness and affection with each other, don’t you? the wife: no. mr testart: you don’t? the wife: no. mr testart: you say that that photograph is a lie? the wife: that photograph was a request from my daughter. mr testart: you see, ma’am, why were you in that photograph in the first place if what you were saying is true? the wife: my daughter had - - - mr testart: you tell his honour why it is that you engaged in these photographs? the wife: so we actually went to [location ae]. there was a – an appointment that was made at the [af] restaurant. that was actually organised - - - his honour: i missed the name of the restaurant? the wife: so it’s the [[af]]] restaurant at [location ae]. mr testart: [[af]] restaurant, your honour. his honour: okay? the wife: the request was that we celebrate [[ms f]]'s birthday, which was the previous year in 2017 of their – we were not able to actually secure a seating for 2017 that particular time because [[ms f]]'s birthday is in .... she also had exams during that time, and we couldn’t secure seating. so we actually ended up finding seating at the [[af]] restaurant] the following year, and that’s when that photo was taken. so it was to celebrate [[ms f]]'s birthday and – and her first – i think it was her first year of university – finishing off her first year of university. mr testart: what were you doing making arrangements with [the husband] to celebrate [[ms f]]'s birthday in the face of [[ms f]]'s problematic history with her father as you say it was, and in the face of his violence towards you as you say it was? the wife: so i don’t deny my children their birthdays with their father. mr testart: i see, and that extends to standing close to him? looks like you’ve got your arm around him, correct? the wife: yes. mr testart: he has got his arm around you, you’ve got your arm around him. you’re both smiling for the camera. it’s a happy snap, correct? the wife: i was happy to oblige my daughter’s request. mr testart: yes. yes. yes. and the reason you were obliging your daughter’s request was why? the wife: because my daughter had requested photo of her parents. mr testart: well, why didn’t you tell her, “look, i can’t live a lie, and neither can you. you don’t really love or respect your dad, and he doesn’t really love or respect you. i won’t be part of it”? why didn’t you say that to your husband? the wife: because i - - - mr testart: i will withdraw that. why didn’t you say that to [the husband]? the wife: because right throughout this whole process with my children, i’ve always behaved in a very civil way. i’ve always wanted their father as part of their lives, and that’s what i’ve actually done. so i’ve actually obliged with [[ms f]]'s request. he is still their father. he definitely does have limitations. he definitely does have mental health issues, but that’s with anybody in any sort of family. so i try to oblige my daughter’s request based on what she had requested that particular time.
2016 event #20 -14 photos at suburb g property ms f’s 18th birthday
october 2019 event #21 -21 photos of gala dinner
dr smith: all right. lastly, with these photos, you’ve seen that it’s your former wife’s evidence that there were special occasions and the like that you, as the father of the children, were invited to. that’s her evidence. understand that? the husband: that’s her – yes. i understand that. dr smith: do you accept that in that context these photos could simply reflect the photos that you’ve attached here to your reply affidavit, could simply reflect that sort of relationship. that you were the – an active father invited to various events – christmas, birthdays, and the like – rather than a.... resumption of a marriage type relationship? the husband: no, i disagree. dr smith: so the only conclusion you say.... his honour can draw from these photos isn’t that resumption, but reconciliation between the two of you? the husband: correct.
other events
application of section 4aa of the act
the three criterion of a de facto relationship
working it out
duration
nature and extent of common residence
sexual relationship
degree of financial interdependence
dr smith: with the separate finances? the husband: yes, we had separate finances. dr smith: well, it’s fair to say that having separate finances was an important point to your former wife, wasn’t it? the husband: i don’t know. dr smith: well, are you saying that in the 13 years or so that the two of you were together you never spoke about having a joint bank account? the husband: we never spoke about having a joint bank account. ...
mr testart: and then in 2007, you filed an application for divorce - - -? the wife: yes. mr testart:- - - - and you formally got a divorce? the wife: correct. mr testart:- it was very important to you to obtain a final property settlement against [the husband], wasn’t it? the wife: it was a divorce process, so that was the final stage. mr testart:- no, no. listen carefully. it was very important to you to get a final property settlement with [the husband] because you wanted your financial relationship with [the husband] to end? the wife: correct. mr testart:- you wanted there to be a break between you and [the husband] financially? the wife: correct. mr testart:- you wanted to be protected from [the husband] financially? the wife: correct. mr testart:- and you wanted to make sure that [the husband]’s behaviour financially didn’t impinge upon you? the wife: upon my family, yes. mr testart:- or your family? the wife: yes.
... in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to the provisions of s 79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties' cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.
ownership, use and acquisition of property
commitment to a shared life
the care and support of children
reputation and public aspects
browne v dunn
jones v dunkel
disputed questions of fact must be decided by a court according to the evidence that the parties adduce, not according to some speculation about what other evidence might possibly have been led... and there are cases where demonstration that other evidence could have been, but was not, called may properly be taken to account in determining whether a party has proved its case to the requisite standard. but both the circumstances in which that may be done and the way in which the absence of evidence may be taken to account are confined by known and accepted principles which do not permit the course taken by the court of appeal of discounting the cogency of the evidence tendered by asic. at [167], the plurality then referred to jones v dunkel, as an example of the application of such principles, quoting: ...”that any inference favourable to the plaintiff for which there was ground in the evidence might be more confidently drawn when a person presumably able to put the true complexion on the facts relied on as the ground for the inference has not been called as a witness by the defendant and the evidence provides no sufficient explanation of his absence”. otnote omitted) however, as in hellicar, in this case, the necessary foundation was not established to allow inferences to be drawn favourable to the respondent’s and icl’s cases and, specifically, the precursors were not available to permit support for the inference that the appellant had fabricated evidence of problematic harmful sexual behaviours.
conclusion as to relationship
“[the] inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description”, referred to by dixon j in briginshaw and effectively endorsed in neat holdings, should be taken into account.
139 determination of matter completely and finally in every matter before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), the court must grant, either: (a) absolutely, or (b) on such terms and conditions as the court thinks just, all remedies to which any of the parties appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by a party in the matter, so that, as far as possible: (c) all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined, and (d) all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.   all multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters may be avoided.
implied consent to setting aside the 2006 final orders? ] the crux of the learned federal magistrate’s reasoning process is probably found in the passages of his reasons for judgment in which he referred to the requirement that the “fact of consent must be established by the alleging party, ... in accordance with the civil standard, that is on the balance of probabilities”. his honour was not satisfied that the husband had “established, on the balance of probabilities, a reasonable and definite inference of consent or that implied consent can be drawn”. [57] putting his case at its highest for the husband, it is apparent that his honour concluded that it was equally probable that the parties intended to be bound by the 2002 orders during the period of resumed cohabitation as it was that they did not intend to be so bound. that being so, his honour was unable to be satisfied that he husband, who clearly bore the onus of proof (prowse & prowse (1995) flc 92-557) had failed to establish the facts necessary for his claim to succeed on the balance of probabilities, that is to say that his assertion that the parties had impliedly consented to the setting aside of the 2002 orders was more probable than not. his honour’s reasoning process with respect to this topic was, in this court’s view, adequately articulated.  ] putting his case at its highest for the husband, it is apparent that his honour concluded that it was equally probable that the parties intended to be bound by the 2002 orders during the period of resumed cohabitation as it was that they did not intend to be so bound. that being so, his honour was unable to be satisfied that he husband, who clearly bore the onus of proof (prowse & prowse (1995) flc 92-557) had failed to establish the facts necessary for his claim to succeed on the balance of probabilities, that is to say that his assertion that the parties had impliedly consented to the setting aside of the 2002 orders was more probable than not. his honour’s reasoning process with respect to this topic was, in this court’s view, adequately articulated.
does part viiiab apply to a post divorce cohabitation?
90rd declarations about existence of de facto relationships (1) if: (a) an application is made for an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, and (b) a claim is made, in support of the application, that a de facto relationship existed between the applicant and another person,   an application is made for an order under section 90se, 90sg or 90sm, or a declaration under section 90sl, and (b) a claim is made, in support of the application, that a de facto relationship existed between the applicant and another person,   a claim is made, in support of the application, that a de facto relationship existed between the applicant and another person,
the court may, for the purposes of those proceedings (the primary proceedings), declare that a de facto relationship existed, or never existed, between those 2 persons.   a declaration under subsection (1) of the existence of a de facto relationship may also declare any or all of the following: (a) the period, or periods, of the de facto relationship for the purposes of paragraph 90sb(a), (b) whether there is a child of the de facto relationship, (c) whether one of the parties to the de facto relationship made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), (d) when the de facto relationship ended, (e) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship. note: for child of a de facto relationship, see section 90rb.   the period, or periods, of the de facto relationship for the purposes of paragraph 90sb(a), (b) whether there is a child of the de facto relationship, (c) whether one of the parties to the de facto relationship made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), (d) when the de facto relationship ended, (e) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship.   whether there is a child of the de facto relationship, (c) whether one of the parties to the de facto relationship made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), (d) when the de facto relationship ended, (e) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship.   whether one of the parties to the de facto relationship made substantial contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90sm(4)(a), (b) or (c), (d) when the de facto relationship ended, (e) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship.   when the de facto relationship ended, (e) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship.   where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily resident during the de facto relationship.
matrimonial cause or new part viiiab de facto relationship?
conclusion
associate: dated: 23 december 2022
dated: 23 december 2022