last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
riggio & cowper [2023] fedcfamc2f 1
orders
pending further order the court orders that:
the court orders that: the matter be listed on 6 october 2020 at 9:30am for mention before judge altobelli. any application in a case or objection to subpoena made returnable by the registry from the date of these orders until the next adjourned date will not be heard on that date without the express leave of judge b smith. [x], born [in] 2015 and [y], born [in] 2017 (“the children”) shall live with the mother. children’s time with the father except as agreed between the parties in writing, the father shall spend supervised time with the children as follows: (a) for two (2) three (3) hours each alternate saturday for a total of six (6) visits supervised by [b contact service] at [e contact centre, town c] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father, (b) at the expiration of order 4(a) herein, each alternate sunday for six (6) hours except for mother’s day supervised by [b contact service] at [e contact centre, town c] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father, and (c) on father’s day for six (6) hours supervised by [b contact service] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father. the paternal grandparents, [ms cowper] and [mr d], are entitled to attend at any supervised visit. until such time that [e contact service] is available, the father may spend, at his election, two (2) hours each alternate saturday with the children so long as it is supervised through an appropriate supervision service. children’s time with paternal grandparents independent of any time with the father, the children are to spend time with the paternal grandparents once per month at the home of the maternal grandmother (or as agreed between the maternal grandmother, paternal grandmother and mother), and the mother is to do all things reasonably required to facilitate this time. the father is not to attend at this visit. supervision service to facilitate the father spending time with the children at [e contact service] or other agreed supervision service pursuant to these orders, the mother and father shall do all things and sign all documents necessary to register with and complete all required intake and assessment documents and processes required by [b contact service] (or other such supervised contact service as agreed between the parties) for the purpose of facilitating the father’s time with the children pursuant to these orders. the mother shall pay up to $50 dollars per fortnight towards the cost of supervision, so long as that is no more than half of the cost, and the father shall pay the remaining costs of the [e contact service] supervised contact service (or other such agreed supervised contact service) (at the relevant concession or non-concession rate), including, but not limited to, any costs associated with the initial intake assessment, any intake assessment or appointments attended by the children and the costs of the father and the children’s attendance at the service for the purpose of the father spending supervised time with the children. in the event that the supervised contact service contact centre offers services supervised time only at times which are less regular than or different from specified in these orders, then the contact shall may occur at the times that are offered by the service contact centre. the father must not attend at or be outside of his car in the vicinity of the changeover venue contact centre before the time with children is to start and must promptly leave the changeover venue contact centre and the vicinity at the time with the children is to end. the parties must comply with all reasonable directions and requests of the contact service, including as to the dates, place and/or times of each visit. within 3 months of these orders, the father shall attend and complete the an appropriate parenting course, such as keeping kids in mind, and shall provide the mother with evidence of completion of the course undertaken. telephone communication the father shall communicate with the children every tuesday and thursday in week 1 (week 1 shall coincide with the week the children spend time with the father) and on tuesday, thursday and sunday in week 2 (in the week the children do not spend time with the father) and for this purpose the communication:   for two (2) three (3) hours each alternate saturday for a total of six (6) visits supervised by [b contact service] at [e contact centre, town c] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father, (b) at the expiration of order 4(a) herein, each alternate sunday for six (6) hours except for mother’s day supervised by [b contact service] at [e contact centre, town c] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father, and (c) on father’s day for six (6) hours supervised by [b contact service] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father.   at the expiration of order 4(a) herein, each alternate sunday for six (6) hours except for mother’s day supervised by [b contact service] at [e contact centre, town c] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father, and (c) on father’s day for six (6) hours supervised by [b contact service] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father.   on father’s day for six (6) hours supervised by [b contact service] (or other supervised contact service as agreed between the mother and father in writing) at times as specified by the contact service centre in consultation with the mother and father.   can be by telephone, facetime and/or skype, (b) shall occur between 6:00 pm until 6:30 pm, (c) shall be initiated by the father contacting the children on a number and/or skype address provided by the mother, and (d) this communication can be monitored by the mother, including by her placing the phone on loudspeaker and/or being present with the children during such communication.   shall be initiated by the father contacting the children on a number and/or skype address provided by the mother, and (d) this communication can be monitored by the mother, including by her placing the phone on loudspeaker and/or being present with the children during such communication.   this communication can be monitored by the mother, including by her placing the phone on loudspeaker and/or being present with the children during such communication.
ancillary matters the mother and father shall do all things necessary to authorise the children’s day care/school to provide to the other parent, on a regular basis, copies of all school reports, school newsletters and other information regarding the children’s school activities. the mother and father be entitled to obtain directly from any day care/school attended by the children or any health or welfare professional or other professional attended by the children, copies of any reports, notices or other relevant verbal or written advice affecting the education, health and welfare of the children and for this purpose the mother and father shall immediately notify each other of the names and contact details of any relevant education, health or welfare professional and keep the other party so informed. the mother and father shall immediately notify the other parent of any illness, medical emergency, serious medical problem, hospitalisation or accident in relation to the children when the children are in their care. that together with such notice the parent is to provide the name of the hospital, treating medical practitioner and/or medical facility that provided medical treatment for the children. the mother and father be restrained from speaking or permitting any other person to speak to or about the other parent or members of their family in a negative, offensive or unpleasant fashion in the children’s presence or hearing. the father be restrained by injunction from consuming any alcohol 24 hours prior to or whilst the children spend time with him.
other matters
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
applications
contentions
...verbally argued in which it was [sic] both our faults and should never have happened, but i vehemently deny any physical harm as [the mother] alleges. i am now more mindful of the fact that the children should never be placed in that position to hear adults argue.   per the original)  phasis added)
background
april 2016 car parking incident
march 2017 cruise incident
10 september 2017 money transfer incident
october 2017: mother’s mental state  riggio] has long term issues with her partner that is [sic] escalating. she had a very good childhood and very good extended family and group of friends. she wants to do the correct thing by family, trying to find out how to deal with current situation. she has features of adjustment disorder due to relationship issues. she is a very positive lady and not having any ideas to hurt self or others. she enjoys herself as a mother and is currently 35 weeks pregnant in her second pregnancy.
4 march 2018 breastfeeding incident
i have been thinking about it and all the blood, sweat and tears i have put into this place and money i have put in is so much more than you. i have worked it all out and you would not even get half of this house and if you think of taking half, i will get violent and no cop will stop me, so you better be careful.”
december 2018 barbeque incident
words cannot describe how sorry i am for the other night ... don’t ask why i snapped in such a way. i should have got pissed off but not like that. i’m drained! so drained. sometimes the pressure and events build up in a way which causes me to act like a dick when something goes wrong or doesn’t work out, a build-up of negatives and thing not working out cause me to snap like a firecracker! i’m just so sorry you guys ... the loves of my life have to see me like this ... it’s tearing me apart inside and us as a family. i do love you with all my heart. please forgive me as i am so regretful of all my actions. (as per the original)
march 2019 movie night incident
25 april 2019 incident
...on anzac day [ms riggio] and i were at my parent’s house, and we were having a barbecue, there was a verbal argument between my father and i, so i decided to leave the house and go home. my mother called the police with the belief they would talk to me about my behaviours. i did attempt to take the phone out of my mother’s hand, and it knocked on the floor and smashed. i pleaded guilty to destroy property in relation to the phone. i pleaded not guilty to the common assault against my father and [ms riggio]. at hearing i was found not guilty. as i was leaving the house i tripped on the front mat as i was trying to leave, and i fell into the front flyscreen door which shattered as it was a thin door however i did not intentionally damage the door. i was found not guilty for damaging the door.
10 august 2019 breach of the advo
i want you gone. i want to give you the money and you must fucking disappear. i’m going to drain your bank account, girl. i don’t give a fuck. if i live in this again, i will come back 10 times fucking stronger and i will fucking show you i want to burn every bit of profit that you fucking think you have put into this house because it was all fucking me, all my fucking income ...i fucking hate you with a passion. you are not welcome back in this house.
12 august 2019 alleged incident at t centre
11 october 2019
13 to 25 october 2019
3 to 5 november 2019
february 2020 u club incident
since july 2020
...it is recommended that [mr cowper] continue with psychological therapy and intervention to further consolidate appropriate anger management strategies. there has been significant improvement for [mr cowper] and to not continue with psychological treatment would potentially result in him reverting to pre-treatment symptomatology affecting his mental well-being negatively. i am confident that with continued psychological sessions, [mr cowper] may be better able to cope with upcoming stressors. (emphasis added)
... [mr cowper] attended ten sessions from 21 july 2020 to 12 december 2020. he attended a 12-month follow up on 22 november 2021 to review his skills use and progress to date after a number of stressors. ... at follow up [mr cowper] demonstrated continued skills use and overall improvement in mood and anger management for 12 months. he reported successfully navigat[ing] many of the highly distressing events of the past 12 months including court cases and working on a mutually beneficial custody agreement of his children with his ex-partner. [mr cowper] has demonstrated his ability to recognise and manage his anger so that it is expressed in healthy ways. given these improvements have remained over the past 12 months, at this point there is no clinical need for [mr cowper] to continue psychological therapy... (emphasis added)   “main thoughts on his behaviour and is effect on his (ex) partner and children”, the assessor recorded “the client offered limited insight as to the impacts of his behaviour on others”, (b) “his ideas for stopping his violence right now”, the assessor recorded “recognizing conflict, taking a ‘step back’ rather than escalating, managing his own ‘short fuse’ without harming others, dealing with past resentment to ex-partners, ‘change direction in life’, be a better dad”, and (c) “barriers to change”, the assessor recorded “blaming his ex partner for his use of abuse (verbal), limited personal accountability for his use of abuse and violence”,   “his ideas for stopping his violence right now”, the assessor recorded “recognizing conflict, taking a ‘step back’ rather than escalating, managing his own ‘short fuse’ without harming others, dealing with past resentment to ex-partners, ‘change direction in life’, be a better dad”, and (c) “barriers to change”, the assessor recorded “blaming his ex partner for his use of abuse (verbal), limited personal accountability for his use of abuse and violence”,   “barriers to change”, the assessor recorded “blaming his ex partner for his use of abuse (verbal), limited personal accountability for his use of abuse and violence”,
...saturday 12/3/22 is the earliest i can book and the only time i have that day is 3-5pm. [mr cowper] would like to do the following fortnight as well and then probably go monthly. i need to check this with him again. (emphasis added)   riggio] has just called me, she wants to try something different to try to get [y] to stay for the visit. would you be agreeable to a park in [suburb v] (i will advise once i know). [ms riggio] is hoping that if [y] goes to a park, she knows she may well stay. we will also try getting [ms riggio] to leave and [y] to stay with the supervisor and hopefully she will start to settle, and we will call you. if she does not settle, then we will need to return her to [ms riggio].
so lets drop her off to a stranger... never going to work, and doesn't make sense... familiar faces " [ms f] and my mother will be there" as per past visits... trust me your supervisor doesn't have a hope in hell in getting [y] to stay. [ms riggio] just needs to drop the kids off, let them go play turn around and go, no talking, no goodbyes, just go, very easy that way [y] will not be faced with a decision... [ms riggio] saying ill see you soon or good bye makes [y] upset and forces her to be the way she is, its not rocket science. but the balls not in my court i have no say, no power, zilch... just the same senario she will have to do in 3 months when i get all this rubbish amended... once again balls in [ms riggio]’s and your court, you need to make it work. (as per the original)
as discussed, i have emailed [ms riggio] to advise that your parents would be at the changeover. [ms riggio] has advised that with [y] and her anxiety issues she really wants her to be comfortable to go with the [w] as there will be times it will only be her. and that maybe for this particular visit as she is going to be leaving [y] with [w] and then departing. she wants to see how she goes and that it is just be [w]. all going well and moving forward she said she would be happy to have them attend at the next change over. are you agreeable for us to try with just [w] on saturday. (as per the original)
sorry i think its better to have my parents there as [y] has anxiety issue's. this woman gives [y] anxiety issues!!!! and everyone else in the picture lol... honestly you can't put brains in statutes. [y] has this issue so let put her in strangers hand's. it doesn’t make sense. please let her know my parents will be there for the changeover... my parents can take her and go play in the park or bike track. that's called “distraction” whilst [ms riggio] slips away with [w]. she is not to lead onto [y] she has departed. so no goodbyes!!! just disappear... when i come on the scene she will be sweet. kids cry. than they stop. if need be she is that upset one of my parents can take her back to [ms riggio]... this is the only way... [ms riggio] has failed 20 times now and will continue to do so if we leave her in charge... its pretty simple... my parents aren't on supervised visits... its me... [ms riggio] needs to to compromise with my decision for once... how many visits have gone by and i don't see my daughter... i believe [ms riggio] has the condition which she is relaying through our daughter... it's sad how she is using these children to her own benefits... all i want is spoil and love these children with all my might and well being.. (as per the original)
children’s characteristics
ms g
expert evidence  .] [mr cowper] described his relationship with his parents as close. he acknowledged that he and his father were both “stubborn back in the day” and “were like two bulls locking horns”. he reported that they have not had any conflict since the incident that occurred on anzac day 2019. he commented that if a disagreement were to arise between himself and his parents, he would communicate calmly and respectfully. [mr cowper] stated that he has learnt to “take a step back and be the bigger person”. [ms cowper] and [mr d] spoke about their current relationship with [mr cowper] and described it as ‘really good’. they indicated that they speak most days on the phone and maintained close contact during the lockdown. [mr d] stated that [mr cowper] sent around a take away meal recently for his birthday as they were unable to celebrate in person due to covid restrictions. [ms cowper] acknowledged that [mr cowper] often “has an opinion and that’s it”. she described him as a ‘typical bloke’ in that he often swears and occasionally yells. however, she stated that he has attended numerous courses and programs lately that have taught him how to handle situations better. [ms cowper] commented that he seems to have more control over his emotions. she described his [sic] as “a really good kid”. [mr d] acknowledged that he and [mr cowper] have had their “ups and downs as father and son”. yet he stated that they continue to have a really good relationship.  .] [mr cowper] demonstrated a limited insight into [x] and [y]’s personalities, interests and needs. he acknowledged that he does not know much about the children’s day to day lives due to the minimal contact he has with them. [mr cowper] expressed disappointment about the lack of information he is given about [x]’s education, commenting that he has never been sent a school report or update. [mr cowper] stated that [x] is quite sporty and enjoys riding his scooter and bike. he also likes playing with trains and toy dinosaurs. [mr cowper] stated that [x] would often follow him around, copying what he would be doing and that they had a close relationship when they lived together.   the time the children spend with the children needs to increase gradually with two hours each alternate saturday at a familiar venue in suburb v, (b) after two months, the time could increase to six hours (i.e. 10.00 am to 4.00 pm) on alternate saturdays in the local area, including the paternal grandparents’ home at town ag. the paternal grandparents’ home will give the children a home base to allow for bad weather, rests and meals. the paternal grandparents should not be present at this time in light of the past conflict between the adults, and (c) after a further six months, the time could increase to alternate weekends (saturday to sunday) with the time able to occur at suburb aj. the expert suggested there be a review before overnight time starts, by reference to the children’s psychologist and an addendum report prioritising observations of interactions and face to face child interviews.   after two months, the time could increase to six hours (i.e. 10.00 am to 4.00 pm) on alternate saturdays in the local area, including the paternal grandparents’ home at town ag. the paternal grandparents’ home will give the children a home base to allow for bad weather, rests and meals. the paternal grandparents should not be present at this time in light of the past conflict between the adults, and (c) after a further six months, the time could increase to alternate weekends (saturday to sunday) with the time able to occur at suburb aj. the expert suggested there be a review before overnight time starts, by reference to the children’s psychologist and an addendum report prioritising observations of interactions and face to face child interviews.   after a further six months, the time could increase to alternate weekends (saturday to sunday) with the time able to occur at suburb aj. the expert suggested there be a review before overnight time starts, by reference to the children’s psychologist and an addendum report prioritising observations of interactions and face to face child interviews.
ms k
sessions have also focussed on developing ways [ms riggio] can set up contact time so [x] and [y] will be more likely to engage in contact calls. ... [ms riggio] notes she has continued to encourage [x] and [y] to engage in the contact sessions. they continue to show distress associated with the contact with their father, displaying behaviours to avoid contact ( [x] tries to hang up the phone, or throw things at the phone, run away and go behind the door in his room while [y] screams/cries, runs away) and are saying they do not want to have contact. [ms riggio] notes [x] is displaying aggression towards his father during phone contact and he can have difficulties after contact visits (emotional and behavioural challenges). ... these have also occurred following contact when [x] has been with friends and their parents.   x’s problematic behaviour occurs after spending time with his friends and was observed by the court-appointed expert during his assessment, and (b) y’s inability to separate from the mother also occurred in the context of day-care.   y’s inability to separate from the mother also occurred in the context of day-care.
legal framework  he procedure for making interim parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the inquiry is “significantly curtailed”. where the court cannot make findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. the court also looks to the less contentious matters, such as the agreed facts and issues not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to separation, the current circumstances of the parties and their children, and the parties’ respective proposals for the future.
34. section 61da is as follows:   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or  family violence.  when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. section 61da and in particular, subsection (3), was discussed in treloar & nepean [2009] famcafc 206, (2009) flc 93-417 (coleman, may & dawe jj) where the full court stressed its importance, and gave particular emphasis to what was said in goode and goode (2006) flc 93-286 (at 83,750). the following paragraph from goode (supra) was emphasised in the decision of treloar: the combination of the revised explanatory memorandum and the comments of the house of representatives standing committee on legal and constitutional affairs suggests that s 61da(3) provides a discretion not to be exercised in a broad exclusionary manner, but only in circumstances where limited evidence may make the application of the presumption, or its rebuttal, difficult.... section 60cg requires a court when considering what parenting order to make, to ensure that whatever order is made, it does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence. had the trial judge referred to s 61da(3), the interim orders provision, his honour would have applied a cautious approach, absent any need for findings as to family violence, and applied s 60cg. it is very common in interim parenting proceedings to see factual disputes which cannot be determined without the evidence being tested in the context of a trial. his honour recognised this and indeed at [14] referred to “the usual pathway as highlighted in goode & goode (2006) flc 93-286”. a paragraph relevant to this appeal in the goode decision is as follows (at 80,901): ... the procedure for making interim parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the enquiry is “significantly curtailed”. where the court cannot make findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. the court also looks to the less contentious matters, such as the agreed facts and issues not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to separation, the current circumstances of the parties and their children, and the parties’ respective proposals for the future.
...that does not mean that merely because the facts are in dispute the evidence on the topic must be disregarded, and the case determined solely by reference to the agreed facts.
apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
consideration
primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with each of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, with primacy given to this consideration.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, with primacy given to this consideration.
... i have since learnt to take ownership of my behaviours and how it affected [ms riggio] and the children. i recognise it impacted on [ms riggio] and have taken large steps forward to educate myself to not do any of those behaviours moving forward.
...made a promise to the court that i would never do that type of behaviour again. i have learnt a very hard lesson, but it has also helped me recognise my inappropriate behaviours and educate myself with the knowledge to be a better person. sometimes i say the wrong thing without thinking about the consequences it has on others. through my counsellor and educational programs such as “keeping kids in mind” i have been able to learn how to react differently and control myself in emotional situations and think of others. this is evident in my current relationship with [ms g] and all the relationships i have with family and friends.   prior to that time, his behaviour was inappropriate but it is an historic matter, but (b) since that time, he has reformed his behaviour and gained new awareness and insights about the impact his behaviour has on others.   since that time, he has reformed his behaviour and gained new awareness and insights about the impact his behaviour has on others.
...it is recommended that [mr cowper] continue with psychological therapy and intervention to further consolidate appropriate anger management strategies. there has been significant improvement for [mr cowper] and to not continue with psychological treatment would potentially result in him reverting to pre-treatment symptomatology affecting his mental well-being negatively...
...working on a mutually beneficial custody agreement of his children with his ex-partner. [mr cowper] has demonstrated his ability to recognise and manage his anger so that it is expressed in healthy ways. given these improvements have remained over the past 12 months, at this point there is no clinical need for [mr cowper] to continue psychological therapy.
any view expressed by a child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court considers relevant to the weight that should be applied to the child’s views
the nature of the child’s relationship with (i) each of the child’s parents and (ii) other persons (who may include grandparents or other relative of the child)
the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child
the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of (i) each of the child's parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including any lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks relevant
the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents.
family violence orders
conclusion
transfer to division 1
single expert report
associate: dated: 10 january 2023
dated: 10 january 2023