last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
simiko & kellidis (no 3) [2023] fedcfamc2f 14
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
background  the respondent’s brother be joined as the second respondent, (b) the suburb e property be vacated within 30 days, and (c) the applicant be appointed trustee for sale of the suburb e property.   the suburb e property be vacated within 30 days, and (c) the applicant be appointed trustee for sale of the suburb e property.   the applicant be appointed trustee for sale of the suburb e property.
the hearing
initially this was objected to but the objection was withdrawn during submissions on the objection. part of the withdrawal of the applicant’s objection was on the understanding that the respondent’s opinion evidence about the value of the suburb e property is not proof of the value of the suburb e property and i confirm that it is not.
facts
it is noted that: orders 2-3 of annexure a of the orders made 25 november 2021 remain of force and effect, and the following orders are made pursuant to sections 124 and 141 of the child support (assessment) act 1989 (cth). the court further orders that: ... the mother is to pay all of the school fees for the education of the children for the 2022 school year as soon as practicable. the mother is to provide to the father and to the solicitor acting on the sale of the property at [d street, suburb e], receipts or proof of payment in compliance with the preceding order. by this order, upon completion of the sale of the property at [d street, suburb e], the father is taken to have authorised and directed the solicitor acting on the sale of the property for the vendors to cause a sum equivalent to 50% of the 2022 school fees paid by the mother to be paid from his share of the net sale proceeds (after discharge payment of any secured creditor, costs of sale and usual adjustments on sale) to the solicitors for the mother. ... the father must provide child support for [z] otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the mother, namely, by payment to [b school] half of all school fees as and when they fall due for and from the 2023 school year for the education of [z]. the father must provide child support for [x] otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the mother, namely, by payment to [f school] half of all school fees as and when they fall due for and from the 2023 school year for the education of [x]. the father must provide child support for [y] otherwise than in the form of periodic amounts paid to the mother, namely, by payment to [f school] half of all school fees as and when they fall due for and from the 2023 school year for the education of [y]. the child support provided pursuant to these orders is not to be credited against a liability under any relevant administrative assessment of child support. by way of security for the payment of child support by the father, the father is to pay to the mother, the sum of $150,000 from his share of the proceeds of sale of the property at [d street, suburb e], and the mother is to cause such amount to be paid into an interest bearing account in a financial institution of the mother’s choosing, in the name of the mother (“the child support account”).   the parties have liberty to apply, with 7 days’ notice, with respect to the sale of [suburb e].
197 i have also taken into account:
... (b) the other orders made under the act in these proceedings affecting the parties and the notations to the orders made on 25 november 2021, (c) the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.   the other orders made under the act in these proceedings affecting the parties and the notations to the orders made on 25 november 2021, (c) the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.   the child support order made under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that the father is to provide and is liable to provide in the future for the children of the marriage.
8(b). ..... the girls' education for 2023 is in jeopardy. i understand [f school] is still owed $93,586.85 by [mr kellidis]. the listing agent is [ms ao] of [ap property services]. my solicitors have asked [ms ao] to keep them updated as to the status of the sale. 28. on 4 march 2022, my solicitors said to [ms ao]:
could you please tell me how much the written offers were for?
29. on 4 march 2022, {ms ao] said to my solicitors:
high $2,000,000's. need to get into the $4,000,000's + or high $3,000,000's as the brother [mr m] wants a high price. the [suburb e] property has now been on the market since at least 7 december 2021.
31. the [suburb e] property was valued at $2,800,000 on 2 may 2022.
15. i do not accept the [suburb e] property valuation of $2.8 million.   the respondent has failed to comply with his promise to take all reasonable and timely steps to sell the property. (b) the second respondent has failed to comply with his undertaking to do all reasonable acts and things to bring about the sale and the settlement of the sale of the property. (c) the respondent and the second respondent are not likely to comply with their respective promise and undertaking. (d) consequently, the applicant (and the children) will be denied that to which she is entitled after relying on the promise and undertaking of the respondents. (e) the sale of the suburb e property ought to be taken out of the respondents’ hands to ensure that the final orders are carried into effect. (f) the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.   the second respondent has failed to comply with his undertaking to do all reasonable acts and things to bring about the sale and the settlement of the sale of the property. (c) the respondent and the second respondent are not likely to comply with their respective promise and undertaking. (d) consequently, the applicant (and the children) will be denied that to which she is entitled after relying on the promise and undertaking of the respondents. (e) the sale of the suburb e property ought to be taken out of the respondents’ hands to ensure that the final orders are carried into effect. (f) the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.   the respondent and the second respondent are not likely to comply with their respective promise and undertaking. (d) consequently, the applicant (and the children) will be denied that to which she is entitled after relying on the promise and undertaking of the respondents. (e) the sale of the suburb e property ought to be taken out of the respondents’ hands to ensure that the final orders are carried into effect. (f) the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.   consequently, the applicant (and the children) will be denied that to which she is entitled after relying on the promise and undertaking of the respondents. (e) the sale of the suburb e property ought to be taken out of the respondents’ hands to ensure that the final orders are carried into effect. (f) the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.   the sale of the suburb e property ought to be taken out of the respondents’ hands to ensure that the final orders are carried into effect. (f) the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.   the substantive rights of the respondents have not been impinged upon.
power to appoint a trustee  appoint or remove trustees, (k) make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice.   make any other order (whether or not of the same nature as those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs of this section), which it thinks it is necessary to make to do justice.
the court has the power to enforce the order and to modify the machinery provisions of the order to effect enforcement provided that by doing so it does not affect the substantive rights of the parties. that power can also be used to spell out the effect of the order where that is not clear.
the wife as trustee
power to order to vacate
time in which to vacate
associate: dated: 12 january 2023
dated: 12 january 2023