last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
barbosa & furtado [2023] fedcfamc2f 32
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with
anger management course
spend time with  in a two-week cycle: (i) in week one – for a period of two hours supported by the current or an agreed professional contact service, at such times as suitable to the professional contact service, with such costs to be met by the father. it is noted that these spend time with periods are not required to be ‘strictly supervised’, (ii) in week two – for a period of four hours supervised by a professional contact service or other person agreed to by the parents, at such times as suitable to the professional contact service or person agreed, with such costs to be met equally by the parents. it is noted that these spend time with periods can occur at venues other than a supervised contact centre.   in week one – for a period of two hours supported by the current or an agreed professional contact service, at such times as suitable to the professional contact service, with such costs to be met by the father. it is noted that these spend time with periods are not required to be ‘strictly supervised’, (ii) in week two – for a period of four hours supervised by a professional contact service or other person agreed to by the parents, at such times as suitable to the professional contact service or person agreed, with such costs to be met equally by the parents. it is noted that these spend time with periods can occur at venues other than a supervised contact centre.  ) in week two – for a period of four hours supervised by a professional contact service or other person agreed to by the parents, at such times as suitable to the professional contact service or person agreed, with such costs to be met equally by the parents. it is noted that these spend time with periods can occur at venues other than a supervised contact centre.   for two months from the date that the father provides the mother and the icl with evidence of his completion of the anger management course, each alternate weekend on sunday from 11:00am until 5:00pm, (b) thereafter, for a period of two months in the same fortnightly pattern as established in order 5(a), each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (c) thereafter, for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (d) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from after school on friday or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on sunday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (e) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm. (f) thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   thereafter, for a period of two months in the same fortnightly pattern as established in order 5(a), each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (c) thereafter, for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (d) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from after school on friday or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on sunday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (e) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm. (f) thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   thereafter, for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (d) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from after school on friday or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on sunday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (e) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm. (f) thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on saturday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm,  ) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm,   thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from after school on friday or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on sunday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm, (e) thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm. (f) thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   each alternate weekend from after school on friday or 3:00pm if not a school day until 5:00pm on sunday, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm,   thereafter for a period of two months, in the same fortnightly pattern: (i) each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm. (f) thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm.  ) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until 7:00pm.   thereafter, during school term time: (i) each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.   each alternate weekend in the same fortnightly pattern from friday after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on monday morning, (ii) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.  ) each wednesday from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the following thursday morning.
school holidays  during the short april, july, and september/october school holidays, for eight (8) nights from the last friday of the proceedings school term immediately prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and concluding on the second saturday of such school holidays at 5:00pm, (b) during the summer december/january school holidays: (i) for the december 2024/january 2025 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father for two periods of consecutive nights the first commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term and concluding at 2:00pm on christmas day, and the second from 9.00am on 2 january 2025 until 9.00am on 9 january 2025, (ii) for the december 2025/january 2026 and the december 2026/january 2027 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term, (iii) for the december 2027/january 2028 school holidays and thereafter, for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement: the first half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an even year, and the second half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an odd year.   during the summer december/january school holidays: (i) for the december 2024/january 2025 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father for two periods of consecutive nights the first commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term and concluding at 2:00pm on christmas day, and the second from 9.00am on 2 january 2025 until 9.00am on 9 january 2025, (ii) for the december 2025/january 2026 and the december 2026/january 2027 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term, (iii) for the december 2027/january 2028 school holidays and thereafter, for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement: the first half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an even year, and the second half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an odd year.   for the december 2024/january 2025 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father for two periods of consecutive nights the first commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term and concluding at 2:00pm on christmas day, and the second from 9.00am on 2 january 2025 until 9.00am on 9 january 2025, (ii) for the december 2025/january 2026 and the december 2026/january 2027 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term, (iii) for the december 2027/january 2028 school holidays and thereafter, for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement: the first half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an even year, and the second half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an odd year.  ) for the december 2025/january 2026 and the december 2026/january 2027 school holidays, the children shall spend time with the father on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term, (iii) for the december 2027/january 2028 school holidays and thereafter, for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement: the first half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an even year, and the second half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an odd year.  i) for the december 2027/january 2028 school holidays and thereafter, for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement: the first half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an even year, and the second half of school holidays in years in which the holiday period commenced in an odd year.   commence on the afternoon of the last day that the children are required to attend school at any school term, (b) conclude on the evening two days prior to the first day of the new school term of the following term, and (c) pupil free days at the commencement or conclusion of the holidays shall not be included as part of the holidays period.   conclude on the evening two days prior to the first day of the new school term of the following term, and (c) pupil free days at the commencement or conclusion of the holidays shall not be included as part of the holidays period.   pupil free days at the commencement or conclusion of the holidays shall not be included as part of the holidays period.
special days  on easter sunday from 9:00am to 2:00pm (if the father is not already spending time with the children during that weekend pursuant to orders 5 or 6). (b) on the father’s birthday: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 7:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm, (c) on the father’s day weekend: (i) in 2023, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, then from 10:00am until 5:00pm on father’s day, (ii) in 2024 and for each year thereafter, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following father’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number, (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an odd number, (f) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the father’s birthday: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 7:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm, (c) on the father’s day weekend: (i) in 2023, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, then from 10:00am until 5:00pm on father’s day, (ii) in 2024 and for each year thereafter, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following father’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number, (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an odd number, (f) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   if it is a school day, from after school until 7:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm,  ) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm,   on the father’s day weekend: (i) in 2023, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, then from 10:00am until 5:00pm on father’s day, (ii) in 2024 and for each year thereafter, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following father’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number, (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an odd number, (f) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   in 2023, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, then from 10:00am until 5:00pm on father’s day, (ii) in 2024 and for each year thereafter, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following father’s day.  ) in 2024 and for each year thereafter, provided the father has completed an anger management course pursuant to order 3 herein, and in the event the children are not ordinarily spending time with the father on father’s day, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following father’s day.   from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an even number, (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an odd number, (f) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an odd number, (f) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the children’s birthdays: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.  ) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on easter sunday from 9:00am to 2:00pm if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day. (b) on the mother’s birthday: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 7:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm, (c) on the mother’s day weekend, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding mother’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following mother’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (f) on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the mother’s birthday: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 7:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 9:00am until 2:00pm, (c) on the mother’s day weekend, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding mother’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following mother’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (f) on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the mother’s day weekend, from after school or 3:00pm if not a school day on the friday immediately preceding mother’s day until before school or 9:00am if not a school day on the monday immediately following mother’s day. (d) from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (f) on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   from 5:00pm on christmas eve until 2:00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (e) from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (f) on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   from 2:00pm on christmas day until 2:00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (f) on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.   on the children’s birthdays if they would not otherwise be in their mother’s care on that day: (i) if it is a school day, from after school until 6:00pm, (ii) if it is not a school day, from 10:00am until 2:00pm.
changeovers  the father shall collect the children from shopping centre c, suburb d at the commencement of his time with the children, and (b) the mother or her nominee to collect the children from shopping centre c, suburb d at the conclusion of the father’s time with the children.   the mother or her nominee to collect the children from shopping centre c, suburb d at the conclusion of the father’s time with the children.
injunction
other orders
costs of the independent children’s lawyer
the court notes that
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
proceedings
... it is noted that it is intended that this therapy address, if relevant, any anxieties the mother may have relating to the children’s relationship with their father.
final hearing
orders sought by the parties
parenting responsibility [1] that the parent/parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the children:   [x] born [in] 2013, and (b) [y] born [in] 2015 (‘the children’).
live with [2] that the children live with the respondent mother (‘the mother’). school term-spend time [3] that the children shall spend time with the applicant father (‘the father’) as follow:   for the first two months from the date of these orders: each alternate weekend on sunday from 11.00am until 5.00pm, (b) thereafter for the next two months: each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3.00pm until 5.00pm on saturday. (c) thereafter for the next two months:
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3.00pm until 5.00pm on saturday. ii. each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm until 7pm.  thereafter for the next two months:
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3.00pm until 5.00pm on sunday. ii. each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm until 7pm.  thereafter for the next two months:
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3.00pm until before school or 9.00am on the following monday morning. ii. each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm until 7pm.  thereafter:
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school or 3.00pm until before school or 9.00am on monday morning. ii. each wednesday from after school or 3.00pm until 7pm until before school or 9.00am on the following thursday morning.  on the father’s day weekend, if father’s day does not coincide with the above spend time periods, each year from after day care and/or school or 3.00pm friday until monday before school (or 9am).   that order 3 be suspended on the following special occasions when the children is spending time with the mother:   on the mother’s day weekend each year from friday after school (or 5pm) until monday before school (or 9am). (b) on the mother’s birthday from 9.00am to 2.00pm.
other special days [5] that the children shall spend time with the father as follows:   on easter sunday from 9.00am to 2.00pm (if it does not coincident with either the weekend times as stated above, or school holidays as set out below). (b)from after school (or 3pm if it is not a school day) until 7pm on the father’s birthday or if not a school day from 9.00am to 2.00pm, (c) from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (d) from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number, (e) on the children’s birthdays, if it falls on a non-school day, from 10.00am until 2.00pm or if a school day from after school or 3.00pm until 6.00pm.
school holidays spend time [6] that from 2022, the children shall spend time with the father during school holiday periods as follows:   during the shorter april, july, and september/october school holidays for eight (8) nights from the last friday of the proceedings school term immediately prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and concluding on the second saturday of such school holidays at 5pm, (b) during the summer december/january school holidays:
i. for the first summer december/january school holidays: for 2 periods of seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term and concluding at 3pm on the eighth day, ii. for the second and third summer december/january school holidays: on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term, iii. for the fourth summer december/january school holidays and thereafter: for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement, and the first half of school holidays in even numbered (december) years, and the second half of school holidays in odd numbered (december) years.  for the purposes of calculating a school holiday period the holidays shall be taken to:   commence on the afternoon of the last day that the children are required to attend school at any school term, (b) conclude on the evening two days prior to the first day of the new school term of the following term, and (c) pupil free days at the commencement or conclusion of the holidays shall not be included as part of the holidays period.
changeover [8] if the changeover occurs at school, the parent who is to spend time with the child is to collect and drop off the children to and from school. [9] if the changeover does not occur at school:   the father shall collect the children from [shopping centre c, suburb d] at the commencement of his time with the children and, (b) the mother or her nominee to collect the children from [shopping centre c, suburb d] at the conclusion of the spend time as stated above.
telephone and facetime orders [10] that each parent shall be permitted to contact the children by telephone or facetime at all reasonable times, and each wednesday from 6.00pm to 6.30pm, and at times as initiated by the children and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to facilitate the telephone or facetime call including keeping their phone charged. [11] for the purposes of order 10 [sic], the parent who the children is living with or spending time with shall use their best endeavours to remove any multimedia or other distractions during the telephone or facetime call. information orders [12] that each party shall promptly inform the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by the children whilst in the care of the party, or any attendance upon a medical professional for serious illness/injury, including providing particulars of any treatment given or medication prescribed to the child. [13] that each party shall provide to the other with their current email address, telephone number and address within seven days from the date of these orders, and keep each other informed within 48 hours of any change to their current email address, telephone number and address. [14] that each party shall authorise the child’s school to provide to the other party copies of all notices, newsletter and letter as mainly forwarded by the school from time to time. attendance of child’s school events [15] that each of the parties shall be permitted to attend at the child’s school at all times at which parents are permitted to attend, including events such as school sports days, parent-teacher interviews and alike or at any extracurricular activity which the children participates in. miscellaneous [16] each party shall be and hereby are restrained from doing or saying anything derogatory in the hearing or presence of the children regarding the other party or detrimental to the relationship each party each has with the child. [17] the parties shall do all things necessary to engage in a family therapy or with a family intervention organisation, (such as [av] family service as governed by adhd australia support) for such period of time as recommended by the treating therapists. [18] that the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application in relation to matters concerning the children. notation [19] that the mother shall ensure that the child [x] continue therapy with [ms e].   that the mother have sole parental responsibility for [x] born in 2013, and [y] born in 2015 (“the children”). [2] that the children live with the mother. [3] that the children spend supervised time with the father each alternate weekend as follows:   for two hours on saturday supervised by the sydney city contact centre, and (b) for four hours on sunday supervised by [m contact centre] with the costs of such service to be borne by the father.   that until further order [mr barbosa] born [in] 1973, his servants, and/or agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction, and irrespective of authenticated consent are contemplated in part vii of the family law act 1975, from removing or attempting to remove of causing or permitting the removal of the said children [x] born [in] 2013, and [y] born [in] 2015, or either of them, from the commonwealth of australia and it is requested that the australian federal police give effect to this order by placing the names of the said children on the family law watchlist in force at all points of arrival and departure in the commonwealth of australia and maintain the children’s names on the watchlist until the court orders their removal.
live with [2] that the children live with the respondent mother (‘the mother’). school term-spend time [3] that the children shall spend time with the applicant father (‘the father’) as follows:   for the first two months from the date of these orders: each alternate weekend on sunday from 11.00am until 4.00pm, (b) thereafter for the next two months: each alternate weekend from friday after school until 4.00pm on saturday. (c) thereafter for the next two months:
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school until 4.00pm on saturday. ii. each wednesday from after school until 7pm.
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school until 4.00pm on sunday. ii. each wednesday from after school until 7pm.
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school until before school on the following monday morning. ii. each wednesday from after school until 7pm.
i. each alternate weekend from friday after school until before school on monday morning. ii. each wednesday from after school until 7pm until before school on the following thursday morning.  on the father’s day weekend, if father’s day does not coincide with the above spend time periods, each year from after day care and/or school friday until monday before school (or 9am),   that order 3 be suspended on the following special occasions when the children are [sic] spending time with the mother:   on the mother’s day weekend each year from friday after school (or 5pm) until monday before school (or 9am). (b) on the mother’s birthday.   on easter sunday (if it does not coincident with either the weekend times as stated above, or school holidays as set out below). (b) from after school (or 3pm if it is not a school day) until 7pm on the father’s birthday. (c) from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day in years ending in an odd number. (d) from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day in years ending in an even number. (e) on the children’s birthdays, if it falls on a non-school day, from 10.00am until 2.00pm.
school holidays spend time [6] that from twelve months from the date of these orders, the children shall spend time with the father during school holiday periods as follows:
i. for the first summer december/january school holidays: for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term and concluding at 3pm on the eighth day, ii. for the second and third summer december/january school holidays: on a week about basis for seven consecutive nights commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of the fourth school term. iii. for the fourth summer december/january school holidays and thereafter: for one half of the summer december/january school holidays by agreement between the parties and in absence of agreement, and the first half of school holidays in even numbered (december) years, and the second half of school holidays in odd numbered (december) years.  commence on the afternoon of the last day that the children are required to attend school at any school term, and (b) conclude on the evening two days prior to the first day of the new school term of the following term. (c) pupil free days at the commencement or conclusion of the holidays shall not be included as part of the holidays period.   the father shall collect the children from the mother’s residence at the commencement of his time with the children and, (b) the mother or her nominee to collect the children from the father’s residence at the conclusion of the spend time as stated above.
telephone and facetime orders [10] that each parent shall be permitted to contact the children by telephone or facetime at all reasonable times, and the other parent shall use their best endeavours to facilitate the telephone or facetime call including keeping their phone charged. [11] for the purposes of order 10, the parent who the children is living with or spending time with shall use their best endeavours to remove any multimedia or other distractions during the telephone or facetime call. information orders [12] that each party shall promptly inform the other of any serious illness or injury suffered by the children whilst in the care of the party, or any attendance upon a medical professional for serious illness/injury, including providing particulars of any treatment given or medication prescribed to the child. [13] that each party shall provide to the other with their current email address, telephone number and address within seven days from the date of these orders, and keep each other informed within 48 hours of any change to their current email address, telephone number and address. [14] that each party shall authorise the child’s school to provide to the other party copies of all notices, newsletter and letter as mainly forwarded by the school from time to time. attendance of child’s school events [15] that each of the parties shall be permitted to attend at the child’s school at all times at which parents are permitted to attend, including events such as school sports days, parent-teacher interviews and alike or at any extracurricular activity which the children participates in. miscellaneous [16] each party shall be and hereby are restrained from doing or saying anything derogatory in the hearing or presence of the children regarding the other party or detrimental to the relationship each party each has with the child. [17] the parties shall do all things necessary to engage in a family intervention organisation, (such as [av] family service as governed by adhd australia support). notation [18] that the mother shall ensure that the child [x] continue therapy with [ms e].
evidence
the relationship
... during evenings, nights and mornings in feeding, changing diapers, bathing, reading, settling both boys by swaddling and cuddling them in the evening as well as making them midnight bottles.   furtado] also consistently refused to accept my help when it came to the children.
i see you hate me too
and that when he was irritated he said to x:
you are behaving like a spoiled little snot
or
you scream like a girl. look what your mummy has made you.
i’m taking him. this is my baby too
and which x woke up and began crying.
there were two occasions when the father had hit [x] too hard, he said to me:
i lost it. i couldn’t help it.
the father made derogatory remarks about me in the presence of the children making remarks like “what would your mum know”, “your mum wants me to disappear”, “your mum is clueless” and “your mum has ruined you.” on occasions he swore at me in the presence of the children, saying to me “fucking fat cunt”
the father admitted during cross-examination to “probably” saying this to the mother, asserting that he “swore at her once”.[1]
on other occasions when we had arguments pushed or shoved me, smacked me, slapped me, pinched me, spat at me grabbed me and threw things at me or broke things. the father slapped me on most occasions there was no significant mark. on one occasion however, he smacked my mouth hard, leaving what appeared to be a blood filled bubble inside my lip. i said, “you are a disgrace. how can you do this? i am bleeding”. he looked in my mouth and said, “oh, that just looks like an ulcer”.
on one occasion we had an argument. during the argument, the father placed both his hands around my neck. i said, “get your hands off me”. he took his hand off and grabbed my arm.”
... never assaulted the children in any way by hitting, grabbing or deliberately harming either [x] or [y] at any time. i do not believe in corporal punishment.
the father’s work christmas party
i don’t know. you always do this last minute. you know it means a lot to me to be with the boys. can you please drop us off? you know what i feel like, i feel like stabbing everyone.
... almost immediately after that i heard the father come back in through the back door... i heard the father rummaging loudly in the drawer in the kitchen. we had a draw filled all full of large knives. it was difficult to open as it often got stuck and i recognised the sound of the draw full ... i did not see the father and i did not look up.   barbosa] just went into a rage and said he is about to stab the lot of us. he has run upstairs and all i could think to do was to get the kids in the car and go. my heart is racing but i can’t panic as the boys think they are on their way to his children’s christmas party.
i had to settle the children. it was an enormous decision i was making. i wanted to discuss it with my family. i had just come into their lives, my father wasn’t well and i arrived on the doorstep with two children. it took a long time to discuss the impact it was going to have on everyone involved and to explain what had happened to my parents.
the period following the making of the final advo
i am not a threat to anyone and a court has just proven that. what you are doing is abuse!
supervised time
given that [ms furtado] is a single-parent and has been involved in a lengthy and difficult family court process, it is not surprising that [ms furtado] is currently experiencing symptoms of anxiety and stress. i believe that [ms furtado] is coping well given her [sic] the significant stressors she has endured for a number of years.
... the boys were happy to see their dad. they both gave him a big appropriate cuddle. they chatted very comfortable [sic] with their dad and their interactions were very natural. dad offered them the option to see mum early if they wanted but they both shook their heads and said “no”.
other matters
asked about the 2009 avo, [mr barbosa] referred to it being made when he was with a previous partner called “[ms ar]”. they worked together, she was depressed and was seeing others while with him. during an incident when they argued over her sleeping with others, she said she would “call the boss” and, as she reached for the telephone, he stopped her by holding her arm. he reported “[ms ar] “flipped” after he held her, began to screen “help” and started knocking on neighbours’ doors. he felt he had not done anything and told her to call the police, which she did. an avo was made after he agreed he “grabbed her hand”.
expert evidence by dr h.
i would have to agree but you would also have to look at mediating factors in there. so is it the father per se or spending time with the father per se. is it about the mother’s anxiety about the children being with their father because she has talked about harm and kidnap and so forth. or has young [x] got a clinical condition, a separation anxiety, because he is difficult to get off to school. he talked about he’s reluctant to separating from his mum, he wants his mum to wait for him. i mean, these are all sorts of behaviours you see in children with clinical separation anxiety or you might know it also as school phobias when they refuse to go to school, and that is about the nature of the relationship between the child and the parent – in this case the mother – that something about their relationship which the father may or may not be contributing to, in [x]’s mind because his more connected and concerned about where his mother is at and children who have these anxieties that some harm could come to the parent there separating from develop this refusal to separate from the parent this scared of losing. and that’s the common dynamic between children who have school refusal or these older children with separation anxiety is that they are fearful of losing the parent that they don’t want to separate from.
again, it’s possible, of course, but i think the main issue would have been the mother feeling comfortable. whether she was comfortable with that arrangement. as i said, she expressed to me issues about not only with the father harming the children but possibly also kidnapping them and she, by her experience of the father, she felt he was manipulative and good at acting so she would’ve – and here i’m assuming that she would have perhaps also had apprehension around did the supervisor, you know, really perceive what was happening. how safe were the boys, even though there was a supervisor there. you know, will he run off with them. will he manipulate them, because i think there was concerns about, you know, he will tell them whatever he wants to tell them and i think there are allegations that he actually used to, when they were having telephone contact, he used to say things to them like, you know, your mother has kidnapped or something of that nature. and so i’m sure she would have been worried about something like that happening.
... more of the same doesn’t fix the situation. if the court judges that the father is safe for the children to be around, then the children need to get to know him. we can’t keep putting off moving on and creating certainty for the children by waiting for the mother to manage her anxiety. the mother needs to work on her anxiety and what she needs to do to cope with unsupervised time.
dr h noted that the mother’s level of anxiety had not seemed to have diminished, on her reading of the mother’s evidence, since the interviews for the expert report in august 2018, nor had it been diminished by the long chain of good contact supervision reports. dr h noted that over the years of supervised time, hundreds of hours, the father has not “lost it” and is always engaged with the children in an appropriate way.
that’s the question – does the father had the capacity to react like that. he does have the capacity to bruise his partner, he has done that to two partners. but does he have the capacity to be homicidal?
that’s a reasonable hypothesis, especially if the unsupervised time is not weekly, is not jammed up together.
in relation to this last opinion as to frequency, i pointed out to dr h that the father was proposing (at the time of the relevant cross-examination) that he start with unsupervised time for five hours on sunday in week one and 4.5 hours on saturday in week 2, progressing thereafter to alternate weekend overnight time. to this, dr h expressed the view that it would be better if the father collected the children from school so as not to expose the mother to anxiety and the children could be returned to the mother to changeover at a contact centre, but for such not to occur every weekend. the suggestion was then made by dr mcconaghy that unsupervised time could be a weekday afternoon in week one and a weekend in week 2 so that the mother still has an unbroken weekend with the children, with which dr h agreed. dr mcconaghy then asked dr h her opinion as to what such time should build up to, and dr h expressed an immediate and strong opinion – four nights per fortnight, half the school holidays in the fullness of time and time on special occasions so long as same was not too disruptive as special occasions need to be shared between the parents and the children should not bounce between the parents too frequently.
very much so. that was not my recommendation unless the court found that the father would cause harm to the children. otherwise would be detrimental and cause confusion for the children. how would you explain it to the children? [x] lost his father for 18 months. to do that a second time would not help [x].
you said that the mother needs to work on her anxiety. what did you mean?
to this, dr h responded that the mother needs to a more objective threat assessment and suggested it would be useful for the mother to work with someone who does not just accept her view that the father is a serious threat to the children but is open to accepting the court’s finding about the father and using that assessment to help the mother to accept the courts assessment, to look to the future and move forward.
submissions
there is no concern that the independent children’s lawyer forms that the children are at any risk in being in the care of their father because of the history of family violence.
i believe that [ms furtado] is coping well given her the significant stresses she has endured for a number of years
she definitely has symptoms of anxiety and distress, but despite those symptoms, i have – you know, i have no concerns about the way that she functions in terms of caring for her children or managing decisions in her life. despite the symptoms, she has not decompensated.
the law
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[11]  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child’s paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, ‘psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law’ (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty’s statement (which also has echoes in the english author’s statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court’s formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
in napier & hepburn [2006] famca 1316, the full court emphasised that it is not for the court to find a solution which will eliminate any chance of serious harm. rather, it is to balance the harm that will follow if the risk is not minimised or removed, as against a normal, healthy relationship between a parent and a child not being permitted to prosper.   m v m put beyond doubt the proposition that courts exercising jurisdiction under pt vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) must protect children from credible risks of harm due to sexual abuse. such risks, like all prospective events, are capable of classification in only one of three mutually exclusive categories: possibilities, probabilities, or certainties. once it is accepted courts should (and do) react to dangers in the form of risks of harm which may merely be possibilities, it is an oxymoron to expect such possibilities to then be forensically proven on the balance of probabilities according to the civil standard of proof. by definition, possibilities are not, and could never be, probabilities. risks of harm are not susceptible of scientific demonstration or proof (cdj v vaj (1998) 197 clr 172 at [151]), but are instead postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances. ... [85] the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary. the statement to the contrary by the full court in bant & clayton [2019] famcafc 198, (2019) flc 93-924 at [52] is rejected as being incorrect. sometimes it can be difficult to discern the difference between the exercise of discretion and an evaluative judgment (edwards v noble (1971) 125 clr 296 at 304), though a discretionary decision is one in which no single factor or combination of considerations will necessarily dictate the result (norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513 at 518). the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one. [86] we have already acknowledged how risks of harm are not susceptible of empirical proof, but a mathematical hypothetical will nevertheless illustrate how findings of “unacceptable risk” cannot be measured by the civil standard of proof. imagine a child will be minded by one of three randomly allocated carers. assume one of the carers would sexually abuse the child, but the other two would not, meaning the child stands a 33.33 per cent chance of being sexually abused if left in care. no sensible adult would take the risk of leaving the child in care because, even though the prospect of sexual abuse is only possible but not probable, the risk is still too high to tolerate. in other words, it is unacceptable. if parents (and courts) were to instead only react to risks which are probabilities then, in that example, the child would still be left in care unless shown he or she was susceptible to sexual abuse by two of the three carers and the risk was then rated at 66.66 per cent.
supervised access is not appropriate as a long-term measure. ... supervisors must be available to the children for safety and support and be prepared to intervene on the children’s behalf if an issue of protection arises during the visit. it is, in our opinion, unrealistic to expect a supervisor to undertake those responsibilities on a regular weekly or fortnightly basis for an indefinite period.[13]   should the father bring a further application asking for the provision in relation to supervision at the contact centre be removed, his case doubtless would be met with an assertion that he may not do so because there have [sic] been no change in circumstances (rice & asplund). ... [10] in my view, where an order is made that the time a parent spends with a child be under supervision indeterminately, there would need to be cogent reasons to support such orders ...  9] the undesirability of, and the practical difficulties associated with long term supervision in a children’s contact centre are referred to in the guideline for family law courts and children’s contact services january 2007, part c 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 (published by the attorney-general’s department, the family court of australia and the federal magistrates court of australia). in fitzpatrick & fitzpatrick [2005] famca 394, (2005) flc 93-227, may j, having found that the evidence in the case “objectively viewed reveals the potential for an unacceptable risk to the children if contact with the father is not supervised...”, then referred to the difficulty associated with long term supervised contact and said “the necessity for contact to be supervised apparently indefinitely leads to the need to finely balance what is in the children’s best interests”. her honour then explained “[w]hilst supervised contact in this case will protect the children from any potential physical harm, the effect on their emotional well-being cannot be ignored”. (see also w & w [abuse allegations: unacceptable risk] [2005] famca 892, (2005) flc 93-235, (2005) 34 fam lr 129 at paragraph 114).
while the making of orders for supervised time is an exercise of discretion, statements from the full court of this court have sought to give specific guidance where such orders are to be made for an indefinite or indeterminate period ....  8] i have found no merit in any ground of appeal, however, i am troubled by the circumstances that the effect of the orders made by the trial judge is that following the initial 12 month period of the children spending no time with the mother, there is to be supervised time that continues indefinitely. there are of course the notations to the orders recording that the icl may “arrange for the parties to attend family dispute resolution or restore the matter to the list to consider the establishment of other time arrangements between the children and the mother”, upon being provided with a report of a therapist who has treated the mother for a period of not less than 12 months, but that is not an order of the court, and he leaves it entirely in the discretion of the icl whether or not to restore the matter to the list (even if that could be done). thus, it does not operate to necessarily bring an end to the ongoing regime of supervised time if that is appropriate. [259] the difficulty with that in this case is ... her honour provides no reasons for ordering the indefinite supervision of time, and it has long been the case that to put such an order in place there must be cogent reasons for doing so (e.g. see moose & moose ... , h v k [2001] famca 687, and slater v light ... .  0] the making of orders for supervised time occurs within a broad discretion referenced to the children’s best interests exercised within mandatory statutory considerations. the conditions or limitations which might attach to orders for supervised time – and, indeed whether any conditions or limitations should attach at all – involves the exercise of that broad discretion just as much as the making of any other parenting order. [291] “final” orders for supervised time carry inherently the prospect of future alteration, no parenting order is a final order in the usual sense in which that expression is used. despite the statutory desire evident in s 60cc(3)(l), a “final” parenting order is always necessarily susceptible to later being “discharge[d], varie[d], suspend[ed] or revive[d]” in whole or in part. the act provides specifically for that possibility and gives the parties rights accordingly (s 65d(2), conditional, relevantly, upon satisfaction of the “rule in rice v asplund”). [292] as a consequence of the factors just referred to, it cannot be said that the failure to provide an end point for supervised time is, of itself, an error of either principle or discretion (see, for example, h & k, fitzpatrick and fitzpatrick [2005] famca 394, (2005) flc 93-227, moose & moose, slater v light). [293] however, the full court has sought to provide “specific guidance where [orders for supervised time] are to be made for an indefinite or indeterminate period” (slater v light at [38]). the “guidance” is of long standing and has frequently been applied. that the full court can issue guidelines as to the exercise of relevant discretions is not in doubt, but guidelines are to be distinguished from binding principles of law (norbis & norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513, per mason and deane jj. compare brennan j and see the discussion (within the context of s 79 of the act)) in hoffman & hoffman [2014] famcafc 92, (2014) flc 93-591:
...guidance must be given in a way that preserves, so far as it is possible to do so, the capacity of the family court to do justice according to the needs of the individual case, whatever its complications may be. reconciliation of these goals suggests that in most, if not all, cases the full court of the family court should give guidance in the form of guidelines rather than binding principles of law [norbis at 520]. (emphasis omitted) thus, any such guidance must guide the exercise of discretion, not replace it. the failure to follow binding principles of law constitutes an error of law, the failure to observe guidelines flags the possibility of discretionary error: it “can throw a question mark over the trial judge’s decision and ease the appellant’s burden of showing it is wrong” (norbis, above).  4] as to the content of the relevant guideline, may j said in moose v moose:  ] in my view, where an order is made that the time a parent spends with a child be under supervision indeterminately, there would need to be cogent reasons to support such orders. apart from expressing, quite properly, a concern about the mother’s emotional reaction to the children seeing their father which was consistent with the evidence (t/s p 135) his honour did not provide reasons to support these orders. in addition, his honour should have made orders which would allow for some review of the situation in the future as suggested by the family consultant. for those reasons i would allow the appeal and order a rehearing. (emphasis added)  5] to similar effect, in slater v light the full court concluded:  ] flowing from this finding, his honour was correct to find that an order for supervised time should be made. we do consider appealable error has been made out however in ground 3, as an indefinite supervision order was not justified in the circumstances and in any event was not substantiated by sufficient reasons. it is also relevant to the success of this ground that the orders did not at least provide an opportunity for the father to apply to vary the supervision arrangements at a later time. that the father could bring such an application is no solution given that on the basis of rice and asplund he would need to establish significant changed circumstances before being permitted to have his case heard on the merits. (emphasis added)  6] it appears that the guideline stems from a premise founded in the “undesirability of, and the practical difficulties associated with, long term supervision in a children’s contact centre” and the impact each and both might have on the welfare of the children concerned (boland j in moose, cited with apparent approval in slater v light and referring to “guideline for family law courts and children’s contact services, january 2007 ... published by the attorney-general’s department, the family court of australia and the federal magistrates court of australia). [297] the guideline would appear to contain four components. first, while a failure to limit supervision is not itself an error, the failure to consider a limitation upon it may constitute an error in the exercise in discretion. second is the necessity to give “cogent” reasons. thirdly, and in practical effect alternatively, is the apparent necessity for the orders to “allow for some review of the situation in the future”. fourthly is the need to give reasons reflective of the consideration of those issues. [298] as to the necessity for “cogent” reasons, in my view, reasons for judgment are either adequate to explain the exercise of discretion or they are not. inadequate reasons might attract appellate intervention – adequate reasons do not. reasons that are adequate at law might ipso facto be thought to be “cogent”. to the extent that any additional burden is intended to be placed upon a trial judge’s reasons by use of the word “cogent”, such burden is not referenced to any authority or statement of principle and i cannot, respectfully, see how any intended additional burden is justified in principle. however, as the reference to “sufficient” reasons in the passage quoted above from the later decision in slater v light suggests, the use of the word “cogent” is, as it respectfully seems to me, intended merely to reinforce the importance of reasons giving specific attention to that issue as part of providing reasons, the adequacy of which will not attract appellate intervention. [299] in a similar vein, statements such as those quoted above that orders for indefinite supervised time “should” contain provisions allowing “the opportunity to vary the supervision arrangements at a later time” cannot be seen as intended to fetter a trial judge’s discretion. thus, the apparent imperative, implicit in the use of the word “should”, is not to be seen as purporting to establish a binding principle of law, but, rather, as a guideline – the effect of which is to highlight the consideration of such a provision as a relevant matter in the exercise of the discretion in making an indefinite supervision order. [300] in summary, what emerges from the authorities by way of guideline when orders for supervised time are in contemplation is that:   consideration of a time or condition by which supervised time should cease is a relevant consideration in the exercise of the best interests discretion in making such an order, [b] as a consequence, the failure by a trial judge to take account of that relevant consideration may constitute discretionary error attracting the intervention of this court, [c] alternatively, if, having considered and rejected such a limitation, an order for indefinite supervision is made, the failure to consider or make an additional order whereby the indefinite order can be revisited in the future, may be indicative of discretionary error, and [d] given that, by operation of the act, “final” parenting orders can be revisited in any event (usually conditioned upon satisfaction of the “rule in rice v asplund”), the failure of a trial judge to provide reasons why any future change to the order is left to a party pursuing that right, as distinct from the orders providing a mechanism for the orders to be revisited, may constitute a failure to provide adequate reasons.  1] her honour’s order for supervised time is, in terms, indefinite. no reasons indicate why it is considered in the children’s best interests that the orders continue indefinitely as opposed to being limited in time or to the occurrence of a future event. no provision is made for the orders to be revisited. indeed, as earlier discussed, the reasons suggest that her honour considered that the supervision order should not be indefinite and should be subject to revision.  ] it has long been recognised that the permanent imposition of supervision upon the interaction between children and a parent is undesirable, though sometimes warranted (see slater & light [2013] famcafc 4, (2013) 48 fam lr 573 at 583–584, champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 at [209]–[215], moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108, (2008) flc 93-375 at [119], h & k [2001] famca 687 at [40]–[41], b and b [1993] famca 143, (1993) flc 92-357 at [79,780]). consideration should usually be given to whether orders can be created to avoid the permanence of the supervision or, if that is not practicable in the circumstances of the case, whether the orders for permanent supervision are instead best made unconditionally, leaving the supervised party to decide if and when he or she might bring fresh proceedings to vary the orders upon proof of changed circumstances, in the manner envisaged by rice and asplund [1978] famcafc 128, (1979) flc 90-725, as s 65d(2) of the act ordinarily allows (see gorman & huffman and anor [2016] famcafc 174).
section 60cc – the primary considerations ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.  ] the act sets out in s 60cc several matters for the court to consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests but does not seek to mandate that any one or other matter becomes determinative in any particular case. for the purposes of this case the legislation requires that there be a primary consideration given to the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents but it does not purport to prescribe how that meaningful relationship is best promoted in the circumstances of any one case.  ] it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.  0] ...to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child... those adjectives mean that children need their parents to lead by example about self-discipline. children need to learn to develop the ability to relate to others. they need to learn about the privileges and responsibility which will devolve upon them as parents. those are fundamental parts of the meaningful relationship ...  ] we accept that the benefit to be derived by a child from sibling relationships is not a matter which could be the subject of judicial notice within s144 of the evidence act 1995(cth), ...
it is not open to a judge to use section 144 of the evidence act to “inform” him or herself of matters in respect of which reasonable minds might differ.
section 60cc – the relevant additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the children’s views
the nature of the relationship of each of the children with each of their parents and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the children)
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the children, and to spend time with the children, and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parents obligation to maintain the children
the likely effect of any changes in the children circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of their parents
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with their father and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of the children’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and of either of the children’s parents, and any other characteristics of the children that the court thinks are relevant
the attitude to the children, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents
any family violence involving the children or a member of the children’s family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the children or a member of the children’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children
parental responsibility
conclusions
i do not regarded as in the best interests of the children to have them subjected to further ongoing therapies by court order.
associate: dated: 19 january 2023
dated: 19 january 2023
[1] transcript pages 78 & 79.[2] the mother accepted during her cross-examination by dr mcconaghy that she “possibly i took 15 minutes in entirety” – transcript page 279.[3] transcript pages 36-37.[4] transcript page 401.[5] transcript page 177.[6] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[8] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[9] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[10] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[11] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[12] briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34; (1938) 60 clr 336.[13] in the marriage of b [1993] famca 143; (1993) 112 flr 45, 61, 62.[14] transcript pages 177-178.[15] transcript page 51.