last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cudden & heyworth [2023] fedcfamc2f 36
orders
the court orders that:  each alternate weekend during school terms from 4.30pm on friday until 5.00pm on sunday commencing in term 1, 2023, save if the monday is a public holiday or pupil free day the time conclude at 5.00pm on the monday, (b) during victorian school term holidays for half the term holidays, and unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, for the first half commencing from the conclusion of the last day of school for the term to 5pm on the saturday nearest the midpoint of the term holiday period, (c) for half the long summer school holidays, and unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties in writing, each alternate week on a week about basis from the conclusion of the last day of the school year to 5pm 7 days later and thereafter week about commencing and concluding at 5pm, and if week about time taking place during the summer holidays falls on the week when students are expected to attend school for the start of the new school year, x will be returned to the father at 5pm 2 days prior to students attending. (d) for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing (e) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm christmas eve until 2.30pm christmas day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, (f) on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   during victorian school term holidays for half the term holidays, and unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, for the first half commencing from the conclusion of the last day of school for the term to 5pm on the saturday nearest the midpoint of the term holiday period, (c) for half the long summer school holidays, and unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties in writing, each alternate week on a week about basis from the conclusion of the last day of the school year to 5pm 7 days later and thereafter week about commencing and concluding at 5pm, and if week about time taking place during the summer holidays falls on the week when students are expected to attend school for the start of the new school year, x will be returned to the father at 5pm 2 days prior to students attending. (d) for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing (e) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm christmas eve until 2.30pm christmas day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, (f) on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   for half the long summer school holidays, and unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties in writing, each alternate week on a week about basis from the conclusion of the last day of the school year to 5pm 7 days later and thereafter week about commencing and concluding at 5pm, and if week about time taking place during the summer holidays falls on the week when students are expected to attend school for the start of the new school year, x will be returned to the father at 5pm 2 days prior to students attending. (d) for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing (e) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm christmas eve until 2.30pm christmas day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, (f) on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing (e) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm christmas eve until 2.30pm christmas day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, (f) on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm christmas eve until 2.30pm christmas day, unless otherwise agreed between the parents and maternal grandmother in writing, (f) on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   on mother’s day if x is not already spending time with the maternal grandmother, from 5.00pm on the day preceding mother’s day until 5.00pm on mother’s day, (g) on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   on each of the mother’s birthday, x’s birthday and c’s birthday from 3.30pm until 7.30pm or from 10.00am until 7.30pm on a non-school day, (h) by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   by facetime on each wednesday when x is not in the maternal grandmother’s care, from 6.00pm until 6.30pm with the maternal grandmother to place the call and the father to ensure that x is available and that his phone is able to receive the call, and at all other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents and the maternal grandmother,   on father’s day from 5.00pm on the day preceding father’s day until 5.00pm on father’s day, (b) for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas eve until 2.30pm on christmas day, and (c) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day (d) on the father’s birthday from 5.00pm the day preceding the father’s birthday until 5.00pm on the father’s birthday.   for christmas in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas eve until 2.30pm on christmas day, and (c) for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day (d) on the father’s birthday from 5.00pm the day preceding the father’s birthday until 5.00pm on the father’s birthday.   for christmas in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 2.30pm on christmas day until 2.30pm on boxing day (d) on the father’s birthday from 5.00pm the day preceding the father’s birthday until 5.00pm on the father’s birthday.   on the father’s birthday from 5.00pm the day preceding the father’s birthday until 5.00pm on the father’s birthday.   the time spent between x and the maternal grandmother will continue and the mother shall not be permitted to spend time with x until she provides a clean supervised urine drug screen to the maternal grandmother.   a true copy of these orders, (b) a copy of dr j report dated 2 november 2020, (c) a copy of the family reports: (i) the family report of ms l dated 13 october 2020, (ii) the family report of mr k dated 10 november 2021, (iii) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022 (d) a copy of the following department of families, fairness and housing documents: (i) the 91b report dated 23 march 2021, (ii) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022 (e) a copy of the reports of mr h dated 28 november 2021 and 19 september 2022, and (f) a copy of the reasons for judgment.   a copy of dr j report dated 2 november 2020, (c) a copy of the family reports: (i) the family report of ms l dated 13 october 2020, (ii) the family report of mr k dated 10 november 2021, (iii) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022 (d) a copy of the following department of families, fairness and housing documents: (i) the 91b report dated 23 march 2021, (ii) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022 (e) a copy of the reports of mr h dated 28 november 2021 and 19 september 2022, and (f) a copy of the reasons for judgment.   a copy of the family reports: (i) the family report of ms l dated 13 october 2020, (ii) the family report of mr k dated 10 november 2021, (iii) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022 (d) a copy of the following department of families, fairness and housing documents: (i) the 91b report dated 23 march 2021, (ii) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022 (e) a copy of the reports of mr h dated 28 november 2021 and 19 september 2022, and (f) a copy of the reasons for judgment.   the family report of ms l dated 13 october 2020, (ii) the family report of mr k dated 10 november 2021, (iii) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022  ) the family report of mr k dated 10 november 2021, (iii) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022  i) the family report of mr k dated 8 august 2022, and (iv) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022  ) the family report of mr k dated 16 august 2022   a copy of the following department of families, fairness and housing documents: (i) the 91b report dated 23 march 2021, (ii) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022 (e) a copy of the reports of mr h dated 28 november 2021 and 19 september 2022, and (f) a copy of the reasons for judgment.   the 91b report dated 23 march 2021, (ii) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022  ) the 67za response dated 6 october 2022, and (iii) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022  i) the 69zw response dated 23 november 2022   a copy of the reports of mr h dated 28 november 2021 and 19 september 2022, and (f) a copy of the reasons for judgment.   a copy of the reasons for judgment.   denigrating (speaking ill of), criticising, belittling, insulting or abusing the other party in front of or within hearing of the child, or allowing any other person to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings, save for time arrangements, with or within hearing of x, or allowing any other person to do so, and (c) allowing x access to any court documents or documents related to these proceedings including legal correspondence, (d) allowing x to be exposed to family violence, (e) from filming, video or voice recording x to document her behaviour at, after or around changeovers or to require her to express a view about her living and spend time arrangements.   discussing these proceedings, save for time arrangements, with or within hearing of x, or allowing any other person to do so, and (c) allowing x access to any court documents or documents related to these proceedings including legal correspondence, (d) allowing x to be exposed to family violence, (e) from filming, video or voice recording x to document her behaviour at, after or around changeovers or to require her to express a view about her living and spend time arrangements.   allowing x access to any court documents or documents related to these proceedings including legal correspondence, (d) allowing x to be exposed to family violence, (e) from filming, video or voice recording x to document her behaviour at, after or around changeovers or to require her to express a view about her living and spend time arrangements.   allowing x to be exposed to family violence, (e) from filming, video or voice recording x to document her behaviour at, after or around changeovers or to require her to express a view about her living and spend time arrangements.   from filming, video or voice recording x to document her behaviour at, after or around changeovers or to require her to express a view about her living and spend time arrangements.
reasons for judgment
judge harland:
brief chronology
history with mr n
section 69zw response during the trial
what are the issues the court must determine?
mr cudden’s protective concerns
dffh involvement informing mr cudden’s concerns
breakdown of mr cudden’s relationship with ms b heyworth
allegations of physical abuse perpetrated by ms b heyworth
allegations of emotional abuse perpetrated by ms b heyworth
mr allen: so now is your opportunity to explain that? [mr cudden]: yes. okay. yes. yes. so just using children as pawns, like, playing one against the other, just triangulating all the family members, like – you know, like putting the – for example, putting everyone where you want them and then just – yes, just a lot – you know, just opportunistic. just taking advantage. like, the – like, i can’t exactly pinpoint because she has issues verbalising because it’s fear based and i can’t ‑ ‑ ‑ mr allen: no, no? [mr cudden]: delve into the intricates, like ‑ - i would because of her age. i mean, she ‑ ‑ ‑ mr allen: the difficult is, is that what you’ve just said then [mr cudden]: yes. mr allen: is completely generalised? [mr cudden]: yes. so just trying to give you ‑ ‑ ‑ mr allen: right. there’s no examples? [mr cudden]: the whole picture of ‑ ‑ ‑ mr allen: well ‑ ‑ ‑? [mr cudden]: like, it’s, like, the nature of the beast. it’s a mr allen: [mr cudden]? ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: yes, very, very mind control, manipulate. mr allen: ‑ ‑ ‑ you’re being asked to give an example? [mr cudden]: mind control, mind control. to hopefully – she – [ms b heyworth] sees [x] as an extension of herself. okay. so she wants – she – it’s just total mind control. even all the orders, with all due respect, that [ms b heyworth] put in place with the registrar, for example, is just – it gives you an idea of the – it’s just complete control, like, mind control. she wants to keep the hook into [x]. like, if you have a look at the orders that are structured through the registrar previously she wants to – she just wants – it’s just – it’s a hook, it’s a hook. so, you know, there’s ulterior motives there. okay. and, look, i can’t – like, as i said, i’m not a psychologist. so i don’t know the exact right terminology but there’s – like, she – they’re very, very crafty people. very, very, very cunning, with all due respect. opportunist. so if you give them five minutes or one day with the child, they’re going to abuse it. like, they just abuse their times. that’s what they do. they want to hijack the mind, turn the child against – like, it’s just – like, every – from every angle on every level you can think of. so that’s – and it’s fear based as well. that’s what – that’s [ms b heyworth]’s main go-to. so it’s predatory. yes. mr allen: mr ‑ ‑ ‑? [mr cudden]: manipulative, cunning insidious. mr allen: can i – [mr cudden]: yes?‑‑‑just, yes, extremely crafty and just uses every entity as well, every single entity to her advantage. like, plays one against the other.   b heyworth]: i would like to just say one more thing. is it true, [mr cudden], that you honestly believe that i would hurt [x] when i love her and i would never hurt her? [mr cudden]: well, she’s eight. she can’t verbalise things because she’s absolutely frightened of you, because you’re an abuser. [ms b heyworth]: well, i don’t agree with that [mr cudden]: yes. you are. you’re an abuser and you target vulnerable innocent children because they’re easy targets and you know   b heyworth]: so my question was, do you honestly believe that i would hurt [x]? i love her with all my heart and i’m pretty sure you know ‑ ‑ ‑ her honour: hang on ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden], you don’t love her. her honour: ‑ ‑ ‑ you’ve just got to let him answer that [mr cudden]: you do not love her at all.
mr cudden’s perception of ms b heyworth
ms agresta: if [mr h] is correct ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: yes. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ in that your daughter, [x] ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: yes. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ is someone who is aware of your view of the family and such that she feels herself she can’t speak in a positive about her – about her maternal family, you would have to say, wouldn’t you, that it’s quite possible from you she gets a very, very, very negative and warped sense of that family, and probably feels unsafe with them because you make her feel unsafe because of the way you describe them and talk about them and feel about them? [mr cudden]: okay. so [x] is very smart. so as – so she learns from what she sees and hears. i’ve always – i’ve always taught her to always, you know, keep your eyes and ears open wherever you are. you know, i’ve taught her to the best of my ability with everything in life. unfortunately i had to teach her a lot – a lot of life skills at such a young age to give her the best chance to fend for herself, unfortunately. but, you know – that – it will go a long way. but, you know, in – regarding – look, she – i – she has a – she has her own opinion of people. she learns over – over a period of time, and that’s it. i – i don’t discourage. okay. i don’t discourage but i’m not – i’m not an enabler either. okay. ms agresta: what does that mean? [mr cudden]: i’m not an enabler.
allegation of ms b heyworth strangling ms heyworth  m]: well, it was different to the psychological abuse. i mean, it was domestic violence in front of [x], but the – the reason [mr cudden] withheld her was because they were doing it to her, whereas this was being doing – this was being done in front of her, like, domestic violence it’s still violence and it’s still abuse, but because it wasn’t actually – [x] wasn’t actually harmed, we just thought, well, you know, what – what could you do? you know, what really, what could we do, because we had, you know, some – we breached because we – i mean, i think [mr cudden] said ‑ ‑ ‑ ms agresta: yes, go on, you breached because? [ms m]: ‑ ‑ ‑ that he breached because – because of the psychological abuse that she was going through. ms agresta: yes? [ms m]: she was hysterical, but the – you know, yes, so the domestic violence obviously wasn’t actually – [x] didn’t actually get harmed, but it was actually harm in itself, the domestic violence.
ms m’s perception of ms b heyworth
mr cudden’s breaches of orders and unilateral actions
mr cudden’s failure to respond to communication
unilateral actions taken by mr cudden
video recordings of x
ms agresta: [mr cudden]? [mr cudden]: yes. i’m listening. ms agresta: if [mr h] is right about what your daughter said about those videos – let’s assume that your daughter said that – what do we make of that, that she did it to show you she loves you? what do we make of that? [mr cudden]: well, there’s nothing i can say about what [mr h] says, [mr h]. that’s her psychologist. so i’m not sure how to answer that question, with all due respect. i – like, i just don’t know how to answer that question. not sure. ms agresta: but you’re the one who talks about your daughter having a voice. you’re the one who tells us that you believe what she says. and so here she is, saying, “i’ve done that” – i mean, that’s an incredibly perceptive thing ‑ ‑ ‑? [mr cudden]: yes. so ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ for a little girl of eight to say? [mr cudden]: so i’ve – yes. ms agresta: she did it to show you that she loves you? [mr cudden]: yes. so that’s what you’re saying, but that’s not the truth. so that’s not the reality of it. so the reality of it is – is that i don’t agree with that at all. ms agresta: you don’t agree that she said it? [mr cudden]: with what you’re saying. with what you’re saying. with what you’re saying. with what you’re saying regarding trying to – with all due respect, trying to twist it around. it’s not working. so ‑ ‑ ‑ ms agresta: well, what have i twisted around? i’m just saying that’s the evidence that your? [mr cudden]: i’m – i – i’m not – like, i’m not – like, with all due respect, as i said, like, i’m not going to be entrapped.
ms heyworth
ms heyworth’s failure to address risk concerns
ms heyworth cutting x’s hair
ms b heyworth
expert reports
ms l family report – 13 october 2020  presented with a strange combination of being a precocious and mature child in some ways and as an innocent childlike young girl at other times. she was observant, smart and quick in her understanding of others and was able to speak well.
dr j psychiatric assessment report - 26 october 2020
mr k family report - 18 november 2021
mr k family report - 8 august 2022
mr k family report – 16 august 2022
cross-examination of mr k
mr allen: all right. if we – putting the nuclear option to one side, if the little girl was in the grandmother’s home from your what dealings with her and the material, would you be more confident that the child would have a relationship with the paternal family than vice versa? [mr k]: it would be supported by [ms b heyworth]. whether, when she goes into her father’s household, what is said, i don’t know, but i’m sure, you know, that’s a concern how that’s then dealt with, the fact that she’s not with him [sic] and that if he still holds the belief that she’s in a den of iniquity or, you know, witch’s cauldron or something, he won’t change. so then there might be behaviour that – or actions that follow, but i know that [ms b heyworth] will send her every second weekend. now, when i interviewed – sorry, i’m moving into your first name, now [ms b heyworth], i hope you don’t mind, but is that we didn’t talk about her becoming primary care giver. she wanted to, but she was holding off because she knew the problems that it would create and i think she was thinking of [x] by not doing that, but since i did the interviews, she has moved, because when the icl contacted me and said, “that is now her position”, i was a little surprised, because she wasn’t going to go down that road because she knew it would create problems for [x], but there’s problems already.
mr h
ms agresta: “[x] will talk in a negative way to her father and paternal grandmother about her maternal grandmother. i suspect that [x] is afraid she will lose her father’s love if she speaks good things about the grandmother. good things are what [x] calls them to me.” ms agresta: so ? [mr cudden]: through his – through his – through his expert observations, that’s maybe the conclusions he has – he has come across. and that – that – that’s fine. he’s the expert. so i’m not – that’s how it reads. you’re right. yes. ms agresta: she says bad things to you ‑ ‑ ‑? [mr cudden]: that’s how it reads. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ about ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: that’s how it reads. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑well, i mean, i don’t know what you’re actually saying when you say stuff like that? [mr cudden]: can’t really divulge any – any further. i can’t really divulge any further because i – i don’t have any further information regarding ‑ ‑ ‑ ms agresta: well, you just said to her honour that ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: where you’re going. ms agresta: you believe – wait. [mr cudden], i will tell you when ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: sorry. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ you can answer. you just said to her honour that you believe that [x] has her own mind? [mr cudden]: that’s right. yes. ms agresta: you respect her views ‑ ‑ ‑ [mr cudden]: yes. always have. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ that her – just wait. her honour: wait. ms agresta: her views are borne of her own experience? [mr cudden]: yes. ms agresta: and she is able to be open about those things to you because she knows you will protect her? [mr cudden]: yes. that’s right. ms agresta: i am suggesting to you that what mr – what i have just read out to you about what [mr h] says is sort of like the opposite of that, that in fact this isn’t somebody speaking her own mind. she is telling you what you want to hear because she knows that you have an negative view about that other family, as she calls them, and what goes on in that household and she tells you what you want to hear? [mr cudden]: in that household behind closed doors, well – look, as i said – as i said, i – i’m – i’m – i’ve heard – i hear what you’re saying, and i understand your – you know. so basically she has her own mind. i’ve always respected that. and in regards to ‑ ‑ ‑ ms agresta: well, if you heard what i said? [mr cudden]: ‑ ‑ ‑in regards to [mr h], i can’t – i can’t dispute anything. he is the expert.   h]: how can i say, those videos, i see them as very concerning in terms of this little girl has learnt that, if she does that, she will make sure she has dad’s affection. she does it all the time. you know, like, that’s not the first time – i – when i saw that video, i wasn’t surprised. i thought, you know, she – because she has done that sort of thing before where – and it’s not as heavy but – milder but, certainly, she has done it before. you know, she just wants dad to know that she wants to be with dad. she wants dad to know that she loves him and that – she loves him, you know. basically, that’s how it is. now, in terms of the psychological side, she has learnt that, if i do that with dad, dad is okay. and with the maternal grandmother, i’m okay there. so, you see, she feels okay. so i guess what i’m saying is she’s trying to resolve it herself, actually, this little girl.
ms agresta: i mean, no disrespect to you, because you’re obviously providing her a lot of support, but can i suggest to you that if what you’re saying to the court is that this situation that we have here is really psychologically dysfunctional and harmful to this child and she needs to keep seeing you to keep her sort of afloat, that’s really ‑ ‑ ‑? [mr h]: yes. ms agresta: ‑ ‑ ‑ not good enough, is it? i mean, doesn’t this child need to be placed in the household that is less deluded and less negative and less – and more fixed in, like, reality for this child? [mr h]: well, yes, maybe, but the thing is if the – if [x] keeps seeing me or someone like me, that’s fine ..... who understands the conflict between the two sides. because if she sees mum – on the maternal – say, for example, she – she wasn’t to see the father’s side at all, then – then the conflict would be extreme, and if – and if, say, dad was to see her every second weekend like it is now with the mother, then the mother might withhold – sorry, the maternal side might withhold as well, and i mean ‑ ‑ ‑
x’s current wellbeing
risk of harm – mr k
ms agresta: of course, her honour has to look at that because that’s one of the issues here, and in those sorts of cases then it’s trite, but i mean i will say it anyway, isn’t it true to say that what we’re confronted with is a weighing up of, on the one hand leaving [x] where she is and not causing her disruption into the short and medium term. allowing her to stay with the father, who, otherwise, in many respects in her life, manages her very well and is meeting most of her needs. where she’s at school where she’s settled enough, where she has a routine and a community. so, you know, to leave her with her father gives her that stability and that security and that – and allows her to live her life as she has for the last couple of years, but exposes her to a risk long-term of adverse emotional consequences from being exposed to the emotional harms that you describe in your report, yes? [mr k]: well, yes, that happens when she goes to the maternal household. that’s the dilemma that her honour has to deal with
risk of harm - mr h
final orders sought
submissions with respect to parental responsibility
should the appointment of the icl be extended?
legal principles
conclusion
associate: dated: 19 january 2023
dated: 19 january 2023