last updated: 28 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
oglesby & oglesby [2023] fedcfamc2f 565
orders
the court orders:
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
short history
submissions
the wife’s preliminary applications
it is pertinent to raise an issue aired during submissions by counsel for the father where i questioned whether there was any change of circumstances or sufficient change of circumstances from the consent orders made by judge howe on 14 july 2021 confirmed by her orders of 17 september 2021 but where counsel took exception (with the proper courtesy) to the question. in response i borrow from the learned comments of my colleague harper j in malloy & stopford malloy (no.4) [2020] famca 995 where his honour opined: [15] at [23] of the july judgment i pointed out that where there are repeated interim applications regarding spousal maintenance the principle of finality, informed by questions of change of circumstances or the availability of fresh evidence, gains added prominence, and the discretion to set aside or vary an interim order must at some point be subject to the constraints imposed by the public interest in the finality of litigation. i repeated what i said in joubert and anor & verhoeven and anor [2020] famca 53 at [30] - [31]. i rely upon that statement of the law again, in particular the principles stated by brereton j in paris king investments pty ltd & 1 ors v michael normal rayhill & 2 ors [2006] nswsc 578 at [14] as follows: the general rule is that interlocutory relief is not to be reconsidered if at all that is involved is a review on the same facts as prevailed when it was originally granted or declined or on facts which ought then reasonably have been in contemplation, but that if new facts have emerged which may affect the arguability of the case for final relief or the balance of convenience, then the grant of interlocutory relief may be reconsidered. harper j also cited nettle j in the high court in re golding [2020] hca 38 where the latter said: [11] generally speaking, an applicant for interlocutory relief is required to advance all of the grounds on which he or she relies in support of the relief sought, and, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, such as, for example, the discovery of facts of which the applicant was not aware and which the applicant could not have ascertained with reasonable diligence at the time of the first application, it will ordinarily be regarded as an abuse of process to make a second application for interlocutory relief on the same or other grounds. i comment further only to say as a matter of policy that parties do not have a necessary right to the determination of an interim hearing and certainly not a multitude of interim hearings save in the advent of changed circumstances.
many, although not all, of the relevant authorities were drawn together by white j in the context of part 7aa of the migration act in the bvz16 v minister for immigration and border protection. those authorities may be catalogued in the following manner-
the word “exceptional” is to be construed as an ordinary, familiar english adjective and not as a term of art, describing a circumstance that is such as to form an exception, being something out of the ordinary, something unusual, something special or uncommon yet it need not be unique, unprecedented or very rare but it cannot be something that is regularly, routinely or normally encountered (lord bingham of cornhill cj in r v kelly (attorney general’s reference no 53 of 1998) and maan v minister for immigration and citizenship), all relevant circumstances must be examined in order to determine whether exceptional circumstances exist because even though no single factor may be exceptional, in combination the circumstances may be such as reasonably to be regarded as exceptional (brennan and dawson jj in griffiths v the queen, baker v the queen, ho v professional services review committee no 295 and hasim & ors v attorney general (cth)), and subject to the particular statutory context, circumstances will be exceptional if they are out of the ordinary or they are unusual (keifel j in hatcher v cohn & ors, lindgren j in an v minister for immigration and citizenship and my own decision in csj17 v minister for immigration and border protection). (citations omitted)
the legislative framework, and the authorities to which we have been referred, suggest that the court’s power to make orders with respect to settlement of property is not necessarily exercisable at only one time, and can properly be exercised by a succession of orders until the power to make orders with respect to property is exhausted. logic suggests that the power to make orders for settlement of property will be exhausted or “spent” when there remains no property of the parties to the marriage or either of them with respect to which orders by way of alteration of interests of property could be or have been made. in those circumstances there can be no matrimonial cause to enliven the jurisdiction to make orders for settlement of property. it is thus potentially more instructive to focus on the nature and scope of the power conferred by section 79 of the act and the nature and effect of orders made in the exercise of the power than upon attempts to categorise the kinds of orders which may be made pursuant to the power.
in relation to the variation of an interim property order bryant cj and coleman j said:  ] as we have earlier explained, in our view the focus of our attention should be whether or not the power to make orders pursuant to s 79 has been exhausted. unless it has, we see no basis in law or logic for concluding that further orders may not be made with respect to property the subject of earlier orders. there can be little doubt that the exercise of power under s 79 involves the exercise of discretion by reference to the provisions of part viii of the act. it would be surprising if, in circumstances clearly involving less than such an exercise of discretion, orders made pursuant to the power conferred by s 79(6) of the act could not be revisited and altered. indeed, there may be cases where the court could only exhaust the power conferred by s 79 in a “just and equitable” manner as required by s 79(2) of the act by altering an earlier order with respect to the property of the parties or either of them as learned senior counsel for the wife submitted.   relation to the contention that] the trial judge “erred in principle in confining the circumstances of the discretion to order an interim property settlement to compelling circumstances rather than simply to a proper case in all the circumstances” (emphasis in original). the first matter to observe is that the term “compelling circumstances” does not appear anywhere in the legislation. in exercising the power under s 79 of the act a court may make an order of the type described in s 80(1)(h). in a passage, which we have earlier referred to, the full court in harris at 79,928 said that “[s]ection 80 is intended to be a wide, enabling provision and there is no justification for imposing limitations upon its normal or ordinary meaning and operation when applied to s.79”. before us it was submitted by senior counsel for the wife that s 80 of the act confers a “free standing and unfettered discretion to entertain an application for an interim property settlement” and the court should not “circumscribe that unfettered discretion with judge-made rules”. it was submitted that it is “contrary to proper judicial practice to confine the jurisdiction ... by artificial formulae”. senior counsel for the wife submitted that the only limits on the application of s 80 “are the usual limits on the exercise of a judicial discretion” and that the overreaching criterion is the justice of the case.
9. within 14 days of the date of these orders, each party must exchange with each other party a copy of each of the following documents (to the extent such documents have not already been provided):   the documents mentioned in rule 6.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth). (b) statements for all bank or credit union accounts (including loan, mortgage and credit card accounts) in which the party has an interest for the period from 12 months before the date of separation to the date of these orders, (c) any documents which:  support the information contained in the party’s financial statement / financial summary, (ii) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.
10. within 21 days of a party receiving a written request for a document from another party to these proceedings, the first-mentioned party must provide a copy of the requested document(s) to the requesting party to the extent they are within the first-mentioned party’s power, possession or control.
the court orders that: 1. pursuant to rule 7.26 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) leave be given for both parties to ask further questions of the single expert witness – preferably by a joint letter, but not necessarily, although such letters will need to be exchanged – as to the following:   whether or not, for the purposes of the single expert report, she had in her possession the financial statements and tax returns for d pty ltd for the financial period ended 30th of june 2021, and (b) if she did, does she still hold those documents?
2. in the event that the single expert continues to hold them she is authorised to provide copies of those documents to the solicitors for the wife and the husband. 3. these proceedings be adjourned for further hearing in the federal circuit and family court of australia at launceston on 22 december 2022 at 10.00 a.m. with parties given leave to appear via teams. 4. both parties must make, file and serve any updating affidavit material relating to disclosure issues by 4.00 p.m. on 16 december 2022.   the wife submits that the application should not be heard for the following reasons:  this is effectively the re-hearing of an application filed september 2022 and no exceptional circumstances that have arisen since this time to allow the application to be heard and are effectively an abuse of process. (ii) secondly the wife argues that the husband is non-compliant with the orders for discovery and as such the court should not hear the husband’s application, at least until such time as the breach has been purged. in this regard, the parties are continuing to embark upon a further process of discovery and disclosure and further questions will be asked of the single expert witness.  the husband’s position is that:  he is entitled to file more than 1 application for an interim property order, and (ii) in any event, there have been significant changes since the september date that should allow the matter be heard and determined.  it is the husband’s contention that:  it was the wife who prepared the zero records dated 17 june 2021 of the balance of d pty ltd as at 30 june 2021. (ii) the wife, while employed at d pty ltd, imputed accounts receivable/trade debtors, imputing the amount of $418,327 which the husband contends was incorrect. (iii) the husband contends the accountant for d pty ltd identified this error and that the records were updated to accurately reflect trade debtors of $119,121.85.
drawing upon the discretionary features mentioned in watson & de gafforj, the husband’s contempt of past orders was deliberate and is continuing, his conduct obstructed the course of justice because the breached orders seemed unlikely to ever be capable of enforcement, and there was no other reasonably feasible remedy for his default but to decline to entertain his appeal. there was no utility in adjourning the appeal and giving the husband further time within which to rectify his defaults as there was no reasonable prospect of his rectification and an adjournment would only serve to subject the parties to more delay and expense. just as in de gafforj, the husband’s multiple and continuing failures to pay significant sums of money to, or on behalf of, the wife was sufficient to invoke the discretionary application of the hadkinson principle. on balance, the discretionary considerations weighed more heavily in favour of refusal to entertain the husband’s appeal.
from the detailed discussion by the full court in fahmi of the various authorities referred to, and the express or implicit acceptance of particular statements of principle or approach, the following propositions emerge as to the discretionary rule that a party in a contempt may not be heard when a court is exercising jurisdiction under the act,   procedural justice dictates that the fact that a party has disobeyed an order of the court is not of itself a bar to the party being heard on a subsequent application brought by that party, (b) in courts exercising jurisdiction under the act, the rule, when it operates, gives rise to a discretion not to permit a party being heard. that is, unlike other jurisdictions such as new south wales and south australia where the rule is to be applied as a strict rule subject to limited exceptions, in this jurisdiction the discretionary approach applies (as to new south wales see young j in young v jackman (1986) 7 nswlr 97 at 102, 11 fam lr 331 at 335 referring to the court of appeal decision in permewan wright consolidated pty ltd v attorney-general (1978) 35 nswlr 365, and as to south australia see per bray cj (with whom mitchell and jacobs jj agreed) in short v short (1973) 7 sasr1 at11), (c) the rule applies where facts establish disobedience of an order, even though there has been no application for the party to be dealt with for contravention or contempt, and no determination has been made that the party is guilty of a contravention or contempt, (d) the court may, in its discretion, refuse to hear a party in breach of an order only if that party makes an application in the same proceedings or in the same cause in which the disobedience of an order has occurred. if the application by that party is not in the same proceedings or in the same cause of action in which the contempt has been committed, no question as to the party in alleged contempt being heard arises, (e) the question of whether the application is in the same proceeding or in the same cause is crucial and is determined by reference to the structure and content of the definition of “matrimonial cause” in the act, the relevant parts of the act and the family law rules 2004 (cth) that apply and, ultimately whether the proceedings may be identified as distinct because the nature of the relief claimed in them respectively is determinative, (f) no question as to a party being heard arises:  if that party is defending, rather than bringing, an application, (ii) on an appeal by the party to set aside the order on which the alleged contempt is unfounded, (iii) where a party applies for the purpose of purging the party’s contempt, (iv) where a party against whom contempt is alleged seeks to be heard on a submission that, having regard to the true meaning and intent of the order which the party is said to have disobeyed, the party’s actions did not constitute a breach of it, or having regard to all the circumstances, the party ought not to be treated as being in contempt.  where the discretion arises its exercise depends upon the balance between that parties right to procedural justice, including the right to be heard, and public policy considerations. those public policy considerations include that if the party’s disobedience is such that, so long as it continues, it impedes the course of justice in the cause by making it more difficult for the court to ascertain the truth, or to enforce the orders which it may make, or the party’s further application constitutes an abuse of process in the circumstances, then the court is unlikely to exercise its discretion in favour of hearing the party or entertaining the application of the party.
nondisclosure the obligation of disclosure is fundamental to the effective functioning of this jurisdiction. it is an obligation that exists both at common law and pursuant to statute. in briese & briese [1985] famca 23, (1986) flc 91-713 at [75,181], smithers j applied the house of lords decision in livesey (formerly jenkins) and jenkins [1984] ukhl 3, [1985] 1 all er 106 in determining that: ... in financial proceedings between spouses each party must make a full and frank disclosure of all material facts. in that case it was made clear that full and frank disclosure was required as a matter of principle in the light of the fact that it was the duty of the court, taking into account a number of designated criteria, to make a decision which basically involved the exercise of a discretion. [emphasis added]. his honour further stated at [75,181]: in my view it is fundamental to the whole operation of the family law act 1975 (cth) in financial cases that there is an obligation of the nature to which i have referred. livesey (formerly jenkins) v. jenkins makes it clear that mere compliance with rules of court or practice directions does not alter the basic principle of the need for full and frank disclosure by the parties. [emphasis added]....... the fact that the obligation of disclosure exists as a duty to the court, as well as the other party, is significant. it is also significant that the obligation is in respect to the disclosure of “information relevant to the dispute,” not simply one that attaches to the production of documents. in graf-salzmann & graf [2015] fcwa 68 walters j noted: ... a judge is entitled to take a "robust view" in relation to findings regarding a party's financial position (including a party's capacity to meet any proposed order) where that party has failed to make full and frank disclosure of his/her financial position: see chang v su [2002] famca 156, (2002) flc 93-117 at [71] and [72]. in efthidmiadis & efthidmiadis [1993] famca 15, (1993) flc 92-361 at [79,804], the full court said: so far as the wife is concerned, there is no doubt that she should be treated as substantially understating her income... the circumstance that the wife had a significantly greater income that she deposed to was very damaging to her on issues of credit overall and virtually ensured that she was put out of court so far as s75(2) factors were concerned. in weir & weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338 at [79,593], the full court, stated: it seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure, which follows from his honour's findings in this case, then the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party.
the husband’s application for an interim property order
in strahan, the full court held that there is a two-stage process to applications for interim partial property settlement. firstly, the procedural step, which is the question of whether the court should exercise discretion to entertain and determine the application, and secondly the substantive step, namely the nature of the order which should be made. with respect to the first step, the full court in strahan approved the approach adopted in wenz. there must exist appropriate circumstances for an interim order to be made, rather than compelling circumstances. boland & o’ryan jj commented:
132. in relation to the first stage, in our view, when considering whether to exercise the power under ss 79 and 80(1)(h) of the act to make an interim property order the “overarching consideration” is the interests of justice. it is not necessary to establish compelling circumstances. all that is required is that in the circumstances it is appropriate to exercise the power. in exercising the wide and unfettered discretion conferred by the power to make such an order, regard should be had to the fact that the usual order pursuant to s 79 is a once and for all order made after a final hearing.
their honours continued at [133] that circumstances warranting the exercise of the power at an interim stage, included where both parties consent, in urgent situations to avoid injustice, and where “one party requires funds to assist in defraying the costs of litigation without which funds an injustice may be cause.” the second step identified in strahan involves the exercise of the court’s power pursuant to s 79 of the act. insofar as it is possible in interim proceedings, this step requires the court to:   identify “the parties’ property and of their interests in it” (medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 at [69]), and (b) consider and apply the provisions of s 79 (strahan at [135]).
any interim property order should not exhaust the discretion in s 79 of the act. in strahan at [136] the full court said:
as to the third matter identified at 79,930 by the full court in harris, in discussion before us it was described as the “adjustment issue” or “claw-back issue”. it was submitted by senior counsel for the wife that it is relevant to consider whether an order would give the applicant “more than they would be indubitably entitled to on a final hearing” or alternatively “would it give them so much that it could not be adjusted on a final hearing?”. as we have observed the full court in zschokke at 83,220-221 stressed the importance of consideration of the “adjustment issue” if the power in s 80(1)(h) of the act is being exercised. we accept the submission and observe that this matter is relevant because the discretion conferred by the power in s 79 is to make such order as the court considers appropriate provided it is just and equitable to make the order in circumstances where the power will not be exhausted by the interim order. as bryant cj and coleman j observed in gabel v yardley at [69] and [72] the interim order must be capable of variation or reversal without resort to s 79a of the act or appeal. as finn j said at [126] the interim order must be “capable of alteration at any time prior to, or as part of, the final exercise of the s 79 power”.
in osferatu & osferatu [2012] famca 408, watts j at [41] made clear a detailed inquiry is not required:
as was discussed in harris and confirmed in strahan, the second step in making an interim property order is to have regard to the usual matters in a section 79 order (ss 79(2) and 79(4) fla). a detailed inquiry is not required, but there must be some assessment of section 79 factors. given it is an imprecise exercise, the interim property order has to be “conservative” so that the final outcome of property settlement will not be compromised by the interim property order. either the remaining property needs to be sufficient to meet the legitimate expectations of both parties at the final hearing, or the order that is contemplated needs to be capable of being reversed or adjusted if it is subsequently considered necessary to do so.
even if the wife were wholly successful on her version of the balance sheet (subject to the removal of the anticipated capital gains tax, sale costs and purported loan) it is the husband’s contention that the interim distribution ...does not jeopardise nor defeat the wife’s claim on a final basis.
given it is an imprecise exercise, the interim property order has to be “conservative” so that the final outcome of property settlement will not be compromised by the interim property order. either the remaining property needs to be sufficient to meet the legitimate expectations of both parties at the final hearing, or the order that is contemplated needs to be capable of being reversed or adjusted if it is subsequently considered necessary to do so.
mr wong submitted that these transactions support the argument that $115,000, or perhaps as much as $208,000, should be added back to the balance sheet. he submitted that there is currently insufficient information as to why these monies were paid to company e, and then to the husband, and it is difficult to understand how d pty ltd could afford to pay company e $208,000 when the husband claims that d pty ltd is insolvent, and
on wed, 29 sept 2021 at 09:16, [mr m] wrote: hi [mr n], i’ve had a look at the [o] file, and the balances have changed from when we ran the reports to prepare the financial statements: originally now sales $764,653.32 $762,330.33 rebate $942,512.41 $720,971.00 recycling $1,108.14 $1,108.14 trade debtors $332,093.23 $119,121.85 looking at the trade debtors, the debtor to [company p] has decreased from $231,238.61 to $35,142.95. there has been some movement with other debtors, but not to the same amount. our office wouldn’t have made any changes to the [o] file. its been changed by someone else. regards [mr m] director q pty ltd ph: ... fax: ... liability limited the husband replies: on wed, 29 sept 2021 at 11:37, [mr oglesby] wrote: talk to me re this please trade debtors $332,093.23 $119,121.85 regards [mr oglesby] ceo [company r]
determination  identify “the parties’ property and of their interests in it” (medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 at [69][6]), and (b) consider and apply the provisions of s 79 strahan at [135].   whether the trade debtors of d pty ltd are $119,121.95, as relied upon the single expert when she valued the shares of the company, or $332,000 - as referred to in the emails of september 2021, or indeed $418,000 as allegedly inputted by the wife into the company’s financial statements. this is clearly a matter to be explored at trial. if the trade debtors are more than $119,121.95 then it raises a question as to whether the value of d pty ltd’s shares are actually ‘nil’ or some higher amount. mr wong says it is simpler than that — if the figure is higher than $119,121.95 it will result in a simple new line entry in the balance sheet (on the husband’s side) for d pty ltd’s trade debtors — perhaps as high as $220,000. i am not sure if he is right, but again the ultimate outcome is unknown, and it is a matter to be explored at trial. (b) there remains a question about the inclusion of the motorbike, motor vehicle 1 and motorcycle. as shown, the husband purchased a motorbike with his amex card. whether these items should be included in the balance sheet is unclear, but this will be explored at trial. (c) whether there should be an add-back of $115,000 to the balance sheet or perhaps as much as $208,000 for monies paid by d pty ltd to company e and then partly to the husband. the husband says he did receive $115,000 but spent those monies legitimately and reasonably, but there was no proper examination as to whether these monies were, in fact, spent reasonably. whether any amount like the figures stated should be added back to the balance sheet is again a matter for trial. i cannot determine the issue on the evidence i have before me. (d) there is also the amount of the potential capital gains tax and the cost of selling the town c property. mr wong says the capital gains tax is $300,000 — the husband says it will be $245,000. the wife says the costs of sale are $50,000 — the husband says $34,000. it is impossible for me to know what the correct figures are, particularly when the sale price is unknown. (e) there is also the value of the property of $2,000,000. the valuation was obtained in june 2022. whether the sale price is less or more or the same is again unknown.   there remains a question about the inclusion of the motorbike, motor vehicle 1 and motorcycle. as shown, the husband purchased a motorbike with his amex card. whether these items should be included in the balance sheet is unclear, but this will be explored at trial. (c) whether there should be an add-back of $115,000 to the balance sheet or perhaps as much as $208,000 for monies paid by d pty ltd to company e and then partly to the husband. the husband says he did receive $115,000 but spent those monies legitimately and reasonably, but there was no proper examination as to whether these monies were, in fact, spent reasonably. whether any amount like the figures stated should be added back to the balance sheet is again a matter for trial. i cannot determine the issue on the evidence i have before me. (d) there is also the amount of the potential capital gains tax and the cost of selling the town c property. mr wong says the capital gains tax is $300,000 — the husband says it will be $245,000. the wife says the costs of sale are $50,000 — the husband says $34,000. it is impossible for me to know what the correct figures are, particularly when the sale price is unknown. (e) there is also the value of the property of $2,000,000. the valuation was obtained in june 2022. whether the sale price is less or more or the same is again unknown.   whether there should be an add-back of $115,000 to the balance sheet or perhaps as much as $208,000 for monies paid by d pty ltd to company e and then partly to the husband. the husband says he did receive $115,000 but spent those monies legitimately and reasonably, but there was no proper examination as to whether these monies were, in fact, spent reasonably. whether any amount like the figures stated should be added back to the balance sheet is again a matter for trial. i cannot determine the issue on the evidence i have before me. (d) there is also the amount of the potential capital gains tax and the cost of selling the town c property. mr wong says the capital gains tax is $300,000 — the husband says it will be $245,000. the wife says the costs of sale are $50,000 — the husband says $34,000. it is impossible for me to know what the correct figures are, particularly when the sale price is unknown. (e) there is also the value of the property of $2,000,000. the valuation was obtained in june 2022. whether the sale price is less or more or the same is again unknown.   there is also the amount of the potential capital gains tax and the cost of selling the town c property. mr wong says the capital gains tax is $300,000 — the husband says it will be $245,000. the wife says the costs of sale are $50,000 — the husband says $34,000. it is impossible for me to know what the correct figures are, particularly when the sale price is unknown. (e) there is also the value of the property of $2,000,000. the valuation was obtained in june 2022. whether the sale price is less or more or the same is again unknown.   there is also the value of the property of $2,000,000. the valuation was obtained in june 2022. whether the sale price is less or more or the same is again unknown.
associate: dated: 19 january 2023
dated: 19 january 2023
[1] reid & lynch [2010] famcafc 184.[2] accardi & russo [2022] fedcfamc1f 253.[3] malloy & stopford malloy (no.4) [2020] famca 995.[4] re golding [2020] hca 38 (“re golding”).[5] gabel & yardley [2008] famcafc 162 @ 57[6] medlow & medlow (2016) flc 93-692 at [69]