last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
stringer & nissen [2023] fedcfamc2f 61
orders
pending further order the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
introduction  dismiss the application to discharge dr p, and (b) dismiss the father’s application for paternity testing.   dismiss the father’s application for paternity testing.
the application to discharge the single expert
background   another person, who she now understands to be ms q (hereinafter “ms q”), accompanied dr p. she was told that ms q ‘will be involved in the interviews.’ at no time was ms q’s role in the process explained to her, and at no time was she asked to consent to her involvement. (b) the mother signed some forms although was not aware of what she was signing. (c) ms q was present for the entirety of the interview with dr p. the mother alleges that ‘on some occasions during my interview, ms q interrupted me and even interrupted dr p when he was speaking.’ she also observed ms q to be the one mainly taking notes. (d) ms q was actively involved in the interview process and interviewed x in dr p’ absence. (e) dr p and/or ms q made comments during the process that would give rise to an apprehension of bias. (f) ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.   the mother signed some forms although was not aware of what she was signing. (c) ms q was present for the entirety of the interview with dr p. the mother alleges that ‘on some occasions during my interview, ms q interrupted me and even interrupted dr p when he was speaking.’ she also observed ms q to be the one mainly taking notes. (d) ms q was actively involved in the interview process and interviewed x in dr p’ absence. (e) dr p and/or ms q made comments during the process that would give rise to an apprehension of bias. (f) ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.   ms q was present for the entirety of the interview with dr p. the mother alleges that ‘on some occasions during my interview, ms q interrupted me and even interrupted dr p when he was speaking.’ she also observed ms q to be the one mainly taking notes. (d) ms q was actively involved in the interview process and interviewed x in dr p’ absence. (e) dr p and/or ms q made comments during the process that would give rise to an apprehension of bias. (f) ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.   ms q was actively involved in the interview process and interviewed x in dr p’ absence. (e) dr p and/or ms q made comments during the process that would give rise to an apprehension of bias. (f) ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.   dr p and/or ms q made comments during the process that would give rise to an apprehension of bias. (f) ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.   ms q and dr p appeared to be trying to mediate between the positions taken by the parties.
...i am an approved supervisor for the australian psychological society’s (aps) college of clinical psychologists and the college of forensic psychologists, and i also hold appointment with many nsw universities to supervise both interns and registrars. it has been my routine for more than 25 years (where possible) to always have an intern or registrar present in my assessments, in part to ensure the next generation of court clinicians have the opportunity of quality mentorship that i had in my early years. that said, i can indicate that i had the opportunity to supervise [ms q’s] registrar program to become a fellow of the aps college of forensic psychologists. since that time she has continued to work with me as a junior clinician, observing my assessments and i readily invite her to ask an occasional question or make a brief comment. [ms q] is now progressing in her career to the point of starting to take on single expert – limited issues assessments, and i am currently supervising her accreditation as an fdr practitioner. i can confirm i introduced [ms q] to the parties at the commencement of their respective interviews, and as part of that, indicated that our centre is a teaching facility and that [ms q] is completing the latter stages of her credentialling [sic] under my supervision.   dr p has read and received the brief of documents, and met with the parties, their respective partners and x, (b) dr p has not written his report because he is waiting for the mother to complete three online assessments, and (c) there is some money outstanding to dr p from each party.   dr p has not written his report because he is waiting for the mother to complete three online assessments, and (c) there is some money outstanding to dr p from each party.   there is some money outstanding to dr p from each party.
the law  assist the court with matters that are within the expert witness’ knowledge and capability (rule 7.18(1) of the rules), and (b) give an objective and unbiased opinion that is also independent and impartial on matters that are within the expert witness’ knowledge and capability (rule 7.18(3)(a) of the rules).   give an objective and unbiased opinion that is also independent and impartial on matters that are within the expert witness’ knowledge and capability (rule 7.18(3)(a) of the rules).
discussion
due to the allegations of bias raised by the mother, should dr p be discharged before completing his report?  in response to her comment that ‘mr nissen now wants a paternity test so why we are here [sic],’ ms q said ‘(h)urt people, hurt people.’ the mother understood this comment to mean that mr nissen was entitled to seek a paternity test because she had hurt mr nissen by moving. (b) dr p made comments that indicated he blamed her for moving to sydney. for example, dr p told the mother that she ‘created this reality for x by unilaterally moving’ and that because she has family in town a, ‘any judge could order you back there as you created this.’ (c) dr p and ms q made comments that put the mother in a position of risk. for example, the mother alleges that in response to her discussing her fear towards the father due to family violence and his drinking, dr p told her that she ‘should give mr nissen more’ and must get over her fear of mr nissen. the mother deposes that ms q also told her that ‘mr nissen has changed’ as ‘(h)e no longer drinks alcohol and has moved on with ms r.’   dr p made comments that indicated he blamed her for moving to sydney. for example, dr p told the mother that she ‘created this reality for x by unilaterally moving’ and that because she has family in town a, ‘any judge could order you back there as you created this.’ (c) dr p and ms q made comments that put the mother in a position of risk. for example, the mother alleges that in response to her discussing her fear towards the father due to family violence and his drinking, dr p told her that she ‘should give mr nissen more’ and must get over her fear of mr nissen. the mother deposes that ms q also told her that ‘mr nissen has changed’ as ‘(h)e no longer drinks alcohol and has moved on with ms r.’   dr p and ms q made comments that put the mother in a position of risk. for example, the mother alleges that in response to her discussing her fear towards the father due to family violence and his drinking, dr p told her that she ‘should give mr nissen more’ and must get over her fear of mr nissen. the mother deposes that ms q also told her that ‘mr nissen has changed’ as ‘(h)e no longer drinks alcohol and has moved on with ms r.’   both dr p and ms q told him that he should persuade the mother ‘to give mr nissen more.’ towards the end of the interview, ms q allegedly asked mr e whether he will persuade the mother, which made him feel pressured to respond in a certain manner. (b) in disclosing to dr p that the mother fears mr nissen, dr p replied ‘ms stringer just has to get over that.’   in disclosing to dr p that the mother fears mr nissen, dr p replied ‘ms stringer just has to get over that.’
...the assertion of bias, be it apprehended or actual, on the part of the single expert, will best be able to be established through cross-examination of the single expert at the trial of the parenting proceedings...following such cross-examination, all or parts of the expert’s report may be rejected or given only limited weight by the trial judge. it is not particularly unusual, in our combined experience, for trial judges not to accept, or to only give limited weight to, the opinion of a single expert in a children’s case.
due to third party involvement in the interview process, should dr p be discharged before completing his report?  dr p was appointed because the issues in dispute fell within his established area of knowledge, but it is unclear whether the same can be said for ms q’s knowledge and capability. (b) dr p has a duty to assist the court with matters that are within his knowledge. if some of the interviews took place without him being present, and someone else took notes, he cannot attest to those matters being within his knowledge. (c) dr p is required to confirm that the opinions he expresses are independent and impartial. by involving ms q in the manner in which he did, dr p may not be expressing an independent opinion, but one arising from their joint observations and collusion. (d) dr p was appointed as the single expert with the parties’ approval and consent, not ms q. nor was ms q’s actual involvement in the interview and report writing process explained to the mother. she was not asked to consent to ms q’s presence and involvement. she was not given the opportunity to speak to her legal representative about dr p’s presence either. she felt uncomfortable with the presence of ms q. (e) she found the interview process confusing. she did not know whom to look at and was surprised that dr p deferred to ms q to explain things. as a result, she argues that the involvement of ms q in the interview process was procedurally unfair. she says that ms q’s presence compromises the interview process and the interests of justice contrary to rule 7.02(c) of the rules.   dr p has a duty to assist the court with matters that are within his knowledge. if some of the interviews took place without him being present, and someone else took notes, he cannot attest to those matters being within his knowledge. (c) dr p is required to confirm that the opinions he expresses are independent and impartial. by involving ms q in the manner in which he did, dr p may not be expressing an independent opinion, but one arising from their joint observations and collusion. (d) dr p was appointed as the single expert with the parties’ approval and consent, not ms q. nor was ms q’s actual involvement in the interview and report writing process explained to the mother. she was not asked to consent to ms q’s presence and involvement. she was not given the opportunity to speak to her legal representative about dr p’s presence either. she felt uncomfortable with the presence of ms q. (e) she found the interview process confusing. she did not know whom to look at and was surprised that dr p deferred to ms q to explain things. as a result, she argues that the involvement of ms q in the interview process was procedurally unfair. she says that ms q’s presence compromises the interview process and the interests of justice contrary to rule 7.02(c) of the rules.   dr p is required to confirm that the opinions he expresses are independent and impartial. by involving ms q in the manner in which he did, dr p may not be expressing an independent opinion, but one arising from their joint observations and collusion. (d) dr p was appointed as the single expert with the parties’ approval and consent, not ms q. nor was ms q’s actual involvement in the interview and report writing process explained to the mother. she was not asked to consent to ms q’s presence and involvement. she was not given the opportunity to speak to her legal representative about dr p’s presence either. she felt uncomfortable with the presence of ms q. (e) she found the interview process confusing. she did not know whom to look at and was surprised that dr p deferred to ms q to explain things. as a result, she argues that the involvement of ms q in the interview process was procedurally unfair. she says that ms q’s presence compromises the interview process and the interests of justice contrary to rule 7.02(c) of the rules.   dr p was appointed as the single expert with the parties’ approval and consent, not ms q. nor was ms q’s actual involvement in the interview and report writing process explained to the mother. she was not asked to consent to ms q’s presence and involvement. she was not given the opportunity to speak to her legal representative about dr p’s presence either. she felt uncomfortable with the presence of ms q. (e) she found the interview process confusing. she did not know whom to look at and was surprised that dr p deferred to ms q to explain things. as a result, she argues that the involvement of ms q in the interview process was procedurally unfair. she says that ms q’s presence compromises the interview process and the interests of justice contrary to rule 7.02(c) of the rules.   she found the interview process confusing. she did not know whom to look at and was surprised that dr p deferred to ms q to explain things. as a result, she argues that the involvement of ms q in the interview process was procedurally unfair. she says that ms q’s presence compromises the interview process and the interests of justice contrary to rule 7.02(c) of the rules.
opinions formed in the process of interviewing children are by their very nature subjective. that, however, is not a basis for rejecting, out of hand, the opinion if given by a person with the requisite specialist knowledge (see einstein j in idoport pty ltd v national australia bank ltd [2001] nswsc 123 at [83]).
conclusion
the application for paternity testing
background  the parties commenced a relationship in about 2013. they married in 2014 and separated on 14 february 2015. (b) x was born in 2014. at this time, the parties were in an intact marriage and were living together. (c) the father is named as x’s father on his birth certificate. (d) these proceedings commenced on 27 march 2019 with the mother filing an initiating application.   x was born in 2014. at this time, the parties were in an intact marriage and were living together. (c) the father is named as x’s father on his birth certificate. (d) these proceedings commenced on 27 march 2019 with the mother filing an initiating application.   the father is named as x’s father on his birth certificate. (d) these proceedings commenced on 27 march 2019 with the mother filing an initiating application.   these proceedings commenced on 27 march 2019 with the mother filing an initiating application.
associate: dated: 30 january 2023
dated: 30 january 2023
[1] see kernot & matson [2008] famca 756; nepean & treloar [2010] famca 781; bass & bass [2008] famcafc 67; (2008) flc 93-366.