last updated: 5 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sutcliff & rower (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 131
orders
amended pursuant to rule 10.13(1) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 01/02/2023
the court orders that:  removing or attempting to remove the children from the state of south australia, and (b) removing or attempting to remove the children from the care of the father,   removing or attempting to remove the children from the care of the father,
unless agreed with the father in writing via facebook message, text message or email.  via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone each monday between 5:30pm and 6:00pm south australia time, with: (i) the father to initiate the monday 5:30-6:00pm call, unless the mother has already initiated the call, and (ii) the father to arrange for the children to skype or facetime the mother on the night following the monday if for any unforeseen circumstances they miss the call, (b) via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone at any reasonable time requested by the children or any other time the mother calls provided it is at a reasonable time and no more than three times per week with the mother to initiate the call, (c) via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone on christmas day when the mother is not otherwise spending time with the children by arrangement in writing via facebook message, text message or email, and (d) such further or other time as agreed between parents in writing by facebook message, text message or email.   the father to initiate the monday 5:30-6:00pm call, unless the mother has already initiated the call, and (ii) the father to arrange for the children to skype or facetime the mother on the night following the monday if for any unforeseen circumstances they miss the call,  ) the father to arrange for the children to skype or facetime the mother on the night following the monday if for any unforeseen circumstances they miss the call,   via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone at any reasonable time requested by the children or any other time the mother calls provided it is at a reasonable time and no more than three times per week with the mother to initiate the call, (c) via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone on christmas day when the mother is not otherwise spending time with the children by arrangement in writing via facebook message, text message or email, and (d) such further or other time as agreed between parents in writing by facebook message, text message or email.   via skype, facetime, messenger, video call or telephone on christmas day when the mother is not otherwise spending time with the children by arrangement in writing via facebook message, text message or email, and (d) such further or other time as agreed between parents in writing by facebook message, text message or email.   such further or other time as agreed between parents in writing by facebook message, text message or email.   questioning the children or either of them about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speaking of the other parent, their partner, their family and friends in any manner other than respectfully, (c) denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (d) allowing others to denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (e) physically disciplining the children or allowing any other person to physically discipline the children or either of them, and (f) using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   speaking of the other parent, their partner, their family and friends in any manner other than respectfully, (c) denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (d) allowing others to denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (e) physically disciplining the children or allowing any other person to physically discipline the children or either of them, and (f) using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   denigrating or insulting the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (d) allowing others to denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (e) physically disciplining the children or allowing any other person to physically discipline the children or either of them, and (f) using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   allowing others to denigrate or insult the other parent, their partner, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (e) physically disciplining the children or allowing any other person to physically discipline the children or either of them, and (f) using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   physically disciplining the children or allowing any other person to physically discipline the children or either of them, and (f) using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   using illicit substances or drinking to excess.   keep the other parent informed at all times of their skype, facetime user name, telephone number and email address, (b) keep the other parent informed of the name and addresses of any medical treating medical or any other health practitioner who treat the children and authorise the practitioner to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the children, and (c) inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any serious medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children.   keep the other parent informed of the name and addresses of any medical treating medical or any other health practitioner who treat the children and authorise the practitioner to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the children, and (c) inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any serious medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children.   inform the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable of any serious medical condition, significant health issue or illness suffered by the children.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
questions to determine
recent history of the mother’s participation
to my dearest daughter, as you grow older i want you to fly out like a free bird. go forth and pursue all your dreams. live life to the fullest and make sure that your happiness is second to none. and while you are at it, just remember that every time you need a hug or a place to call your own, i'm always here... [ellipses in original]
to my son... [ellipses in original] never forget how much i love you and that i always will as you grow older, you will face many obstacles in life stay strong, be confident and just do your best every day may not be good but find something good in everyday follow your dreams & believe in yourself & remember to be awesome i will always be with you love, mom
... [child x], aged 8 years and [child y], aged 6 years were well presented, both dressed in clothes purchased by the father. although [child x] impressed as the quieter or more subdued of the two children, it was [child y] who repeatedly and spontaneously verbalised that he was ‘missing mum’. ... neither the mother nor the children were aware that they would be seeing each other during this report process, with the mother bursting into tears when informed, and the children ‘freezing’ with astonishment, as if disbelieving the writer. subsequent observations of the children with their mother commenced with [child y] literally knocking his mother off her feet in his exuberant race across the room to physically embrace her. there were moments when [child y] seemed inarticulate with grief, silent, unresponsive and draped across his mother, at which times the mother tried to console him by patting him on the back and telling him not to worry, unable to reassure him as he voiced wanting ‘to go home with her’. indeed, [child y] asked the writer whether he could ‘go home with mum’ and he seemed sad and frustrated when he could find no one who could give him the answer he wanted in this regard. although [child x] referred to her mother ‘missing them’ and that she too missed her mother, she seemed intuitively aware of a ‘bigger picture’ in that her mother might be ‘struggling’ to care for them. she referred to her mother leaving them with their older sisters and going to bed before them, as if this was indicative of her mother’s “struggle”. [child x] had also observed that her father’s house was ‘cleaner’ than her mother’s, and both children seemed acutely conscious of the ‘new’ clothes (and shoes) they were wearing as if ‘new’ clothes were a novelty, or an exception. ... both children spoke to their mother of having new clothes and toys bought for them by “him” since arriving in adelaide, with the father reporting that they only had inadequate and/or ill-fitting footwear and clothing when they were placed in his care by police. the children referred to their father as “he” or “[mr sutcliff]” when talking to their mother and repeatedly sought reassurance from her that they would be returning “home”, reassurances the mother was unable to give, much to her visible unhappiness. [child y] seemed the more needy of his mother’s, then his ‘pop’s’ attention, while [child x] seemed more self-reliant, often playing or drawing on her own, although there were also occasions when the mother and both children played games together on the floor. when it came time for the mother to leave, [child y] clung fiercely and quietly to his mother and he needed to be literally peeled off her by the writer and childcare worker, the latter of whom he then clung onto for some time, after the mother had left. amidst his obvious distress about not being able to leave with his mother, [child y] complained that he wanted some “bikkies” and by the time the father arrived with “bikkies” and a gift from the market for each child from [child ad] and [child f], [child y] had completely settled down and was quietly playing a game of uno. whilst it is clear that the children are missing their mother, as would be expected, [child y’s] speedy recovery after displays of emotion reflecting his need for his mother, suggests that he will adjust to his new circumstances with consistent, stable and loving support. indeed, the two children left seemingly happily with their father, excited at the prospect they were going to the zoo and/or museum with [child ad] and [child f]. ... while the current orders for the two children to live with the father is in the context of the mother’s repeated refusal to engage in a court process that has endeavoured to support the father to maintain a relationship with the children, it seems that the children’s living conditions with their mother may be such that their long term needs might be better met if they remained living with their father, than if they returned to live with their mother. certainly, information from queensland child protection services would seem to suggest that the mother has struggled to provide a hygienic and/or safe living environment for the children, even with the support of services, including twice weekly cleaners visiting the home. ... the mother referred to having been [child x] and [child y’s] primary caregiver all their lives and she questioned the merits of the two children living with the father, who she said still makes her feel ‘fearful’. she said that she had ‘fled’ to queensland almost six years ago due to alleged family violence on his part, allegations which the father refutes, claiming that the mother makes such allegations in order to justify not facilitating time with each of the father’s respective children after the end of the relationships. this is consistent with the mother acknowledging that she had become similarly fearful around [t]’s father, [mr h] (who is referenced in child protection reports, with [x] and [y] calling him ‘dad’) who she reported having become “aggressive and violent” before she separated from him, although she added that he has had no contact with [t] ‘because he moved to victoria’. the mother spoke in terms of having always acted protectively in regard to the children, with respect to the children’s ongoing relationships (or not) with their respective fathers. ... however, the mother was less able to provide a coherent account of her rationale for not participating in these court proceedings, especially in circumstances wherein she reported only having moved from her father’s home two years ago, which is where court documents were being sent to her, from the time the father initiated proceedings in 2016. nor was the mother able to explain why she ‘disappeared’ with the children after interim orders were made mid trial in 2019, allowing the father to have visits with the children in the event he travelled to queensland to see them. indeed, the mother sought to claim that the father only wanted “one visit”, which is not only contrary to the father’s report in this regard, but also lacks credibility on the mother’s part given that the father, accompanied by [g], had travelled all the way from south australia to queensland at his personal expense, to spend time with the children. the mother acknowledged that she had not understood the potential consequences of her failure to either comply with orders for her to facilitate the father’s time with [x] and [y] or to attend court events about them, until they were removed from her care on 27 march 2022, in what sounds like highly distressing circumstances for the children. the mother impressed as saddened and burdened that inaction on her part had resulted in the children having been “traumatised” by their sudden removal by commonwealth police. the mother referred to the children’s removal from her care as being viewed by her ‘mob’ in similar terms to ‘the stolen generation’ such that she reported that her trip to adelaide had been funded by her supportive indigenous family and friends. however, in interview, when reference was made to the past six years of litigation, the mother seemed more inclined to accept that it was her avoidance of these proceedings and/or her repeated failure to facilitate contact between the father and children that had caused [x] and [y] to be removed from her care. nonetheless, the mother spoke of wanting the children to return to her full time care, and of her readiness to support the father to have regular skype calls with the children. she said that the court ordered skype calls had only ceased in september 2021 after she had lost her skype connection. she denied purposely stopping or withdrawing support for the children to speak to their father, although she said that the children often spoke of not wanting to talk to him. the mother’s inability to provide a rationale for ‘disappearing’ after one visit between the children and their father after the father visited queensland to see the children, nor provide an explanation for why she changed [y]’s surname when enrolling him at school, with the queensland education department advising the father that no ‘[y]’ was enrolled at the school, instils little confidence in the writer as to the mother’s readiness to genuinely support the father’s relationship with the children if they were returned to her care. ... this addendum report would seem to indicate that [x] and [y] are adjusting as well as can be expected to the abrupt change in their living circumstances, albeit missing their mother and wanting to return “home”. it will be important that they have regular opportunities to talk to their mother, such as each night to say goodnight, at which time they could tell her about their day, whilst establishing a routine of saying goodnight to her before they go to bed. if this bedtime routine is to have a settling effect on the children, it will require the mother to be consistently available to make such calls, whilst also ensuring that she does not instil unrest in them by saying that she misses them, or wants them to return home. ... a fuller more comprehensive assessment is recommended in term 4 of 2022, before any final decisions are made about the children.
good morning parties and practitioners, as per our discussions in court yesterday, could you please provide us with a list of names that the children have been known as, recorded as, or alleged to be known or recorded as, so that judge o'shannessy can finalise his orders. thank you in advance for your assistance.
good morning. the 2 children in this matter have been known as [list of names the children have been known as] thank you for you're [sic] time [the mother].
good morning parties and practitioners, please see attached sealed interim orders made by judge o'shannessy on 4 may 2022. the matter is listed for final hearing for 3 days from 30 january 2023.
... although the aforementioned report recommended that [child x] and [child y] have “regular opportunities to talk to their mother”, it appears that the mother has made no contact with the children for the past 4½ months, apart from a birthday text to [child x] [in] 2022. ... [child x] and [child y] last saw their mother (and paternal grandfather and older half-sister [child ac]) for the child impact report on 4 april 2022. the mother has not communicated with them for more than four months, apart from texting [child x] for her 9th birthday [in] 2022. the mother provided a multiple reasons for her failure to maintain contact with [child x] and [child y], including that she has suffered from ptsd since [child x] and [child y] were “taken” from her, that she has a new phone and lost all her contact details and that she had lost her facebook account, which had been set up by [child f], from whom she is estranged. the mother was due to see the children for this family report on 24 october 2022 and when she was contacted by phone after she failed to arrive, the mother said that she had “forgot” due to the death of a close relative... ... the mother’s ten children all reportedly have no relationship with their respective fathers, with the exception of [child ag’s] father, [mr ah], who the mother reports only has “supervised” time with [child ag]. by the mother’s account, most if not all the fathers have allegedly been perpetrators of family violence, with the mother reporting that she had recently become fearful that [child aj] and [child al’s] father, [mr am], had moved back into her local area. the mother continues to allege that [child x] and [child y’s] father was controlling and verbally abusive toward her and that he had physically and verbally abused her children, including allegedly smacking [child af] with a wooden spoon, swinging [child aj] around by her hair, duct taping [child x] and yelling at [child y]. she alleged she ended the relationship and relocated to queensland to escape his violence. the father, who denied ever having been a perpetrator of family violence, either toward the mother or any of the mother’s children, including [child x] and [child y], raised concerns about the mother fabricating family violence allegations against all the fathers of her children in order to maintain sole care of them (and sole parent centrelink benefits) and to prevent the fathers from being able to have meaningful relationships with their respective child/ren. family violence would seem to be a risk factor in this matter. ... the queensland department of children, youth justice & multicultural affairs report longstanding concerns about the mother being unable to maintain a hygienic environment for the children, with concerns also raised about the mother’s household often being chaotic, with the children allegedly physically attacking one another. ... the father claimed that the department of children, youth justice & multicultural affairs department had been involved with the mother since 2003, predating his relationship with the mother, due to the mother’s unsanitary living circumstances and the mother’s alleged “association with men” with concomitant heightened risk of physical or sexual abuse of the children, which is consistent with the mother’s report that she had prevented one of the children’s father’s from having any contact with that child due to his alleged sexual abuse of one of her daughters. child safety and wellbeing appears to be a significant risk factor in this matter. ... the mother, who identified having been [child x] and [child y’s] primary carer all of their lives up to 27 march 2022, and who seeks their return to her care, expressed concern about the negative impact and trauma from the sudden severance of the two children’s attachment relationships with her and with their five siblings still remaining at home, and from their extracurricular and school friendships. she added that she and the five children in her care have been traumatised by [child x] and [child y’s] court ordered removal from queensland, with [child aj] still reportedly having nightmares. ... [the father], aged 45 years presented as open, cooperative and child focussed. he was accompanied to the assessment by the paternal grandmother, [ms l], his second oldest son, [child ad], his oldest daughter, [child f] and [child x] and [child y], all of whom participated in this report, and all of whom were interviewed separately. ... the father described the mother as “lazy”, adding, “she’d never go out of her way for the kids...like she’d never read to them...she was always on her phone...on her laptop...rarely cooking...rarely cleaning”. he added, “it was left to me to do everything and mum lived with us too for a while”. the father believed the mother was also likely to have been overwhelmed and depressed by the competing needs of her ten children, some of whom have disabilities, adding “she always referred to her depression”. ... although the father believed the children had settled in well, he reported that [child x] and [child y] are still on a waiting list to see a counsellor, and they are monitored at school as to their emotional wellbeing. he added that the children have asked “a couple of times” about why their mother does not ring them, adding that the mother ceased calling them at the end of term 2. he said that [child f] and [child x] share the largest bedroom, while [child ad] and [child y] have their own rooms, and [child l] has the granny flat. he described all the children getting on well together and that they seem mutually supportive. he added, with respect to [child x] and [child y], “i think they are happy here”. ... [the mother] impressed as struggling emotionally when endeavouring to respond to questions for the purpose of this assessment. the mother said that she had “totally forgot” about the family report. she said she had been suffering from depression and ptsd after [child x] and [child y] were removed from her care (“it’s breaking my heart”). she added that she was also dealing with the loss of a close relative from [town an]... ... the mother did not seem to have any insight as to her seeming alleged history of choosing violent and/or abusive partners, who were allegedly perpetrators of family violence... ... the mother spoke in terms of wanting [child x] and [child y] returned to her care. she said that she and the children had all been “traumatised” by their removal from the family home by “eight police...no warning...they came after lunch on sunday...i’d just come back from the shops...the kids were screaming, ‘mum please no’””... the mother expressed her outrage that the children had been forcibly removed from her care. she seemed unable to comprehend or take any responsibility for any behaviours on her part that led to this outcome such as failing to comply with orders since 2016. instead, she seemed to view herself as the victim of an injustice. during the interview, she appeared to be constantly re-living the trauma of having the children removed from her care... ... [child x], aged 9 years is in year 3... she was again well presented with a pretty flowing dress. although she continued to present as subdued or guarded at times, she also smiled a lot, maintained more eye contact than previously, and impressed as a happy child... there was a strong sense that [child x] did not want to say anything negative about either parent, but especially her mother, to whom she is likely to feel a powerful loyalty, given that her mother has been her primary carer all of her life until march 2022. ... when asked if she would like to return to live in queensland, [child x] paused at length before replying, “that’s a hard question”, adding, “i wish we could all live together...all of us”. asked whether she might like to stay with her father during school terms and spend time with her mother and maternal siblings during school holidays, [child x’s] face lit up with a smile, as though this might be a solution to her conundrum. however, when asked what she would wish for if given three wishes, she said, “live with my mum...i wish we all lived together and i wish i had a pony”. ... [child y] asked the writer if his mother was coming, and he looked away into the distance when informed she had not come, and rather than tell him she had forgotten, told him instead that she had needed to take [child aj] to hospital after [child aj] had had an epileptic fit. he nodded understandingly but he still looked momentarily bereft at the reality of not being able to see his mother that day. ... when asked whether he would like to stay living with his father, [child y] nodded in the affirmative, but his brow was furrowed as though he was conflicted or weighing up the cost of such an answer. he said, with what seemed like sadness or confusion, “mum hasn’t rung for a while”. he added, “i kinda miss my mum so much...she’s a long way away...i bet [child m] is 3 now”. he said that he still had vivid memories of having been “taken away from mum”, with some wonderment or confusion evident in his face as to why this had occurred. it was clear that [child y] had mixed feelings about wanting to stay with his father... ... the overall sense was happy, relaxed and spontaneous interactions between adult and child, with the father, [p] and the grandmother responsive and interested in whatever the children were doing... ... in 2020 and 2021, there were ongoing child protection concerns in relation to the poor hygienic living conditions in the mother’s household, including “rubbish throughout”, notwithstanding that the mother had cleaning services twice a week. however, child safety concluded in july 2021 that “no actual harm or risk of harm of a significant nature has been identified at this time...the information provided does not indicate that [list of 7 children] have experienced harm that is considered significant or detrimental in nature. whilst acknowledging the notifiers concerns the information does not suggest that [the seven children] are without a parent willing and able to meet their ongoing care and protection needs...as such...the family have enough support...further departmental intervention is not warranted at this time”. (ibid, page 12) ... [ms ao], [child y’s] year 1 teacher described [child y] as “exceptionally friendly and quite a way behind” in his learning when he arrived at the end of term 1 2022, “especially in literacy skills”. she reported that [child y] had since made “significant gains”, especially in reading, with the school’s interventions involving [child y] in small group learning and sso 1:1 support where he is showing “a really good work ethic”. ... [ms ap] seemed pleased to report that [child x] was showing “great improvement especially in reading [similar to [child y]]”, adding, “i’m thrilled with the way she’s working... she’s showing real progress”. she said that [child x] had also developed “a growth mind set...a real work ethic” and although she did poorly in a recent naplan test, her attitude to learning had changed markedly, adding, “she loves to show me her homework”. [ms ap] described [child x] as “very happy”. she said that she always arrived at school clean and well-presented and that her father is in regular contact with the school to ensure the children are up to date with any school work. she recalled [child x] approaching others in her class when she first arrived and asking them, “will you be my friend?” and then later saying, “i can’t believe i’ve got so many friends”. she concluded, seemingly indulgently “[child x’s] so popular...a lovely thing”. ... observations of the two children with their two older siblings [child ad] and [child f] and their father and paternal grandmother, “oma” and revealed relaxed, happy and spontaneous interactions, consistent with loving relationships... ... the father has consistently denied ever having been a perpetrator of family violence, either toward the mother or toward any of the mother’s children... ... whilst this assessment reveals that [child x] and [child y] seem to be thriving in their father’s care, both continue to identify that they miss their mother, with [child x] expressing a wish to live with her, but also wishing, “we all lived together”, which suggests that she is genuinely struggling to choose between her parents. the children’s sense of loss with respect to the absence of a relationship with their mother is likely to be confounded by their mother’s seeming abandonment of them, after she ceased contacting them at the end of term 2 and then failed to attend this assessment. there was no sense that the mother understood in any way the likely hurt, disappointment and confusion [child x] and [child y] are likely to be feeling as a result of her continuing failure to comply with orders. it seems that whatever orders are made, even those for her to be able to maintain contact with her children, the mother is only able to comply with orders for a short period of time, in this instance, for one term... accordingly, if the children were to be returned to her full time care in queensland, it is likely to be at the expense of any type of relationship with their father and paternal family in adelaide, with the mother having a long and established history of failing to consistently support or facilitate the children’s relationship with their father, to the extent that she is still questioning [child x’s] paternity. however, conversely, if the children remain living with their father in adelaide, it appears it will also be at the expense of any type of relationship with their mother, who has not contacted them for the past four months apart from a text wishing [child x] a happy birthday ... the geographical distance between the parties is prohibitive to any parenting arrangement other than the two children living in the primary care of one parent. furthermore, this tyranny of distance in the context of both parties being on low incomes and currently responsible for five children in their respective households, would seem to suggest that any orders for the children to spend time with the non-resident parent during school holidays, would be financially difficult to action or sustain in the long term by either party. ... in the meantime, [child x] and [child y’s] healthy, happy and seemingly well-adjusted presentations, along with the reports from their teachers of their significant progress at school, strongly argues in favour of the children remaining with their father in adelaide... recommendations the following is recommended: that the children remain living with their father.
every monday evening, the mother would call the children by phone (no video calls) on and off, but sometimes failing to call for an extended period of time. the mother had not called the children since her last communication with the children which was on june 27, 2022, at the time of filing this affidavit, with the exception of texting x on her birthday [in] 2022.  ild y], you have grown up so fast. i sometimes wish that we could go back to a time when you peeked at me from under your blanket as i tried to sneak presents under the tree. i saw you, but knowing that you were happy meant the world to me. merry christmas, my daughter!
dearest son, no matter how grown up you are, i hope your christmas season will always be magical and full of anticipation for you. may it fill your heart with joy, peace and love. merry christmas, my precious son. i love you to the moon and back.
the above family law matter has been listed before judge o’shannessy on monday 23 january 2023 at 9.30am (aedt / melbourne time) for compliance hearing. please note that 9.30am in melbourne is 8.30am in queensland and 9.00am in south australia. the hearing will proceed via microsoft teams and there is no requirement to physically attend the court building. please find the microsoft teams link in this email below. ... [emphasis in original]
please find attached sealed interim orders made in chambers today. if you have any questions please contact chambers. final hearing i refer to the above family law matter listed before judge o’shannessy on monday 30 january 2023 at 10.00 aedc [sic] for final hearing. please note that 10.00am aedt (melbourne time) is equivalent to 9.30am acdt (south australian time) and 9.00am aest (queensland time). the hearing will proceed via microsoft teams and there is no requirement to physically attend the court building. please find the microsoft teams link in this email below. please forward this link on to any counsel, instructing solicitor or client as required. attn: [ms rower] – if you have any questions about accessing the hearing, please contact chambers by reply to this email or on [...]. there are a number of other matters listed at this time. please ensure you wait on mute with your camera off until your matter is called. [emphasis in original]
the first question
the second question
the third question, which final orders should be made
... the court child consultant does not place a great deal of weight on the subpoenaed material as raising questions about the mother's living circumstances. the independent children's lawyer has some concerns about that material which would seem to suggest that her care of the children and their living conditions are sub optimal. ... it is the submission of the independent children's lawyer that the children should not be returned to the mother in circumstances where she has simply not engaged in the proceedings. that position is supported by the fact that the children clearly have a developing relationship with the school and their peers, and they now appear to be well-settled in that environment. the interviews with his other children suggest that the father is an appropriate person to have the care of the children. the independent children's lawyer is not aware of any information which would suggest that submission is incorrect. ... lastly, the independent children's lawyer supports the final subparagraph of section s60cc(3) insofar as the court should make a decision which minimises the likelihood of further legal proceedings and/or further involvement of these parties with the courts. seven years on, these proceedings need to be brought to their conclusion.
applicable law
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
primary considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationships
extent failed to take opportunity
extent of fulfilled obligations
the likely effect of any changes
practical difficulty of regular time
the capacity of the child’s parents
maturity, sex, lifestyle, and background of the children
aboriginal or torres strait island children
attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood
family violence
whether to make orders least likely to lead to further proceedings.
conclusion
change of the children’s names
associate: dated: 14 february 2023
dated: 14 february 2023