last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
beyer & beyer [2023] fedcfamc2f 59
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:  on discharge of any loan account that is secured by way of registered mortgage, (b) in payment of the costs of legal fees and disbursements incurred by the conveyancer acting for the parties, (c) in payment of the selling agent’s commission and any reasonable costs of sale incurred by the agent including marketing fees, styling costs and other agreed expenses, (d) in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (e) of the balance: (i) 37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.   in payment of the costs of legal fees and disbursements incurred by the conveyancer acting for the parties, (c) in payment of the selling agent’s commission and any reasonable costs of sale incurred by the agent including marketing fees, styling costs and other agreed expenses, (d) in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (e) of the balance: (i) 37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.   in payment of the selling agent’s commission and any reasonable costs of sale incurred by the agent including marketing fees, styling costs and other agreed expenses, (d) in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (e) of the balance: (i) 37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.   in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (e) of the balance: (i) 37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.   of the balance: (i) 37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.   37 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the applicant, and (ii) the remaining balance to the respondent.  ) the remaining balance to the respondent.
superannuation splitting order
other matters
mechanism and process of sale if parties unable to reach agreement  within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the appointment of a real estate agent failing which: (i) the husband shall nominate three local agents to the wife together with their marketing proposal, marketing fees, advertising fees, sales commission and any other relevant information, (ii) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the agent and the selection shall bind both parties. (b) within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the engagement of a conveyancer failing which: (i) the husband shall nominate three appropriately qualified conveyancers to the wife together with their fees, (ii) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the conveyancer and the selection shall bind both parties. (c) in the first instance, the property shall be listed for sale by public auction with such auction to be not more than six weeks after the due date, (d) except as otherwise, agreed, the contract of sale shall state a completion date of 42 days after exchange, (e) any up-front costs of marketing, advertising or styling shall be paid equally, (f) if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   the husband shall nominate three local agents to the wife together with their marketing proposal, marketing fees, advertising fees, sales commission and any other relevant information, (ii) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the agent and the selection shall bind both parties.  ) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the agent and the selection shall bind both parties.  i) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the agent and the selection shall bind both parties.   within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the engagement of a conveyancer failing which: (i) the husband shall nominate three appropriately qualified conveyancers to the wife together with their fees, (ii) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the conveyancer and the selection shall bind both parties. (c) in the first instance, the property shall be listed for sale by public auction with such auction to be not more than six weeks after the due date, (d) except as otherwise, agreed, the contract of sale shall state a completion date of 42 days after exchange, (e) any up-front costs of marketing, advertising or styling shall be paid equally, (f) if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   the husband shall nominate three appropriately qualified conveyancers to the wife together with their fees, (ii) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the conveyancer and the selection shall bind both parties.  ) within a further seven days, the wife shall select from the three nominees, and such selection shall bind both parties, and (iii) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the conveyancer and the selection shall bind both parties.  i) in the event the wife does not select an agent within the specified time, the husband may select the conveyancer and the selection shall bind both parties.   in the first instance, the property shall be listed for sale by public auction with such auction to be not more than six weeks after the due date, (d) except as otherwise, agreed, the contract of sale shall state a completion date of 42 days after exchange, (e) any up-front costs of marketing, advertising or styling shall be paid equally, (f) if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   except as otherwise, agreed, the contract of sale shall state a completion date of 42 days after exchange, (e) any up-front costs of marketing, advertising or styling shall be paid equally, (f) if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   any up-front costs of marketing, advertising or styling shall be paid equally, (f) if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   if the property is to be auctioned, the reserve price shall be as agreed between the parties, but failing agreement shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (g) if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   if the property is listed for sale by public auction and the property is passed-in, such party, or parties, who are present at the auction may negotiate a sale with the highest bidder, with such negotiation to bind both parties provided the agreed price is not less than three per cent below the reserve, (h) if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   if the property is passed in at auction, it shall be re-listed for sale or auction, as agreed, but failing agreement by private treaty, and (i) the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.   the listing price for ay private treaty shall be as recommended by the agent but not less than $725,000 in the case of the first listing and then in reducing increments of three per cent if the property remains unsold after six weeks.
procedural matters
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
exhibit h1
minute of orders sought by the husband dated 16 january 2023
exhibit h2
joint balance sheet
exhibit h3
bundle of financial documents (comprising 29 pages)
exhibit h4
bundle of financial documents (comprising five pages)
exhibit w1
bank f “mortgage loan account” statement for the account ending ...00 for period 1 july 2022 to 31 december 2022
exhibit w2
financial agreement pursuant to s 90uc of the family law act 1975 (cth) dated 23 july 2012
exhibit w3
summary page from the microsoft excel spreadsheet
exhibit w4
transaction history for bank f “mortgage loan account” ending ...00 as at 31 january 2022
exhibit w5
westpac esaver bank account statement for account ending ...08 for period 17 september 2010 to 18 march 2011
exhibit w6
letter to super fund d fund trustee
exhibit w7
aide memoire as to the effect of the wife’s proposed orders
defined terms   “the property” means the former matrimonial home at b street, suburb c in the australian capital territory of which the husband is the sole registered proprietor, (b) “mortgage loan account” means the account with bank f ending ...00 and secured by the property. this loan account is in the husband’s sole name and was established when he acquired the property in 2009, (c) “...06 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...06. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “g account”, (d) “...07 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...07. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “ms beyer”, (e) “...07 everyday account” means an everyday savings account with bank f in the wife’s sole name, and (f) “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.   “mortgage loan account” means the account with bank f ending ...00 and secured by the property. this loan account is in the husband’s sole name and was established when he acquired the property in 2009, (c) “...06 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...06. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “g account”, (d) “...07 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...07. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “ms beyer”, (e) “...07 everyday account” means an everyday savings account with bank f in the wife’s sole name, and (f) “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.   “...06 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...06. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “g account”, (d) “...07 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...07. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “ms beyer”, (e) “...07 everyday account” means an everyday savings account with bank f in the wife’s sole name, and (f) “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.   “...07 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...07. this account is in the parties’ joint names and is styled “ms beyer”, (e) “...07 everyday account” means an everyday savings account with bank f in the wife’s sole name, and (f) “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.   “...07 everyday account” means an everyday savings account with bank f in the wife’s sole name, and (f) “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.   “...03 offset account” means the interest offset account with bank f ending ...03. this account is in the husband’s sole name and was established with the mortgage loan account in 2009.
legal framework  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them - altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, [...]   the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.  .]   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account:   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and
[...]
the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as 'palm tree justice'. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down. .] third, whether making a property settlement order is "just and equitable" is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised "in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down". to conclude that making an order is "just and equitable" only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.  .] at [105] the primary judge referred to pierce v pierce [1998] famca 74, (1999) flc 92-844 (“pierce”). that case represents the culmination of a line of authorities bearing on the issue of how to weigh an initial contribution against other contributions made by the parties over the course of their relationship. the suggestion that an initial contribution could be “eroded” or “offset” over time by subsequent contributions made by the other party was first made in lee steere and lee steere [1985] famca 57, (1985) flc 91-626 in which the full court said at 80,078:
the longer the duration of the marriage, depending on the quality and extent of her contribution, the more the proportionality of the original contribution is reduced ... the proposition that the strength of a contribution made at the inception of a marriage is eroded, not by the passage of time but by the off-setting contribution of the other spouse, still holds true. in money and money [1994] famca 54, (1994) flc 92-485 at 81,054 (“money”) fogarty j further observed that: the term “off-setting contribution” does not necessarily mean “greater contribution”. it simply reflects the circumstance that the respective contributions of the parties over a long period of marriage may “offset'” the significance which might otherwise be attached to a greater initial contribution by one party ... the original contribution should not be carried forward as a mathematical proportion, ultimately, when it comes to the trial such a contribution is one of a number of factors to be considered. the longer the marriage the more likely it is that there will be later factors of significance, and in the ultimate the exercise is to weigh the original contribution with all other, later, factors and those later factors, whether equal or not, may in the circumstances of the individual case reduce the significance of the original contribution. finally, in pierce, after quoting fogarty j’s remarks in money, the full court said: in our opinion it is not so much a matter of erosion of contribution but a question of what weight is to be attached, in all the circumstances, to the initial contribution. it is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other relevant contributions of both the husband and the wife. in considering the weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the husband, regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that contribution. again, consistent with the authorities set out above and those which we discuss below, the import of pierce is that the weight to be attached to an initial contribution must be assessed against the rubric of all of the contributions, both financial and non-financial, made by the parties over the course of their relationship. the final authority the primary judge referred to was wallis & manning [2017] famcafc 14, (2017) flc 93-759 which was a case involving a long marriage. the family farm had been given to the parties by the husband’s father early in the marriage.
57. her honour said:
113. in considering the question of contributions, the full court said:
the length of a marriage is important, then, in assessing the respective contributions of the parties, particularly when it is said that significant capital contributions made early in the marriage are a dominant feature of that assessment. ... the gifts made by the husband’s father were made early in a long marriage. the use to which those gifts were put rendered them of fundamental importance to the parties throughout the marriage. they provided the foundation for a farming business, operated as a partnership between the husband and the wife, from which the marriage derived income during its duration. they provided land upon which the parties home was situated and, thus, a place to live particularly relevant for the purposes of this case, the full court went on to say: there can be little doubt on the evidence that each party contributed to the maximum of their respective capacities and abilities within these various roles. there was a genuine mutuality to their relationship and it, and the financial decisions and arrangements within it, were subject to the ‘unstated assumptions’ that devolve from that mutuality in wallis, the court concluded that the evidence supported a finding that the husband’s contribution should be assessed as greater than that of the wife’s and, after reviewing a range of comparable decisions, concluded that the parties’ contributions were properly assessed ‘in the proportion of 57.5% to the husband and 42.5% to the wife.’ tnotes omitted)
background
prior to cohabitation  she was working in sydney as a professional full time, (b) the parties travelled to city h for about ten days in late 2010, (c) she worked in city x for about six weeks, (d) the parties travelled to the city j for about two weeks, (e) she visited canberra on about 10 weekends, and that during her visits, the parties were engaged in social activities and outings such as going to markets, (f) two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   the parties travelled to city h for about ten days in late 2010, (c) she worked in city x for about six weeks, (d) the parties travelled to the city j for about two weeks, (e) she visited canberra on about 10 weekends, and that during her visits, the parties were engaged in social activities and outings such as going to markets, (f) two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   she worked in city x for about six weeks, (d) the parties travelled to the city j for about two weeks, (e) she visited canberra on about 10 weekends, and that during her visits, the parties were engaged in social activities and outings such as going to markets, (f) two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   the parties travelled to the city j for about two weeks, (e) she visited canberra on about 10 weekends, and that during her visits, the parties were engaged in social activities and outings such as going to markets, (f) two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   she visited canberra on about 10 weekends, and that during her visits, the parties were engaged in social activities and outings such as going to markets, (f) two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   two other friends of the husband assisted the husband with the work. she did not dispute that “mr k” also assisted the husband, and (g) each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.   each party met their own expenses, although they may have shared the cost of dinner.
late 2010: cohabitation  the husband owned the property with a value of $410,000, subject to a home loan in the sum of about $275,000 (i.e. net about $135,000), cash of about $30,000, superannuation of about $41,000, a motor vehicle 1 and a motorcycle. in his oral evidence, the husband conceded he also had a credit card liability of about $2,500. the husband also had a furnished house including a fridge, washing machine and bed, and (b) the wife owned a motorcycle, personal effects including a laptop, superannuation of about $15,700, savings of about $24,000, and a couch.   the wife owned a motorcycle, personal effects including a laptop, superannuation of about $15,700, savings of about $24,000, and a couch.
2011 to 2012: both parties work full time
july 2012: financial agreement
as at the 21st day of june 2012 [the wife] had made contributions to the [b street, suburb c] property totally 11.20% as follows: total contributions for both [the husband] and [the wife] are $255,708.17 [the wife] and [the husband] both intend in the future to contribute to the mortgage secured against the [b street, suburb c] property ("the [b street, suburb c] mortgage") and to make other contributions to the [b street, suburb c] property. they intend to discharge the [b street, suburb c] mortgage as soon as possible. [the wife] and [the husband] acknowledge that they may each make unequal contributions to the [b street, suburb c] property. [the wife] and [the husband] agree to be individually and personally responsible for maintaining a record of their individual contributions to the [b street, suburb c] property. in addition they agree to be individually and personally responsible for obtaining and retaining source documentation to verify their individual contributions including but not limited to receipts, invoices, bank statements and cheque butts. [the wife] and [the husband] agree that at the end of each financial year they will ascertain and agree to the respective contributions they have made to the [b street, suburb c] property as at that date. for this purpose [the wife] and [the husband] will exchange their records and verifying documentation of their contributions to the [b street, suburb c] property. [the wife] and [the husband’s] agreement will be recorded in writing, dated, signed by each of them in the presence of an independent witness over the age of 18 years and retained with a copy of this financial agreement.   the husband’s contributions to the b street, suburb c property were about $227,074 or 88.8 per cent, and the wife’s contributions were about $28,633 or 11.2 per cent. the first home owner’s grant would, if included, cause these figures to alter in favour of the husband to about 89.2 per cent. a difference of 0.4 per cent is de minimis, and (b) the other assets and resources of the parties totalled $113,112, of which the husband held about 70 per cent and the wife held 30 per cent.   the other assets and resources of the parties totalled $113,112, of which the husband held about 70 per cent and the wife held 30 per cent.
2013 to august 2018: husband’s further course of study and renovations to b street, suburb c property
financial contributions including savings and superannuation   each party met their own costs of living, (b) the wife contributed to the mortgage loan account from her income, and (c) the wife accumulated superannuation, whereas the husband did not.   the wife contributed to the mortgage loan account from her income, and (c) the wife accumulated superannuation, whereas the husband did not.   the wife accumulated superannuation, whereas the husband did not.   the husband was not receiving an income, (b) the husband redrew $64,000 from the mortgage loan account, but said in his oral evidence that $16,000 was applied to relocating to the united kingdom, from which it follows he did not apply that portion to the ...06 offset account or the ...07 offset account, and (c) of the $48,000 the husband redrew for his expenses, there is no evidence that he transferred that money to the ...06 offset account and/or the ...07 offset account.   the husband redrew $64,000 from the mortgage loan account, but said in his oral evidence that $16,000 was applied to relocating to the united kingdom, from which it follows he did not apply that portion to the ...06 offset account or the ...07 offset account, and (c) of the $48,000 the husband redrew for his expenses, there is no evidence that he transferred that money to the ...06 offset account and/or the ...07 offset account.   of the $48,000 the husband redrew for his expenses, there is no evidence that he transferred that money to the ...06 offset account and/or the ...07 offset account.
physical labour and other work
33. with respect to the work undertaken by [the wife], with my assistance, she:   assisted in waterproofing the bathroom and mixing tiling glue, (b) assisted in installation of underfloor insulation, (c) assisted in wall sheeting and painting, (d) assisted in carrying materials, (e) assisted in sourcing some materials and some payments to contractors, (f) paved a small path at the front and small area in the garden, and (g) maintained the vegetable garden.   assisted in sourcing some materials and some payments to contractors,   maintained two large folders of research materials, drawings, costings and quotes, (b) kept notes of what needed to be done, and by when, (c) prepared detailed running sheets of the costs of materials and projected timelines for tasks, (d) kept photographic records of new wall frames as a reference for where drill holes for cables and plumbing should be placed, (e) helped the husband cut and install internal sheeting, (f) calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   kept notes of what needed to be done, and by when, (c) prepared detailed running sheets of the costs of materials and projected timelines for tasks, (d) kept photographic records of new wall frames as a reference for where drill holes for cables and plumbing should be placed, (e) helped the husband cut and install internal sheeting, (f) calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   prepared detailed running sheets of the costs of materials and projected timelines for tasks, (d) kept photographic records of new wall frames as a reference for where drill holes for cables and plumbing should be placed, (e) helped the husband cut and install internal sheeting, (f) calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   kept photographic records of new wall frames as a reference for where drill holes for cables and plumbing should be placed, (e) helped the husband cut and install internal sheeting, (f) calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   helped the husband cut and install internal sheeting, (f) calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   calculated room sizes for the purpose of cutting wall sheeting and insulation, (g) researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   researched how to screed a bathroom floor, how to install timber joist flooring, and wet area construction, (h) attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   attended a renovator’s forum and consulted with a carpenter about the laundry floor, which was rotten under the tiles, and (i) organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.   organised pluming quotes, and liaised with plumbers and bathroom suppliers.
when it came to physical labour, i often worked longer hours than [the husband], many times until 10pm or 11pm because he needed to lay down and rest his back.
findings as to the 2013 to 2018 period  the costs of the renovation materials were paid for equally, (b) the costs of living were met, or otherwise accounted for, equally, (c) the wife accumulated funds from income in the ...06 offset account and the ...07 offset account, (d) the wife accumulated superannuation where the husband did not, (e) the wife made payments to the mortgage loan account where the husband did not, (f) the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the costs of living were met, or otherwise accounted for, equally, (c) the wife accumulated funds from income in the ...06 offset account and the ...07 offset account, (d) the wife accumulated superannuation where the husband did not, (e) the wife made payments to the mortgage loan account where the husband did not, (f) the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the wife accumulated funds from income in the ...06 offset account and the ...07 offset account, (d) the wife accumulated superannuation where the husband did not, (e) the wife made payments to the mortgage loan account where the husband did not, (f) the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the wife accumulated superannuation where the husband did not, (e) the wife made payments to the mortgage loan account where the husband did not, (f) the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the wife made payments to the mortgage loan account where the husband did not, (f) the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the parties contributed to the property in the period 2013 to 2018 in different but real ways. both parties applied their physical, creative and intellectual effort and energy to the renovations, and (g) the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.   the wife’s external employment facilitated the husband ceasing his employment to work on the property and pursue further studies.
july 2018 to april 2021: “pause on mortgage”
august 2018 to january 2019: further studies
april 2019: move to united kingdom
final separation  1 january 2020, the balance of the ...07 offset account was $185, (b) 1 january 2020, the balance of the ...06 offset account was $38,168, and (c) 2 january 2020, a westpac bank account ending ...41, being an account in the wife’s sole name, records a credit balance of $4,679.   1 january 2020, the balance of the ...06 offset account was $38,168, and (c) 2 january 2020, a westpac bank account ending ...41, being an account in the wife’s sole name, records a credit balance of $4,679.   2 january 2020, a westpac bank account ending ...41, being an account in the wife’s sole name, records a credit balance of $4,679.
april 2020: redraw of $90,000 from mortgage loan account  $45,000 to a bank account in the husband’s sole name, and (b) $45,000 to the ...07 offset account.   $45,000 to the ...07 offset account.
february 2021 to november 2021: the b street, suburb c property
since december 2021, i have been solely responsible for meeting the costs of the mortgage and all outgoings, including repairs and maintenance, on the [b street, suburb c] property. i have also been responsible for all maintenance works on the property, including gardening, repairs, maintenance, mowing, weeding, pest control, servicing hot water system, repairing taps and leaks and so on.
consideration
what are the assets, liabilities and financial resources of the parties or either of them?
owner
description
value
h
b street, suburb c, act
725,000
anz bank account ending ...74
165
bank r account ending ...67
2,793
bank s account ending ...90
50
bank q account ending ...91
187
bank f account ending ...03 (i.e. the ...03 offset account)
5
motor vehicle 2
2,500
w
bank r account ending ...63
18,296
bank f account ending ...07
81,180
bank p, country t account ending ...60
4,965
westpac bank account ending ...41
52,442
westpac esaver account ending ...08
9,740
u insurance
18,000
non-superannuation assets
$915,323
liabilities
bank f account ending ...00
-27,604
net non-superannuation
$887,719
superannuation
suepr fund v
174,840
super fund d
262,703
aggregate superannuation
$437,543
the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property.  i accept that the husband paid $119,500 to the mortgage loan account in early 2021, and that this included redundancy money paid to him in early 2021. given the practice of recording all payments to, or in connection with the property, in the excel spreadsheet, $66,000 of redundancy money has been taken into account in the calculation of parity by april 2021, (b) there is no evidence as to the destination of the $45,000 which was redrawn from the mortgage loan account in april 2020 and applied to the husband’s account. it is possible that the same sum was repaid to the mortgage loan account in april 2021, a possibility that is increased by the fact that wife did not seek to treat it as a notional asset. if that was the case, then that portion of the $119,500 was not a “post separation contribution” as it was the transfer of pre-separation contributions to the mortgage loan account, which had been preserved in a different account during the first year of the covid-19 pandemic. it is not a matter on which i can speculate, and (c) there is no evidence of the source of funds used to pay the shortfall between the $119,500 less the redundancy money used as part of that payment (≤$66,000), and possibly less the earlier redraw of ≤$45,000. the shortfall is ≥$8,500.   there is no evidence as to the destination of the $45,000 which was redrawn from the mortgage loan account in april 2020 and applied to the husband’s account. it is possible that the same sum was repaid to the mortgage loan account in april 2021, a possibility that is increased by the fact that wife did not seek to treat it as a notional asset. if that was the case, then that portion of the $119,500 was not a “post separation contribution” as it was the transfer of pre-separation contributions to the mortgage loan account, which had been preserved in a different account during the first year of the covid-19 pandemic. it is not a matter on which i can speculate, and (c) there is no evidence of the source of funds used to pay the shortfall between the $119,500 less the redundancy money used as part of that payment (≤$66,000), and possibly less the earlier redraw of ≤$45,000. the shortfall is ≥$8,500.   there is no evidence of the source of funds used to pay the shortfall between the $119,500 less the redundancy money used as part of that payment (≤$66,000), and possibly less the earlier redraw of ≤$45,000. the shortfall is ≥$8,500.   the wife adduced no evidence as to the value of the bank p and bank r bank accounts as at separation. the combined balances of these accounts are currently $23,261. there is no evidence about what portion of those funds were accumulated “pre” and “post” separation. nevertheless, they are funds accumulated by the wife, as are the funds in the westpac ...08 account, and (b) the balance of the westpac bank account ending ...41 as at separation was $4,679. it is now $52,442. i accept this is a post separation financial contribution by the wife.   the balance of the westpac bank account ending ...41 as at separation was $4,679. it is now $52,442. i accept this is a post separation financial contribution by the wife.   as at december 2019, the balance of the ...06 offset account was $38,000. this is the account styled “g account” on the transaction history. for the reasons earlier given, i accept the wife was the contributor to the ...06 offset account in the period 2013 to 2018. in addition to those reasons, the excel spreadsheet records contributions on the wife’s side of the ledger “from [the wife’s] renovation” account. it is improbable that the “g account” ...06 offset account was other than an account used solely by the wife. the balance of $38,000 in the ...06 offset account represented money saved by the wife prior to separation. that money was transferred to the ...07 everyday account where it remains, (b) on 2 april 2020, $45,000 was transferred from the mortgage loan account to the ...06 offset account and then to the ...17 offset account. that money remained in the ...07 offset account until december 2021 when the wife transferred it to her ...07 everyday account where it remains. the conservation of property is a category of financial contribution.   on 2 april 2020, $45,000 was transferred from the mortgage loan account to the ...06 offset account and then to the ...17 offset account. that money remained in the ...07 offset account until december 2021 when the wife transferred it to her ...07 everyday account where it remains. the conservation of property is a category of financial contribution.
the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property.  the husband made greater contributions to the physical labour and associated tasks of home renovation in 2010. this favours the husband, and (b) the parties contributed in various, but equal, ways to the physical labour, project management, and administrative, creative and intellectual tasks of the renovations in 2013 to 2018.   the parties contributed in various, but equal, ways to the physical labour, project management, and administrative, creative and intellectual tasks of the renovations in 2013 to 2018.
the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent
the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage
the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) of the act so far as they are relevant.
should there be a superannuation splitting order
conclusion
associate: dated: 31 january 2023
dated: 31 january 2023