last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jamain & parslow [2023] fedcfamc2f 72
orders
the court orders on a final basis:
parental responsibility   the child's education (both current and future), (b) the child's religious and cultural upbringing, (c) the child's name, and (d) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with each parent.   the child's religious and cultural upbringing, (c) the child's name, and (d) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with each parent.   the child's name, and (d) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with each parent.   changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with each parent.   the mother shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child when the child is living with or spending time with her, and (b) the father shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child when the child is living with or spending time with him.   the father shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child when the child is living with or spending time with him.
live with and spend time with arrangements   the transitional provisions referred to in order 6 herein, and (b) the mother complying with the condition referred to in order 7 herein,   the mother complying with the condition referred to in order 7 herein,
the child will live with each party on a week about basis, with changeover to occur at 3.00pm or school finishing time on each friday.
transitional provisions  for 4 nights starting immediately: (i) in week 1: friday, 3 february 2023, to monday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (b) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1: friday to tuesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (c) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1: friday to wednesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (d) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) the child will live with the mother and father on a week about basis as referred to in order 5 herein.   in week 1: friday, 3 february 2023, to monday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning,  ) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning,   after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1: friday to tuesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (c) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1: friday to wednesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (d) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) the child will live with the mother and father on a week about basis as referred to in order 5 herein.   in week 1: friday to tuesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning,   after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) in week 1: friday to wednesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning, (d) after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) the child will live with the mother and father on a week about basis as referred to in order 5 herein.   in week 1: friday to wednesday morning, (ii) in week 2: thursday after school to friday morning,   after 8 weeks thereafter: (i) the child will live with the mother and father on a week about basis as referred to in order 5 herein.   the child will live with the mother and father on a week about basis as referred to in order 5 herein.
condition  provide a copy of the final judgment to her psychologist or psychiatrist upon whom she attends for the purpose of compliance with this order, and (b) provide written evidence to the father of the identity of the professional she is attending upon and evidence of her ongoing attendance each four months, and (c) attend upon such professional until the professional provides written evidence to the father to the effect that: (i) the professional has concluded that the mother has altered her attitudes and beliefs towards the father and her anxieties have decreased in terms of the child living with the father.   provide written evidence to the father of the identity of the professional she is attending upon and evidence of her ongoing attendance each four months, and (c) attend upon such professional until the professional provides written evidence to the father to the effect that: (i) the professional has concluded that the mother has altered her attitudes and beliefs towards the father and her anxieties have decreased in terms of the child living with the father.   attend upon such professional until the professional provides written evidence to the father to the effect that: (i) the professional has concluded that the mother has altered her attitudes and beliefs towards the father and her anxieties have decreased in terms of the child living with the father.   the professional has concluded that the mother has altered her attitudes and beliefs towards the father and her anxieties have decreased in terms of the child living with the father.
holidays  the child live with the father for the first half of the school holiday periods in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. (b) the child live with the mother for the first half of all school holiday periods in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (c) in odd numbered years the father collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to the mother at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (d) in even numbered years the mother collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to her father at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (e) the child spend time with the mother for the first week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years. (f) child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.   the child live with the mother for the first half of all school holiday periods in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (c) in odd numbered years the father collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to the mother at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (d) in even numbered years the mother collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to her father at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (e) the child spend time with the mother for the first week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years. (f) child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.   in odd numbered years the father collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to the mother at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (d) in even numbered years the mother collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to her father at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (e) the child spend time with the mother for the first week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years. (f) child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.   in even numbered years the mother collect the child at 5.00 pm on the last day of term and return the child to her father at 5.00 pm on the mid day of the school holiday period. (e) the child spend time with the mother for the first week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years. (f) child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.   the child spend time with the mother for the first week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years. (f) child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.   child spend time with the father for the last week of the december/january school holidays in odd numbered years.
christmas   in odd numbered years from 3pm christmas eve to 3pm christmas day with the father and from 3pm christmas day to 3pm boxing day with the mother, and (b) in even numbered years from 3pm christmas eve to 3pm christmas day with the mother and from 3pm christmas day to 3pm boxing day with the father.   in even numbered years from 3pm christmas eve to 3pm christmas day with the mother and from 3pm christmas day to 3pm boxing day with the father.
maternal family holiday  each year x will spend the first week of the b catholic education office published christmas school holidays with the mother (for the purpose of a maternal family holiday) commencing at 9am saturday and concluding 9am the following saturday, and (b) the child will spend the week immediately following the week referred to in order 12(a) herein with the father commencing at 9am saturday and concluding 9am the following saturday, or another week as nominated by the father.   the child will spend the week immediately following the week referred to in order 12(a) herein with the father commencing at 9am saturday and concluding 9am the following saturday, or another week as nominated by the father.
child’s birthday   if a school day, after school until 7.00pm, (b) if a non-school day, from 9.00am until 2.00pm.   if a non-school day, from 9.00am until 2.00pm.
the court notes that this order is not intended to interrupt any block holiday period provided for in these orders where the child is spending time with either parent.
changeover
communication
child attending a psychologist  each parent shall provide information as requested to the psychologist as part of the initial intake process, (b) neither parent shall seek any information from the psychologist as to the child’s counselling save for the information that the child authorises the therapist to discuss with her parents, (c) should a parent need to discuss any issue with the child’s psychologist then he or she shall first discuss this issue with the other parent and only then, through a joint approach, can the issue be raised with the child’s psychologist, (d) the mother and father are granted leave and are required to provide a copy of these orders and final judgment to the child’s treating psychologist, together with the family report of mr g, and the report of ms h, and further the icl also has such leave, and (e) the mother is restrained from making any arrangements with the child’s psychologist for joint counselling or for her own individual counselling, (f) the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.   neither parent shall seek any information from the psychologist as to the child’s counselling save for the information that the child authorises the therapist to discuss with her parents, (c) should a parent need to discuss any issue with the child’s psychologist then he or she shall first discuss this issue with the other parent and only then, through a joint approach, can the issue be raised with the child’s psychologist, (d) the mother and father are granted leave and are required to provide a copy of these orders and final judgment to the child’s treating psychologist, together with the family report of mr g, and the report of ms h, and further the icl also has such leave, and (e) the mother is restrained from making any arrangements with the child’s psychologist for joint counselling or for her own individual counselling, (f) the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.   should a parent need to discuss any issue with the child’s psychologist then he or she shall first discuss this issue with the other parent and only then, through a joint approach, can the issue be raised with the child’s psychologist, (d) the mother and father are granted leave and are required to provide a copy of these orders and final judgment to the child’s treating psychologist, together with the family report of mr g, and the report of ms h, and further the icl also has such leave, and (e) the mother is restrained from making any arrangements with the child’s psychologist for joint counselling or for her own individual counselling, (f) the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.   the mother and father are granted leave and are required to provide a copy of these orders and final judgment to the child’s treating psychologist, together with the family report of mr g, and the report of ms h, and further the icl also has such leave, and (e) the mother is restrained from making any arrangements with the child’s psychologist for joint counselling or for her own individual counselling, (f) the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.   the mother is restrained from making any arrangements with the child’s psychologist for joint counselling or for her own individual counselling, (f) the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.   the parties are to share the costs of the psychologist equally.
it is further ordered by consent on a final basis:
school
authorities
non-denigration  respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent or their family and will remove the child from the presence or hearing of any person doing so, and (b) be restrained from discussing any of the evidence given in these proceedings directly with the child or in the child’s presence or hearing and they will remove the child from any person doing so, and (c) each parent is restrained from making any court document in these proceedings available to the child.   be restrained from discussing any of the evidence given in these proceedings directly with the child or in the child’s presence or hearing and they will remove the child from any person doing so, and (c) each parent is restrained from making any court document in these proceedings available to the child.   each parent is restrained from making any court document in these proceedings available to the child.
it is further ordered on a final basis:
travel
inside of australia
outside of australia  provide the other parent with a copy of the proposed itinerary and contact details for the child, and (b) ensure the child has reasonable communication with the other parent during the holiday such as is reasonably possible given the particular destination.   ensure the child has reasonable communication with the other parent during the holiday such as is reasonably possible given the particular destination.
leave to file further parenting application
publication of this judgment   the commissioner of police, and (b) the relevant department of child safety, and (c) any medical professional (including but not limited to psychologist and counsellor) upon whom the child attends or has attended, or attends in the future, and (d) any educational institution that the child attends or has attended, and (e) to the proper officer of any institution, entity, company, court, or investigative body or investigative agency (or person/s appointed by such bodies), or other organisation (including the father’s workplace), where the mother has made any claim, complaint, raised any grievances, and/or commenced any action, based on the premise that the father has perpetrated acts of domestic or family violence against her or that he has been sexually abusive to the child.   the relevant department of child safety, and (c) any medical professional (including but not limited to psychologist and counsellor) upon whom the child attends or has attended, or attends in the future, and (d) any educational institution that the child attends or has attended, and (e) to the proper officer of any institution, entity, company, court, or investigative body or investigative agency (or person/s appointed by such bodies), or other organisation (including the father’s workplace), where the mother has made any claim, complaint, raised any grievances, and/or commenced any action, based on the premise that the father has perpetrated acts of domestic or family violence against her or that he has been sexually abusive to the child.   any medical professional (including but not limited to psychologist and counsellor) upon whom the child attends or has attended, or attends in the future, and (d) any educational institution that the child attends or has attended, and (e) to the proper officer of any institution, entity, company, court, or investigative body or investigative agency (or person/s appointed by such bodies), or other organisation (including the father’s workplace), where the mother has made any claim, complaint, raised any grievances, and/or commenced any action, based on the premise that the father has perpetrated acts of domestic or family violence against her or that he has been sexually abusive to the child.   any educational institution that the child attends or has attended, and (e) to the proper officer of any institution, entity, company, court, or investigative body or investigative agency (or person/s appointed by such bodies), or other organisation (including the father’s workplace), where the mother has made any claim, complaint, raised any grievances, and/or commenced any action, based on the premise that the father has perpetrated acts of domestic or family violence against her or that he has been sexually abusive to the child.   to the proper officer of any institution, entity, company, court, or investigative body or investigative agency (or person/s appointed by such bodies), or other organisation (including the father’s workplace), where the mother has made any claim, complaint, raised any grievances, and/or commenced any action, based on the premise that the father has perpetrated acts of domestic or family violence against her or that he has been sexually abusive to the child.
other orders
reasons for judgment
judge willis:
introduction
father’s orders sought
mother’s orders sought
independent children lawyer’s orders sought
the issues
the law
the seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. in such matters “reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
to achieve a proper balance the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.
in proceedings under pt. vii of the act in relation to a child, the court is enjoined to “regard the welfare of the child” as the paramount consideration (sec. 60d). the paramountcy of this consideration in proceedings for custody or access is preserved by sec. 64(1). the consequence is that the ultimate and paramount issue to be decided in proceedings for custody of, or access to, a child is whether the making of the order sought is in the interests of the welfare of the child. the fact that the proceedings involve an allegation that the child has been sexually abused by the parent who seeks custody or access does not alter the paramount and ultimate issue which the court has to determine, though the court’s findings on the disputed allegation of sexual abuse will naturally have an important, perhaps a decisive, impact on the resolution of that issue.”[3]
no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless.
firstly enquire into whether there is objectively an unacceptable risk. if there is the court must take steps proportionate to the degree of risk. if there is not the court may then need to consider whether the resident parent has a genuinely held belief that such a risk exists and whether that will have a significant impact on that party’s capacity as the resident parent and so impinge on the best interests of children. the court then needs to take steps proportionate to that circumstance.
background
the patient has known sensitive skin. when at dad’s she uses soap on a washer, and when at mum’s there is no soap. showers at both places. vaginal inspection. no urinary tract infection found.
father’s barber shop – illegal brothel
we are instructed that it appears you have taken [x] into the premises and she has been waiting for you while you took a massage. we are instructed that [x] said to our client that sometimes people would pick her up for a play date and she was aware of stranger danger and did not want to wait outside the premises. the letter stated we are instructed that the arrangements whereby you have this time with [x] are to come to an end and your rights to spend that time that you spend with her are going to finish, for the very obvious danger that is being created for [x]’s safety and wellbeing. the letter also states that it seems to our client that you have some form of an addiction. our client is not acting against you in any vindictive manner. safety is her only concern.
the mother will reconsider her position if the father will commit to some form of treatment or counselling for this addictive behaviour that leads you to take your daughter with you to this most inappropriate location during the time you have been spent with her. our client suggests that you admit yourself to a clinic or facility that treats addition[sic] and thereafter continue regular counselling or other treatment recommended by a qualified person. in due course, should a recognised counsellor or qualified person dealing with such addictions give a report or assessment that your behaviour has improved and you will not engage in such behaviour again while in company with [x], this can be revisited.
our client seeks an acknowledgment from you of the contents of this email and a response indicating that you agree to immediately undertake some course of treatment in order to deal with the issues raised in this email, so that there can be the eventual possibility of you having parental contact again with [x].[12]
mother suspends all time between child and father
hi [ms parslow] – i spoke to a colleague who has been connected with [w counsellors] for many years she agreed that at this stage there are several red flags but without a disclosure there really is no evidence to work with. there are also many ethical and legal considerations here which need to be taken into account. i was given the name of a private psychologist [ms y] at [v counsellors] who has worked in this space for a long time and she would be able to provide a report on any sessional work she does with [x]. [w counsellors] was nominated as an alternative contact able to refer you to a psychologist who works in the area of child protection.
the email concluded “the challenge is to be able to find someone that x connects with in a safe space where she would feel comfortable to disclose any abuse without any coercion or influencing in a way that could be legally challenge.” the mother is informed that there is no disclosure and there is no evidence to work with.   had returned from her fathers and told mother that he had taken her to a massage place, she was able to describe it, reported he liked the way the ladies massaged there and he wanted to buy one of them chocolates. the mother was aware this place was actually a brothel[13]. she informed the school of the incident and that she planned to stop contact with the father. the school made a safety notification and then the police followed it up. at the police interview [x] denied that she had been taken there. she did tell them the father had gone there. the father has denied taking her to the brothel and that he has not gone himself either.
the father has refused to voluntarily attend a sex addiction program and will not do supervised visitation as he thinks this is an admission of guilt. ...mother is worried the father has groomed her to not get her in trouble, says the mother is trying to stop him having contact[14] father said because of his work commitments he has not been able to take [x] to [ms f] and that the mother has taken and that the costs of this counselling have been shared equally.
the evidence  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
primary consideration: the need to protect the child from abuse, neglect, or family violence (section 60cc(2)(b))
family report writer’s evidence – mr g
the father’s evidence
cross-examination by the icl regarding the alleged brothel visit
the mother’s evidence
allegations of sexual abuse
allegations the father has a sex addiction
findings: sex abuse allegations and allegation of sex addiction
domestic/family violence
alleged family violence at home
father’s attendance at school barbeque
alleged family violence in the workplace
allegations of family violence regarding the carpark
the mother’s work grievance
findings: family violence
primary consideration: meaningful relationship with both parents (s60cc (2)(a))
remaining section 60cc factors
views of the child (s60cc(3)(a))
nature of relationship (s60cc(3)(b))
likely effect of changes to the child’s circumstances (s60cc(3)(d))
practical difficulties and/or expense of child spending time with either parent (s60cc(3)(e))
capacity to parent and the parents’ the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood (s60cc(3)(f) and (i))
maturity, sex, lifestyle, and background of the child and/or parents (s60cc(3)(g))
whether the child and/or parents are aboriginal child or a torres strait islander (s60cc(3)(h))
any family violence involving the child and/or member of child’s family (s60cc(3)(j) and (k))
whether it would be preferable to make orders least likely to lead to further proceeding (s60cc(3)(l))
equal shared parental responsibility
evaluation   the father does not represent an unacceptable risk to the child, (d) the allegation by the mother that the father has sexually abused the child (including grooming and drugging the child) are without foundation, (e) the allegation by the mother that the father took the child to a brothel is rejected and without foundation, (f) the mother’s allegations of family violence against the father are without foundation and the father has not committed any act of family violence against the mother in their former home, at the child’s school, in their joint workplace, or elsewhere.   the allegation by the mother that the father has sexually abused the child (including grooming and drugging the child) are without foundation, (e) the allegation by the mother that the father took the child to a brothel is rejected and without foundation, (f) the mother’s allegations of family violence against the father are without foundation and the father has not committed any act of family violence against the mother in their former home, at the child’s school, in their joint workplace, or elsewhere.   the allegation by the mother that the father took the child to a brothel is rejected and without foundation, (f) the mother’s allegations of family violence against the father are without foundation and the father has not committed any act of family violence against the mother in their former home, at the child’s school, in their joint workplace, or elsewhere.   the mother’s allegations of family violence against the father are without foundation and the father has not committed any act of family violence against the mother in their former home, at the child’s school, in their joint workplace, or elsewhere.
dated: 1 february 2023
[1] in addition to the orders in his application filed 9/4/20[2] transcript of submissions on 9 march 2022, line 45, page 10 onwards.[3] at 77,080.[4] at 77,081.[5] affidavit of 20 may 2020 at paragraph 10.[6] mother’s annexure page 68.[7] affidavit of 29 may 2020 at paragraph 25.[8] notes from v counsellors at page 14.[9] affidavit of mother of 29 may 2020 at paragraph 11.[10] affidavit of mother of 29 may 2020 at paragraph 12.[11] tender bundle of police records at page 7.[12] annexure b of the affidavit of the father 9 april 2020.[13] the father denies the mother’s evidence that this place was discussed or came up during counselling. [14] exhibit “icl 1” at page 13 and 14.[15] affidavit filed 11 february 2022 at paragraph 13.[16] order 7 of the order of 17 june 2020.[17] transcript at page 56, line 25 onwards.[18] after this event the child was interviewed by police. [19] transcript at page 34, line 1, and page 33.[20] transcript of 7 march 2022 at page 32, line 35.[21] supra.[22] transcript of 7 march 2022.[23] see the law section of this judgment. [24] family report of mr g. [25] mother’s affidavit of 15 september 2021 at paragraph 32.[26] who is not a psychologist or social worker.