last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
galla & harroun [2023] fedcfamc2f 77
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility   the mother shall notify the father of her intended decision by email, and (b) the father shall be entitled to notify the mother of his view regarding the proposed decision, such notification to be contained in one email reply to the mother, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s view prior to making the decision regarding x’s long-term care, welfare or development, and   the father shall be entitled to notify the mother of his view regarding the proposed decision, such notification to be contained in one email reply to the mother, and (c) the mother shall consider the father’s view prior to making the decision regarding x’s long-term care, welfare or development, and   the mother shall consider the father’s view prior to making the decision regarding x’s long-term care, welfare or development, and
live with
spend time with arrangements:  from the date of these orders until the commencement of term 2, 2023:- (i) in week one of each fortnight from 10:00am until 3:00pm saturday commencing saturday 4 february 2023, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from 5:00pm friday until 3:00pm saturday commencing friday 10 february 2023. (b) from the commencement of term 2, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school on friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on friday until 3:00pm saturday. (c) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 2 in 2023, for two block periods of two consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on saturday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on sunday. (d) from the commencement of term 3, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday. (e) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 3 in 2023, for two block periods of three consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in the school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm sunday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on monday. (f) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   in week one of each fortnight from 10:00am until 3:00pm saturday commencing saturday 4 february 2023, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from 5:00pm friday until 3:00pm saturday commencing friday 10 february 2023.  ) in week two of each fortnight from 5:00pm friday until 3:00pm saturday commencing friday 10 february 2023.   from the commencement of term 2, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school on friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on friday until 3:00pm saturday. (c) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 2 in 2023, for two block periods of two consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on saturday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on sunday. (d) from the commencement of term 3, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday. (e) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 3 in 2023, for two block periods of three consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in the school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm sunday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on monday. (f) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school on friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on friday until 3:00pm saturday.  ) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on friday until 3:00pm saturday.   for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 2 in 2023, for two block periods of two consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on saturday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on sunday. (d) from the commencement of term 3, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday. (e) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 3 in 2023, for two block periods of three consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in the school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm sunday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on monday. (f) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   from the commencement of term 3, 2023: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday. (e) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 3 in 2023, for two block periods of three consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in the school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm sunday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on monday. (f) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school on thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday.  ) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until 3:00pm sunday.   for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 3 in 2023, for two block periods of three consecutive nights, such time to continue in the same week one and week two pattern as provided for in the school term time, such that the child’s visit with his father in week one of the fortnight be extended to conclude at 3:00pm sunday and the child’s week two visit with the father be extended to conclude at 3:00pm on monday. (f) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter during school terms: (i) in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday. (g) for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   in week one of each fortnight from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, (ii) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday.  ) in week two of each fortnight from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school the following monday.   for the school holidays at the conclusion of term 4 in 2023, for one block period of five nights, such time to commence at 3:00pm on the first thursday of the holiday period and conclude at 3:00pm on the following tuesday.   in odd numbered years, with the mother for the first half of the holiday period and with the father for the second half of the holiday period, (b) in even numbered years, with the father for the first half of the holiday period and with the mother for the second half of the holiday period.   in even numbered years, with the father for the first half of the holiday period and with the mother for the second half of the holiday period.   in odd numbered years, with the mother for the first, third and fifth weeks of the holiday period and extending to include the seventh week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (b) in odd numbered years, with the father for the second, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the eighth week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks. (c) in even numbered years, with the mother for the second, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the eighth week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (d) in even numbered years, with the father for the first, third and fifth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the seventh week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (e) for the purposes of the above, a week is defined as commencing 3.00pm on sunday and concluding the following sunday at 3.00pm.   in odd numbered years, with the father for the second, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the eighth week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks. (c) in even numbered years, with the mother for the second, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the eighth week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (d) in even numbered years, with the father for the first, third and fifth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the seventh week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (e) for the purposes of the above, a week is defined as commencing 3.00pm on sunday and concluding the following sunday at 3.00pm.   in even numbered years, with the mother for the second, fourth and sixth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the eighth week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (d) in even numbered years, with the father for the first, third and fifth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the seventh week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (e) for the purposes of the above, a week is defined as commencing 3.00pm on sunday and concluding the following sunday at 3.00pm.   in even numbered years, with the father for the first, third and fifth weeks of the school holiday period and extending to include the seventh week in the event the school holiday period includes more than six weeks, (e) for the purposes of the above, a week is defined as commencing 3.00pm on sunday and concluding the following sunday at 3.00pm.   for the purposes of the above, a week is defined as commencing 3.00pm on sunday and concluding the following sunday at 3.00pm.   in even numbered years: (i) with the mother for the first half of the holiday period, such time to commence from the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance and conclude at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (ii) with the father for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at 3.00pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance. (a) in odd numbered years: (i) with the father for the first half of the holiday period, such time to commence from the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance and conclude at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (ii) with the mother for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at the resumption of the school term.   with the mother for the first half of the holiday period, such time to commence from the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance and conclude at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (ii) with the father for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at 3.00pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance.  ) with the father for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at 3.00pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance.   in odd numbered years: (i) with the father for the first half of the holiday period, such time to commence from the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance and conclude at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (ii) with the mother for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at the resumption of the school term.   with the father for the first half of the holiday period, such time to commence from the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance and conclude at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period. (ii) with the mother for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at the resumption of the school term.  ) with the mother for the second half of the holiday period, such time to commence at 3.00pm on the middle day of the school holiday period and conclude at the resumption of the school term.   commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of school attendance, (b) conclude at 3.00pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance, and (c) reach the ‘half way’ point at 3.00pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period.   conclude at 3.00pm on the sunday prior to the first day of school attendance, and (c) reach the ‘half way’ point at 3.00pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period.   reach the ‘half way’ point at 3.00pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period.
special occasion time   for christmas in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter: (i) with his mother from 2.00pm christmas day until 2.00pm boxing day. (ii) with his father from 2.00pm christmas eve until 2.00pm christmas day. (b) for christmas in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter: (i) with his mother from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day. (ii) with his father from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day. (c) with his mother on:- (i) the mother’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the mother’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day, (ii) country b independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm. (d) with his father on:- (i) the father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the father’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day, (ii) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.   with his mother from 2.00pm christmas day until 2.00pm boxing day. (ii) with his father from 2.00pm christmas eve until 2.00pm christmas day.  ) with his father from 2.00pm christmas eve until 2.00pm christmas day.   for christmas in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter: (i) with his mother from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day. (ii) with his father from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day. (c) with his mother on:- (i) the mother’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the mother’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day, (ii) country b independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm. (d) with his father on:- (i) the father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the father’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day, (ii) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.   with his mother from 2.00pm on christmas eve until 2.00pm on christmas day. (ii) with his father from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day.  ) with his father from 2.00pm on christmas day until 2.00pm on boxing day.   with his mother on:- (i) the mother’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the mother’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day, (ii) country b independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm. (d) with his father on:- (i) the father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the father’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day, (ii) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.   the mother’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the mother’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following mother’s day, (ii) country b independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.  ) country b independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.   with his father on:- (i) the father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the father’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day, (ii) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.   the father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on the friday prior to the father’s day weekend until the commencement of school on the day following father’s day, (ii) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.  ) country c independence day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm, (iii) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.  i) children’s day each year, if a school attendance day from the conclusion of school until 6.00pm, and if a non-school attendance day from 9.00am until 6.00pm.
changeover   the parent who is delivering x to the other parent at changeover shall as far as is practicable, cause x to enter the play area located at the mcdonalds at least 5 minutes prior to the changeover time, (b) the parent who is due to collect x shall remain at the mcdonalds for not less 10 minutes following the changeover time, (c) the parents are restrained from discussing parenting matters at changeover.   the parent who is due to collect x shall remain at the mcdonalds for not less 10 minutes following the changeover time, (c) the parents are restrained from discussing parenting matters at changeover.   the parents are restrained from discussing parenting matters at changeover.
communication
exchange of information and attendance at events   a copy of all school reports and school photo order forms for the child. (b) notification for activities that he may decide to attend, such activities being those that parents or carers are ordinarily entitled to or invited by the day-care, preschool or school to attend. (c) notification of parent/teacher nights. (d) in the event of x being taken from the day-care, preschool or school for an emergency, that the father be informed as soon as practicable.   notification for activities that he may decide to attend, such activities being those that parents or carers are ordinarily entitled to or invited by the day-care, preschool or school to attend. (c) notification of parent/teacher nights. (d) in the event of x being taken from the day-care, preschool or school for an emergency, that the father be informed as soon as practicable.   notification of parent/teacher nights. (d) in the event of x being taken from the day-care, preschool or school for an emergency, that the father be informed as soon as practicable.   in the event of x being taken from the day-care, preschool or school for an emergency, that the father be informed as soon as practicable.   the other parent is to be notified as soon as practicable. (b) the other parent is to be provided with the full details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which x attends as soon as practicable. (c) the medical practitioner or medical facility be advised that the other parent has access to the x’s medical records upon request.   the other parent is to be provided with the full details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which x attends as soon as practicable. (c) the medical practitioner or medical facility be advised that the other parent has access to the x’s medical records upon request.   the medical practitioner or medical facility be advised that the other parent has access to the x’s medical records upon request.
restraints
airport watch list order
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the competing proposals
the issues
background
1989
applicant father born in country c. the applicant father is currently aged 33 years.
1994
respondent mother born in city h, country b. the respondent mother is currently aged 28 years.
2017
the parties commence a relationship.
2018
child of the relationship, x born. x is currently aged 4 years and 3 months old.
9 december 2018
the father moves out of the home.
08 january 2020
the father commences proceedings.
26 march 2020
interim orders are made providing for x to live with the mother and spend time with the father each saturday, with changeover to occur at the father’s home.
23 june 2021
father files contravention application.
3 september 2021
court determines contravention application. court finds that alleged contraventions on 19 june 2021, 12 june 2021, 13 march 2021 and 6 march 2021 are proved, but as the mother had a reasonable excuse, they are dismissed. court varies changeover order so that changeover can be facilitated by the suburb j children’s contact service.
court varies changeover order so that changeover can be facilitated by the suburb j children’s contact service.
26 april 2022
by consent orders are made for x’s time with his father to increase. for three months – in week one from 10am until 3pm on saturday, in week two 11am until 4.30pm tuesday and from 10am until 3pm saturday. at the expiration of three months – in week from 10am until 3pm saturday and in week two from 5pm friday until 3pm saturday. changeovers to continue at suburb j children’s contact service. matter is allocated final hearing dates.
for three months – in week one from 10am until 3pm on saturday, in week two 11am until 4.30pm tuesday and from 10am until 3pm saturday. at the expiration of three months – in week from 10am until 3pm saturday and in week two from 5pm friday until 3pm saturday. changeovers to continue at suburb j children’s contact service. matter is allocated final hearing dates.
at the expiration of three months – in week from 10am until 3pm saturday and in week two from 5pm friday until 3pm saturday. changeovers to continue at suburb j children’s contact service. matter is allocated final hearing dates.
changeovers to continue at suburb j children’s contact service. matter is allocated final hearing dates.
matter is allocated final hearing dates.
23.06.2022
father files enforcement application.
17-19.10.2022
matter is listed for final hearing.
the child
when the family consultant asked [x] to accompany her for a play x shook his head and put his arms around [mr galla]. [mr galla] attempted to get [x] to let go of him and [x] became distressed. when this was attempted a second time without success, the family consultant made the decision to forgo individual play interaction with [x].”[1]
the parties
the family report
the law  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (f) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (g) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (h) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (i) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (g) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (h) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (i) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (h) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (i) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (i) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
the primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
...should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...[2]
when a father is involved in an affectionate and supportive relationship with the child it greatly affects a child’s cognitive and social development. it also instils an overall sense of well-being and self-confidence, thereby reducing the chances for [x]in engaging in risk-taking or aggressive behaviour.[3]
family violence
the october 2017 incident
you are too close to my other friend. i hate it, you are embarrassing me. cease contact with him now! if you don’t stop talking to him, the next time we are in the car i will kill us.” [4]
a ring of truth, your honour. otherwise, what it is, is the mother making this story up and frankly, your honour, she didn’t impress as a witness who seemed to make things up as she went along.
the 9 december 2018 incident
the 4 april 2020 incident
the october 2020 incident
x’s back pack and jacket
while there are elements of control reported, it would appear that the behaviour described is more consistent with a relationship characterised by high conflict. it appears that [mr galla] and [ms harroun] have experienced ongoing disagreements, mistrust over parenting styles, a high level of hostility and physical altercations on occasions with neither parent appearing to be particularly afraid or similarly fearful of the other...... it is positive that since the current to spend time arrangements have been in place there have been no reported incident of family violence between them. if the status quo continues it would seem that family violence is not a significant factor that would impact consideration.[8]
the nature of the parties’ relationship
the cutting of x’s hair
medical appointments
changeover of x between the parties
further issues
alcohol and cannabis use
physical chastisement of x
medical care and treatment
the additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
the nature of the child’s relationship with the parents and other significant persons
the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues or spend time or communicate with the child
the capacity of each parent to provide for x’s needs, including emotional and intellectual needs
the attitude to the child and responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents
because i rely on my family members compared to him. if anything was to happen to [x] i rely on my mum. my mum would actually take time off like she did two weeks ago when [x] was sick and support me with [x], but his dad would not and he has done it before where he left us hanging. so my family members will actually help me compared to him and i’m going to put someone that i rely on, as a single parent that will leave anything that they are doing to support my son. so that’s why i chose family members for that.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background including lifestyle, culture and traditions of the child and the child’s parents
whether it would be preferable to make an order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
parental responsibility
assessment of risk
live with orders
time with orders
term time
holiday time
changeover
facetime calls
communication between the parties
makeup time
passport and overseas travel
attendance at school and extra curricular events
the purchase of a motor vehicle
relocation injunctive order
order re providing x’s belongings
further orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 2 february 2023
dated: 2 february 2023
[1] family report of ms o dated 7 september 2020, paragraph 65 (“family report”). [2] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405, 83,476 at [118]-[119]; [2009] famcafc 92[3] family report, paragraph 77. [4] affidavit of ms harroun filed 14 april 2022, paragraph 13 (“mother’s affidavit”). [5] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 50. [6] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 53. [7] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 55. [8] family report, paragraph 71. [9] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 69 to 70. [10] family report, paragraph 74. [11] family report paragraph 73. [12] family report, paragraph 73. [13] ibid. [14] mother’s affidavit, annexure l. [15] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 97. [16] father’s affidavit, paragraph 64. [17] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 101. [18] family report, paragraph 78.[19] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 81.