last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
paulson & welch [2023] fedcfamc2f 167
orders
the court orders that:  where the father is required to make a non-urgent long-term decision for the child, the father shall provide the mother with twenty-one (21) days’ notice of the relevant issue, his proposed decision concerning the issue and invite the mother to have any input with respect to the decision that the father has to make, (b) if the mother wants her views to be considered, she is to respond to the father within seven (7) days, (c) the father shall ultimately make the decision concerning the long-term issue and he shall promptly advise the mother of the decision once made, however (d) where the father makes an urgent long-term decision for the child, the father shall advise the mother of the decision made as soon as practical after he has made the decision.   if the mother wants her views to be considered, she is to respond to the father within seven (7) days, (c) the father shall ultimately make the decision concerning the long-term issue and he shall promptly advise the mother of the decision once made, however (d) where the father makes an urgent long-term decision for the child, the father shall advise the mother of the decision made as soon as practical after he has made the decision.   the father shall ultimately make the decision concerning the long-term issue and he shall promptly advise the mother of the decision once made, however (d) where the father makes an urgent long-term decision for the child, the father shall advise the mother of the decision made as soon as practical after he has made the decision.   where the father makes an urgent long-term decision for the child, the father shall advise the mother of the decision made as soon as practical after he has made the decision.   during school terms: (i) each alternate weekend from 5.00pm on friday until 5.00pm sunday or 5.00pm monday should monday be a public holiday. (b) for one half of each of the school holiday periods falling at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 being the first half of the school holidays commencing at 9.00am on the first saturday following the conclusion of school and concluding at 9.00am the immediately following saturday in even numbered years and the second half of the school holidays commencing at 9.00am on the second saturday and concluding at 9.00am on the last saturday prior to the new school term in odd numbered years, (c) for the term 4 christmas school holidays in 2023 and in 2024, week about commencing from 9.00am on the first saturday of the nsw gazetted school holidays and including at 4.00pm the immediately following saturday and thereafter each alternate week, (d) thereafter from the christmas school holidays in 2025 onwards, for the first half of each holiday in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. (e) notwithstanding any other order, the child will be in the care of the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   each alternate weekend from 5.00pm on friday until 5.00pm sunday or 5.00pm monday should monday be a public holiday.   for one half of each of the school holiday periods falling at the end of terms 1, 2 and 3 being the first half of the school holidays commencing at 9.00am on the first saturday following the conclusion of school and concluding at 9.00am the immediately following saturday in even numbered years and the second half of the school holidays commencing at 9.00am on the second saturday and concluding at 9.00am on the last saturday prior to the new school term in odd numbered years, (c) for the term 4 christmas school holidays in 2023 and in 2024, week about commencing from 9.00am on the first saturday of the nsw gazetted school holidays and including at 4.00pm the immediately following saturday and thereafter each alternate week, (d) thereafter from the christmas school holidays in 2025 onwards, for the first half of each holiday in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. (e) notwithstanding any other order, the child will be in the care of the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   for the term 4 christmas school holidays in 2023 and in 2024, week about commencing from 9.00am on the first saturday of the nsw gazetted school holidays and including at 4.00pm the immediately following saturday and thereafter each alternate week, (d) thereafter from the christmas school holidays in 2025 onwards, for the first half of each holiday in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. (e) notwithstanding any other order, the child will be in the care of the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   thereafter from the christmas school holidays in 2025 onwards, for the first half of each holiday in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. (e) notwithstanding any other order, the child will be in the care of the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   notwithstanding any other order, the child will be in the care of the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   on the mother’s day weekend, from 5.00pm on friday until 4.00pm on sunday.   on the father’s day weekend and the mother’s weekend time is suspended should the child be ordinarily spending time with the mother.   denigrating the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s household or extended family in the presence or hearing of the child, or allowing the child to remain the in presence of any other person engaging in such denigration, (b) physically disciplining the child or enabling any other person to do so, (c) showing the child any court documents, (d) willingly or knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order, (e) in the case of the mother, allowing the child to remain in the presence of mr b except where the mother is present, (f) in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   physically disciplining the child or enabling any other person to do so, (c) showing the child any court documents, (d) willingly or knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order, (e) in the case of the mother, allowing the child to remain in the presence of mr b except where the mother is present, (f) in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   showing the child any court documents, (d) willingly or knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order, (e) in the case of the mother, allowing the child to remain in the presence of mr b except where the mother is present, (f) in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   willingly or knowingly exposing the child to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to this order, (e) in the case of the mother, allowing the child to remain in the presence of mr b except where the mother is present, (f) in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   in the case of the mother, allowing the child to remain in the presence of mr b except where the mother is present, (f) in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   in the case of the father, allowing the child to remain in the presence of ms c except where the father is present.   becoming seriously ill, (b) becoming hospitalised, (c) being the subject of a medical emergency or an accident requiring attendance at a hospital.   becoming hospitalised, (c) being the subject of a medical emergency or an accident requiring attendance at a hospital.   being the subject of a medical emergency or an accident requiring attendance at a hospital.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
background
short chronology
the hearing before me
the law
section 60cc – how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests primary considerations   the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
additional considerations   additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
“...all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children.”
best interests findings
section 60cc(2)(a): benefit of meaningful relationships
section 60cc(2)(b): risks of harm
risks posed by the mother
...remains abstinent from aod [alcohol and other drugs]. our times are spent addressing past aod issues that have negatively impacted [ms paulson]’s life. discussions and education relate to relapse prevention, identifying high-risk situations and people and how to appropriately deal with them and setting goals. [ms paulson] has been open in discussing her issues during our counselling sessions and has gained insight into the impact her addiction has had on the family unit. [ms paulson] is making an effort to make changes and work towards her son remaining in her care. due to [ms paulson]’s progress, i feel i am unable to offer her further support or assistance in the aod area and have made the decision to close her file.
“v6. [ms paulson] said she has only had a couple of panadol for pain. we discussed triggers and strategies now she is abstinent. we looked at [ms paulson]’s support and how to live with her mum, who is addict (stated by [ms paulson]) to panadeine forte. [ms paulson] said she doesn’t want to see her mum taking this medication.” [7]   the mother had potential access to such drugs from the maternal grandmother, even if by way of taking them without her knowing, and (b) watching her mother take panadeine forte was a “trigger” for her, which is quite a reasonable matter for the mother to raise as a trigger in circumstances such as this.   watching her mother take panadeine forte was a “trigger” for her, which is quite a reasonable matter for the mother to raise as a trigger in circumstances such as this.
physical examination is unable to be carried out patient needs a letter to court state in the past she has been treated with domestic violence and depression, panic attack advise in the past we did not really go into detail about eh deomestic violence. however, we do have nov 2018 records stating that she has an punch assault. advise her we can write a letter stating the issues but it would be best she can have a psychologist report for the court – which will be most effect she said she is doing that at moment – just lack of money she needs the letter for some excuse as she missed the court‑ordered deadline for provide drug‑free test she also wants to increase the duromine dose although she did not feel any worsening of her depression symptoms... patient become agitated and unhappy – complain that i am not listen to her, wasting her on medicare payment, stress that she will lose the daughter in the court battle with her ex who kidnapped her daughter advise her that she is too demanding and not trust me as a professional trying to help her, and there is many other patient is waiting who is delayed being seen advise her that will be the last appointment for us, otherwise i could be stressed out due to her demanding and blaming  am quoting from the gp’s notes, so any typographical errors are as the notes read.]
to whom it may concern, this letter is to mention that [ms paulson] attended the medical centre stating, following the hair follicle test in which the codeine was positive, she decided to see me as her regular gp. she told me about her addiction to codeine and sought help for that problem, and i’m working different pain management, including nsaids medications.  understand the latter to be a reference to non‑steroidal anti‑inflammatories.]
she has also been on duromine tablet, 30 to 40 milligrams, since few months ago. that may cause a positive test for amphetamine and mdma.   explain the delay in compliance, and (b) notably in relation to dr p, the letter goes on to effectively give her an “excuse” if you like, for a positive amphetamine or mdma result based on her use of duromine tablets.   notably in relation to dr p, the letter goes on to effectively give her an “excuse” if you like, for a positive amphetamine or mdma result based on her use of duromine tablets.   paulson] says she has remained abstinent from pills for many months. we worked on relapse prevention and learning to deal with pain before it becomes a problem. due to her remaining abstinent and appearing confident with her parenting, i feel i am unable to offer her any further support or assistance in the aod area and have made the decision to close her file.
a parent of a five year old child may be required to make well‑considered decisions, attend to children if in distress or ill, drive to a hospital, and/or awake when required.
and that:
any drug that compromises the ability of a parent to perform these functions effectively and safely would detrimentally impact a person’s ability to provide adequate care for teenage children.
it does appear that the mother’s use of prescription pain medication remains problematic. codeine‑based medications are highly addictive and are aimed to reduce an individual’s responsiveness. it stands to reason that excessive use of such drugs will impair a parent’s capacity to provide emotional, if not also physical care. [x] is a young child who is still highly dependent on his caregivers.
on monday, 23 august 2021, about 8.30 pm, the accused – [the mother] posted a video on a social media platform, snapchat. in the video, the accused made multiple comments claiming the victim’s partner – [being a young man who was in a relationship with the victim] wants to be with the accused. [which i take to be in a romantic way] as a result of this, the victim’s mother messaged the accused via the social media platform facebook with multiple derogatory comments made by the accused and by somebody else. the accused then said, “if you don’t back your fucking trap up right now, i’ll come to that slut’s house and fucking ragdoll her down her own stairs. test me, cunt.” on 28 august 2021, about 1.30 am, the victim received a message from the accused via facebook, telling her, “answer your phone before i pull up. i mean it.” the accused attempted to call the victim multiple times at this time. however, the victim was asleep and did not answer the calls. the accused then sent another message that said, “i’m gonna smash you because of your lil mate, so answer your phone.” once the victim woke up, she called the accused after receiving the messages. during the phone call, the accused said words to the effect of, “if your friend keeps going, i’m gonna pull up to your house” before the call was terminated. the threats sent by the accused caused the victim to fear for her safety. she attended [town t] police station to report the incident. she provided them with a written statement...   was x present or in hearing vicinity when his mother was assaulted, (b) were the women who assaulted the mother known to the mother, (c) if x was not present/not at home when the assault occurred, then where was he.   were the women who assaulted the mother known to the mother, (c) if x was not present/not at home when the assault occurred, then where was he.   if x was not present/not at home when the assault occurred, then where was he.
there were other questions, but they are not presently relevant.   no, x was not present when the assault occurred, (b) x was at suburb q skate park at the time with the mother’s sister, ms w and her niece, ms y, and another relative’s child,   x was at suburb q skate park at the time with the mother’s sister, ms w and her niece, ms y, and another relative’s child,   yes, one of the women are known to both me and mr welch. [18]
...command hallucinations to kill himself and others. he was advised to attend headspace regarding concerns for self‑harm, seeing dead people, including his mother and his brother, who had recently suicided. he was assessed as moderate risk and has previously acted on command hallucinations.
i was going to smoke it. i can’t sleep. i’ve got no serries (seroquel).
...put it in his wallet, as i didn’t want to spend it.
customer: hey bro, have you got a stick? accused: yeah, bro. accused: come to [ms paulson]’s car.
risks posed by the father
he let himself into my house. when i got out of the shower, he put his hand on my vagina, inside the towel that i had wrapped around me. i moved his hand away and told him “no”, went into my room and closed the door to get changed. [mr welch] followed me. i asked him to leave and he said, “why? i’ve seen you naked before.” i responded that i didn’t care and told him i wouldn’t sleep with him. [mr welch] argued with me. eventually, he realised that he was due at work and left.
...including pushing, throwing the mother to the ground, punching, slapping, kicking, choking and pulling hair, while the children were present.
the violence included occasions when he pushed me, threw me to the ground, punched me, slapped me, kicked me, choked me and pulled my hair.   has detailed an incident which occurred in his father’s care which indicates that his father, [mr welch], may be the perpetrator of domestic violence towards his partner, [ms c]. during this incident, [mr welch] was reported to have sworn and yelled at [ms c], blaming her for “fucking up” [x]. [x] also stated that his father slammed [ms c]’s hand in the door. history indicates domestic violence perpetrated by [mr welch] towards the mother of [x]. [21]
weighing up the competing risks
additional considerations in s 60cc(3)
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 6 february 2023
dated: 6 february 2023
[1] exhibit 2[2] see exhibit 6[3] exhibit 9[4] exhibit 5[5] exhibit 5[6] exhibit 5[7] exhibit 5[8] exhibit 3[9] exhibit 8[10] exhibit 24[11] exhibit 26[12] these prescriptions are all set out in exhibit 26[13] exhibit 22[14] see exhibit 27[15] see exhibit 28[16] exhibit 12[17] see exhibit 15[18] exhibit 21[19] see paragraphs 56 & 57 of the family report (exhibit 1)[20] exhibit 11[21] though spelt “ms c” this is one and the same person as ms c[22] exhibit 18