last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carros & carros [2023] fedcfamc2f 181
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
the adversarial expert in regards to the business valuation
7.25 conference (1) within 21 days after receiving the report of a single expert witness, the parties may enter into a written agreement about conferring with the expert witness for the purpose of clarifying the report. (2) the agreement may provide for the parties, or for one or more of them, to confer with the expert witness. (3) without limiting the scope of the conference, the parties must agree on arrangements for the conference. (4) it is intended that the parties should be free to make any arrangements for the conference that are consistent with this division.
note: for example, arrangements for a conference might include the attendance of another expert, or the provision of a supplementary report.   before participating in the conference, the expert witness must be informed of arrangements for the conference. (6) in seeking to clarify the report of the expert witness, the parties must not interrogate the expert witness. (7) if the parties do not agree about conferring with a single expert witness, the court, on application by a party, may order that a conference be held in accordance with any conditions the court determines.
7.26 questions to single expert witness (1) a party seeking to clarify the report of a single expert witness may ask questions of the single expert witness under this rule: (a) within 7 days after a conference (if any) is held under rule 7.25, or (b) if no conference is held under that rule—within 21 days after the party received the single expert witness’s report. (2) the questions must: (a) be in writing and be put once only, and (b) be only for the purpose of clarifying the single expert witness’s report, and (c) not be vexatious or oppressive, or require the single expert witness to undertake an unreasonable amount of work to answer. (3) the party must give a copy of any questions to each other party.   within 7 days after a conference (if any) is held under rule 7.25, or (b) if no conference is held under that rule—within 21 days after the party received the single expert witness’s report.   if no conference is held under that rule—within 21 days after the party received the single expert witness’s report.   be in writing and be put once only, and (b) be only for the purpose of clarifying the single expert witness’s report, and (c) not be vexatious or oppressive, or require the single expert witness to undertake an unreasonable amount of work to answer.   be only for the purpose of clarifying the single expert witness’s report, and (c) not be vexatious or oppressive, or require the single expert witness to undertake an unreasonable amount of work to answer.   not be vexatious or oppressive, or require the single expert witness to undertake an unreasonable amount of work to answer.
7.27 single expert witness’s answers (1) a single expert witness must answer a question received under rule 7.26 within 21 days after the later of the following: (a) the date the expert witness received the question, (b) the date the fees and expenses for answering the question are paid or secured. (2) an answer to a question:   the date the expert witness received the question, (b) the date the fees and expenses for answering the question are paid or secured.   the date the fees and expenses for answering the question are paid or secured.   must be in writing, and (b) must specifically refer to the question, and (c) must:  answer the substance of the question, or (ii) object to answering the question.  if the single expert witness objects to answering a question or is unable to answer a question, the single expert witness must state the reason for the objection or inability in the document containing the answers. (4) the single expert witness’s answers:   must be: (i) attached to the affidavit under subrule 7.21(2), and (ii) sent by the single expert witness to all parties at the same time, and (iii) filed by the party asking the questions, and (b) are taken to be part of the expert’s report.   attached to the affidavit under subrule 7.21(2), and (ii) sent by the single expert witness to all parties at the same time, and (iii) filed by the party asking the questions, and  ) sent by the single expert witness to all parties at the same time, and (iii) filed by the party asking the questions, and  i) filed by the party asking the questions, and
7.02 purpose of part 7.1 the purpose of this part is as follows: (a) to ensure that parties obtain expert evidence only in relation to a significant issue in dispute, (b) to restrict expert evidence to that which is necessary to resolve or determine a proceeding, (c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to ensure that parties obtain expert evidence only in relation to a significant issue in dispute, (b) to restrict expert evidence to that which is necessary to resolve or determine a proceeding, (c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to restrict expert evidence to that which is necessary to resolve or determine a proceeding, (c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single expert witness, (d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one expert witness, (e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.   to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party, if that is necessary in the interests of justice.
7.08 appointing another expert witness (1) if a single expert witness has been appointed to prepare a report or give evidence in relation to an issue, a party must not tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue without the court’s permission. (2) the court may allow a party to tender a report or adduce evidence from another expert witness on the same issue if it is satisfied that: (a) there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is a substantial body of opinion contrary to any opinion given by the single expert witness and the contrary opinion is or may be necessary for determining the issue, or (b) another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   another expert witness knows of matters, not known to the single expert witness, that may be necessary for determining the issue, or (c) there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.   there is another special reason for adducing evidence from another expert witness.  otnote omitted) the primary judge concluded that contrary to the submissions of the husband, there was not a substantial body of contrary opinion, but rather an alternate opinion. the primary judge identified: here what is presented is an alternate opinion, by a person holding a relevant expertise, mr d. in relation to the controversial area, being the significance of the leases to which the properties are subject, mr d opines that the approach to those matters offered by him is preferable. ... what he proffered was an alternate approach that he opined was superior. that is insufficient to meet the requirement of r 15.49(2)(a). what has been offered is a merely contrary opinion. under that circumstance, despite the significantly different outcome reached by the experts, the rule does not authorise the reception of the additional expert evidence.
... ground 2.2 contended error by the primary judge in applying r 15.49(2)(c) of the old rules in not considering in aggregate, each of the husband’s contentions, but rather adopting a “tick-and-flick” approach. in form, the ground, being as gracious as we can, should have been drafted with more care. it was both inappropriate and incorrect to describe the primary judge’s approach as a “tick-and-flick”. there is, however, force to the argument that in considering “another special reason”, the primary judge did not consider overall the thrust of the husband’s case for the appointment of another expert. as much is made plain in the husband’s summary of argument: as set out in the case outline document it was the cumulative aspect of the complaints together with the differences between the two valuers that was sought to underpin the argument that there was a special reason for being able to rely on the reports of [mr d]. in the judgement his honour dealt with each matter raised singularly, but did not deal with the issues cumulatively when determining the application for [mr d] to be an adversarial expert pursuant to rule 15.49(2)(c). when discussing rule 15.49(2)(c) his honour only referred to the difference in valuation, a reference to the quantum, and not to the other complaints raised by the appellant...  sband’s summary of argument filed 16 november 2021, paragraphs 24–25)
... we agree with the husband’s submission in relation to ground 2.2. we are satisfied that the primary judge did not consider these matters in aggregate in addressing r 15.49(2)(c) of the old rules, but rather confined his consideration to the issue of differences in value. in doing so, the primary judge fell into error. ... as kent j observed in salmon and ors & salmon [2020] famcafc 134 (“salmon”) at [35]: ... the words “substantial body of opinion” in r 15.49(2) are to be given real meaning, as was the approach taken by the primary judge. the approach that the words have meaning of substance has been adopted, correctly in my view, in other decisions at first instance in this court. the mere expression of an opinion as to value by another expert, no matter how substantially contrary it is to that of the single expert, does not in and of itself constitute “a substantial body of opinion” within the meaning of the rule. if such a contrary opinion is founded upon identified and accepted methodology recognised within the field, or some identified and recognised field of expertise different to that founding the single expert opinion, then the requirement of “a substantial body of opinion” will be fulfilled... ... we agree with his honour’s observation as far as the first limb of ground 3.4 is concerned. a difference of opinion, even of this magnitude, does not simpliciter establish a basis for an adversarial expert.
adversarial expert in regards to the wife’s health
7.01 application of part 7.1 (1) this part (other than rule 7.14) does not apply to any of the following: (a) evidence from a medical practitioner or other person who has provided, or is providing, treatment for a party or child if the evidence relates only to any or all of the following: (i) the results of an examination, investigation or observation made, (ii) a description of any treatment carried out or recommended, (iii) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment, including a prognosis,   evidence from a medical practitioner or other person who has provided, or is providing, treatment for a party or child if the evidence relates only to any or all of the following: (i) the results of an examination, investigation or observation made, (ii) a description of any treatment carried out or recommended, (iii) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment, including a prognosis,   the results of an examination, investigation or observation made, (ii) a description of any treatment carried out or recommended, (iii) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment, including a prognosis,  ) a description of any treatment carried out or recommended, (iii) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment, including a prognosis,  i) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment, including a prognosis,
costs
117 costs (1) subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant. [notations omitted]   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
associate: dated: 22 february 2023
dated: 22 february 2023