last updated: 5 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dyer & dyer [2023] fedcfamc2f 80
orders
the court notes that:
on a final basis, the court orders that:
parental responsibility  prior to the decision being made in relation to w give him 7 days in which to provide a response in relation to his views, (b) following the father providing a response to the mother, the mother have a further 7 days to consider his views and provide a further response to the father, (c) once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so, and (d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change w's surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.   following the father providing a response to the mother, the mother have a further 7 days to consider his views and provide a further response to the father, (c) once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so, and (d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change w's surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.   once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so, and (d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change w's surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.   nothing in these orders permits the mother to change w's surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.
live and spend time with  every second weekend from 3:00pm friday to 5.00pm saturday. (b) during the school holidays: (i) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday period from 12:00pm on the second saturday to 12:00pm on third saturday weekend. (ii) during the long summer school holiday period from 12:00pm on saturday to noon on the following saturday for one week in early january and a further week in late january on dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year. (c) from 10:00am to 2:00pm on the father’s birthday if a weekend or 3:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day, (d) from 9:00am on good friday to 4:00pm on easter saturday. (e) from 3:00pm to 6:00pm on w’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. (f) from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   during the school holidays: (i) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday period from 12:00pm on the second saturday to 12:00pm on third saturday weekend. (ii) during the long summer school holiday period from 12:00pm on saturday to noon on the following saturday for one week in early january and a further week in late january on dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year. (c) from 10:00am to 2:00pm on the father’s birthday if a weekend or 3:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day, (d) from 9:00am on good friday to 4:00pm on easter saturday. (e) from 3:00pm to 6:00pm on w’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. (f) from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday period from 12:00pm on the second saturday to 12:00pm on third saturday weekend. (ii) during the long summer school holiday period from 12:00pm on saturday to noon on the following saturday for one week in early january and a further week in late january on dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year.  ) during the long summer school holiday period from 12:00pm on saturday to noon on the following saturday for one week in early january and a further week in late january on dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year.   from 10:00am to 2:00pm on the father’s birthday if a weekend or 3:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day, (d) from 9:00am on good friday to 4:00pm on easter saturday. (e) from 3:00pm to 6:00pm on w’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. (f) from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   from 9:00am on good friday to 4:00pm on easter saturday. (e) from 3:00pm to 6:00pm on w’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. (f) from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   from 3:00pm to 6:00pm on w’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. (f) from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday until to 5:00pm on father’s day. (g) from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   from 11:00am on 25 december to 11:00am on 26 december. (h) commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9:00am on 31 december to 4:00pm on 1 january.   from 5:00pm on the preceding saturday to 5:00pm on mother’s day if w is not already in the mother’s care. (b) from 10:00am to 2:00pm on the mother’s birthday if a weekend or 3:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day if w is not already in the mother’s care.   from 10:00am to 2:00pm on the mother’s birthday if a weekend or 3:00pm to 6:00pm if a school day if w is not already in the mother’s care.   if travelling within australia she has given the father written notice of her intention to travel 14 days in advance or as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, (b) if travelling overseas she has provided written notice in compliance with order 11, and (c) the mother provide make up time to the father within 3 months of her return from her holiday.   if travelling overseas she has provided written notice in compliance with order 11, and (c) the mother provide make up time to the father within 3 months of her return from her holiday.   the mother provide make up time to the father within 3 months of her return from her holiday.
passports and travel  the parents shall do all acts and sign all documents necessary to ensure the children maintain a valid australian passport with the cost of same to be shared equally between the parties, (b) the mother shall hold the children’s passports and provide same to the father not less than 28 days prior to any proposed travel and the father shall return same to the mother within 7 days of returning to australia. (c) should either parent lose the children's passports, the cost of a new passport for the child shall be the sole expense of the parent who lost the passport.   the mother shall hold the children’s passports and provide same to the father not less than 28 days prior to any proposed travel and the father shall return same to the mother within 7 days of returning to australia. (c) should either parent lose the children's passports, the cost of a new passport for the child shall be the sole expense of the parent who lost the passport.   should either parent lose the children's passports, the cost of a new passport for the child shall be the sole expense of the parent who lost the passport.
communication
restraints  using physical discipline on the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (b) exposing the children to family violence, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) yelling or shouting at the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (d) discussing these court proceedings with the children, and (e) denigrating or criticising the other parent, or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall not allow any third party to do so.   exposing the children to family violence, or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) yelling or shouting at the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (d) discussing these court proceedings with the children, and (e) denigrating or criticising the other parent, or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall not allow any third party to do so.   yelling or shouting at the children or allowing anyone else to do so, (d) discussing these court proceedings with the children, and (e) denigrating or criticising the other parent, or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall not allow any third party to do so.   discussing these court proceedings with the children, and (e) denigrating or criticising the other parent, or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall not allow any third party to do so.   denigrating or criticising the other parent, or members of the other parent’s family or household in the presence or hearing of the children and shall not allow any third party to do so.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
hi [ms dyer] thought it best i let you know my plans with the kids. i’ve prayed and considered the holy spirit flow i’ve made my life. i will not be chasing you for custody at this point. i will not be meditating through a professional mediator at this point. i feel the whole spirit of the bible and god i serve is love forgiveness, peace, long suffering and if someone wants your coat give them your shirt as well. if they want you to walk one mile walk two with them. so god bless you with the desires of your heart. i love the children and the pain is unbearable. but i’ve discovered pain only shows where i haven’t let god into my life. pain only reveals i am in control. when we married i gave up my rights willingly and in a love that will never change. i will not fight you for what i don’t own. tomorrow i will be at mcdonald’s and monday i will be at mcdonald’s at 12pm. i would love to be a father to our children. whatever the outcome please know i forgive all your actions. i forgive all the hurt and i forgive myself for failing you. i feel that work of the spirit powerfully that flushed the pain away as i gave up control. i will live my life and be the best father i can be from the little contact i celebrate. my god is faithful and his court room is the only one i will stand and give an account for my actions in. so with all that. i choose life, i choose freedom, i choose no control but the fruits of the spirit to flush my life. whatever you choose just know i hold no anger, hate or unforgiveness. thanks for you life [sic: “your life”) it is an amazing blessing. regards [mr dyer]
do not judge, so that you may not be judged. for with the judgment you make you will be judged, and the measure you give will be the measure you get. why do you see the speck in your neighbour’s eye, but do not notice the log in your own eye? or how can you say to your neighbour, ‘let me take the speck out of your eye,’ while the log is in your own eye? 5 you hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your neighbour’s eye.
again, i want to suggest to you that this is you saying, “i’m not going to fight you. we’re not going to court. i’m not mediating. we’re done here. do you agree with that? no. this is me saying, “i am not personally engaging you in a fight. i very much believe in a courtroom. i think, in another document, that comes up. in fact, i believe a judge is a court-ordained authority, hence why i’m sitting here today. but i don’t believe that it’s a godly thing to be engaging somebody in a personal fight, when we’re both just butting heads, and we need somebody to intervene. so just to be clear, reviewing this email now, it is your evidence to this court that the email had nothing to do with the potential court proceedings between you and the mother, is that right? i think – the spirit of what i’m meaning here. i mean, obviously, we can pull any document apart, but the spirit of what i’m meaning here is, “i am not personally engaging you in a fight”, and, “i will stand in a courtroom”, and me saying, “i will stand in a courtroom”, the ultimate authority, as a minister and a supposed man of god that i fear, is that standing in front of god, and giving an account for my actions. ... if court was the end result, this message, why did you say, “my god is faithful, and his courtroom is the only one i will stand”? because his is the first courtroom i stand in, and where he leads me, if that’s here – or another court – then that’s where i go as well. but my first and foremost allegiance is to a god that i have given my life to. and - ? and i fear his courtroom, and i believe, as the bible says, that a secular courtroom is god-ordained. the judge is a god-ordained authority that, when he speaks, you listen to him. if you don’t, i’m not in the courtroom in heaven.
father’s orders sought
the child, [w] the father and mother are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the major long-term decisions of the child, [w], born [in] 2015 including but not limited to: (a) the child’s education including but not limited to, the choice of school and curriculum, (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (c) major issues concerning the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names. that the parents are to consult with each other about decisions to be made in the exercise of their equal shared parental responsibility as follows: (a) they will inform the other parent about the decision to be made in writing, (b) they will consult with each other by providing the details of any proposal they have, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date when the proposal is to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity, (c) they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date the initial proposal is due to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity. the process to be used for resolving disputes making joint parental decisions referred to at order 1 above, is as follows: (a) the parties will consult with a family dispute practitioner (“the fdrp”) to assist with resolving any dispute or reaching agreement about changes to be made,   the child’s education including but not limited to, the choice of school and curriculum, (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (c) major issues concerning the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (c) major issues concerning the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names.   major issues concerning the child’s health, and (d) the child’s names.   the child’s names.   they will inform the other parent about the decision to be made in writing, (b) they will consult with each other by providing the details of any proposal they have, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date when the proposal is to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity, (c) they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date the initial proposal is due to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity.   they will consult with each other by providing the details of any proposal they have, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date when the proposal is to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity, (c) they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date the initial proposal is due to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity.   they will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date the initial proposal is due to be implemented or such lesser time in cases of emergency or necessity.   the parties will consult with a family dispute practitioner (“the fdrp”) to assist with resolving any dispute or reaching agreement about changes to be made,   the parties will pay the costs of fdrp equally, (c) in the event that the parties cannot agree upon a fdrp, the father will nominate three (3) practitioners and advise the mother in writing of the details of their fees, experience and availability, (d) the mother will choose a practitioner within 7 days, if the mother fails to choose a practitioner within 7 days, the father is at liberty to do and to arrange for an initial appointment for the parties to attend upon that practitioner. if either party does not respond to the other’s proposal or does not engage in the dispute resolution process referred to above, then the parent making the proposal is at liberty to implement the proposal at the expiration of the end of the 30-day period as referred to in order 2. that each parent has the parental responsibility for the day to day needs of the child, [w] for such periods that the child live with or spends time with each of them. the child, [w] will spend time with the father as follows: (a) each fortnight with the father: (i) in the first week with the father from afterschool wednesday to before school friday, and (ii) in the second week with the father from afterschool thursday to before school tuesday. (b) for school holidays: (i) in even numbered years, for the first half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (ii) in odd numbered years for the second half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (c) during all other times in the school holidays with the mother, and (d) for father’s day or the child’s birthdays: (i) on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be. the parents agree that a parenting app will be used, talking parents, our family wizard or weparent or email. each party must notify the other of any change of address within seven (7) days, as well as mobile and email contact details. the parties agree that the father shall have telephone communications / whatsapp or facetime communications with the child in the first week on tuesday evenings from 6.00pm to 6.30pm. the mother will provide the child with a telephone / computer specifically for the purpose of telephone communications / whatsapp or facetime communications with the father. during telephone communications or whatsapp / facetime communications, the mother will not be present while the child are speaking with the father and the mother will afford the child privacy during these times. the mother is restrained from: (a) denigrating or criticising the father to the child or allowing any third party to denigrate or criticise the father within the present or hearing of the child, (b) discussing these proceedings with the child, (c) other than as specifically provided in these orders, the mother is restrained from taking the child for counselling or psychological intervention or allowing others to do so unless recommended by the child’s school or general medical practitioner and after the mother has consulted with the father pursuant to paragraph (2) of these orders and has provided the father with the name, address and telephone number of the proposed counsellor or mental health professional. that in relation to travel for the child: (a) the father and mother may travel out of the act to visit extended family within australia, (b) that the child will be transported by family members or responsible adults with a current licence, (c) that the child will not be permitted to leave australia without the prior knowledge of the other parent. the child’s australian passports is to be kept current and the parents will share the cost of renewing the same, and (a) in the event that the child travel overseas the parent accompanying the child must provide the other parent with details of the travel at least thirty (3)) days prior to the proposed travel. the parent travelling with provide the other parent with the following, (i) date of intended travel and itinerary, (ii) addresses of where the child will be staying. (iii) return airline tickets for the child, (iv) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited. that the mother is restrained from travelling with the child on the child’s [country d] passports unless she has obtained the express written consent of the father and provided the father with the following: (a) dates of intended travel and itinerary, (b) addresses of where the child will be staying, (c) return airline tickets for the child, (d) an undertaking that the mother will not leave the child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited. that the mother will not relocate the residence of the child outside of canberra without the expressed written agreement of the other parent or court order. should either parent wish to live overseas, the parent seeking to relocate must obtain the written consent of the other parent three (3) months prior to the intended date of departure. the parties agree: (a) all documents, birth certificates, citizenship by descent and passports for the child are to be held by the parent they live with, (b) the parent whom the child live with must ensure that the child has all government requirements met so they can reside in australia such as tax file number and medicare number, (c) all [country d] and australian passports and citizenship documentation must be kept current and renewed prior to expiry of such, and (d) both parties agree to equally share the costs associated with keeping the documentation for the child current. that the mother and father shall: (a) keep the other parent informed at all times of their residential address and email address within twenty-four (24) hours of relocation, (b) keep the other parent informed of the names and addresses of any treating medical or allied health practitioners who treat the child and authorise those practitioners to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the child, (c) inform each other about any emergency or critical injury or accident or health issue for the child with twelve (12) hours, (d) ensure that the other parent’s details are placed on any form (medical or educational) requesting information in relation to the mother and/or father, (e) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date. that the parents authorise any schools or any other relevant persons for extracurricular activities attended by the child to give each parent information about the child’s educational certificates and awards obtained by the child (at the parent’s cost). that at all times each parent: (a) respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child, [w] about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak of the other parent and their partners and extended family respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent and their partners and extended family in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (d) not discuss with the child any adult issues arising in their current or future parenting arrangements. that both parents be at liberty to attend any school sport or extra-curricular activities and events associated with the child regardless of with who the child is living with. that this order shall be authority to medical, health, sporting and educational providers of the child to release information about and discuss the child’s progress with and / or health and other needs with each parent and each parent provide such written authority as may be required from time to time and inform the other of the names and addresses of such medical, health, sporting, or educational service providers. that the mother ensure that the father is noted on any formal documentation (including enrolment and medical forms) as the child’s father. that the mother pay the costs of and incidental to this application to be taxed. such further or other order as this honourable court deems fit.   in the event that the parties cannot agree upon a fdrp, the father will nominate three (3) practitioners and advise the mother in writing of the details of their fees, experience and availability, (d) the mother will choose a practitioner within 7 days, if the mother fails to choose a practitioner within 7 days, the father is at liberty to do and to arrange for an initial appointment for the parties to attend upon that practitioner.   the mother will choose a practitioner within 7 days, if the mother fails to choose a practitioner within 7 days, the father is at liberty to do and to arrange for an initial appointment for the parties to attend upon that practitioner.   each fortnight with the father: (i) in the first week with the father from afterschool wednesday to before school friday, and (ii) in the second week with the father from afterschool thursday to before school tuesday. (b) for school holidays: (i) in even numbered years, for the first half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (ii) in odd numbered years for the second half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (c) during all other times in the school holidays with the mother, and (d) for father’s day or the child’s birthdays: (i) on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.   in the first week with the father from afterschool wednesday to before school friday, and (ii) in the second week with the father from afterschool thursday to before school tuesday.  ) in the second week with the father from afterschool thursday to before school tuesday.   for school holidays: (i) in even numbered years, for the first half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (ii) in odd numbered years for the second half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (c) during all other times in the school holidays with the mother, and (d) for father’s day or the child’s birthdays: (i) on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.   in even numbered years, for the first half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter, (ii) in odd numbered years for the second half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter,  ) in odd numbered years for the second half of all school holidays and each alternate year thereafter,   during all other times in the school holidays with the mother, and (d) for father’s day or the child’s birthdays: (i) on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.   for father’s day or the child’s birthdays: (i) on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.   on father’s day from 4.00pm saturday until before school monday morning, (ii) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.  ) on the child’s birthdays, from 3.30pm to 6.30pm, if a school day and from 10.00am to 2.00pm, if a non-school day, (iii) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.  i) changeover is to take place at the child’s school or mcdonald’s as the case may be.   denigrating or criticising the father to the child or allowing any third party to denigrate or criticise the father within the present or hearing of the child, (b) discussing these proceedings with the child, (c) other than as specifically provided in these orders, the mother is restrained from taking the child for counselling or psychological intervention or allowing others to do so unless recommended by the child’s school or general medical practitioner and after the mother has consulted with the father pursuant to paragraph (2) of these orders and has provided the father with the name, address and telephone number of the proposed counsellor or mental health professional.   discussing these proceedings with the child, (c) other than as specifically provided in these orders, the mother is restrained from taking the child for counselling or psychological intervention or allowing others to do so unless recommended by the child’s school or general medical practitioner and after the mother has consulted with the father pursuant to paragraph (2) of these orders and has provided the father with the name, address and telephone number of the proposed counsellor or mental health professional.   other than as specifically provided in these orders, the mother is restrained from taking the child for counselling or psychological intervention or allowing others to do so unless recommended by the child’s school or general medical practitioner and after the mother has consulted with the father pursuant to paragraph (2) of these orders and has provided the father with the name, address and telephone number of the proposed counsellor or mental health professional.   the father and mother may travel out of the act to visit extended family within australia, (b) that the child will be transported by family members or responsible adults with a current licence, (c) that the child will not be permitted to leave australia without the prior knowledge of the other parent.   that the child will be transported by family members or responsible adults with a current licence, (c) that the child will not be permitted to leave australia without the prior knowledge of the other parent.   that the child will not be permitted to leave australia without the prior knowledge of the other parent.   in the event that the child travel overseas the parent accompanying the child must provide the other parent with details of the travel at least thirty (3)) days prior to the proposed travel. the parent travelling with provide the other parent with the following, (i) date of intended travel and itinerary, (ii) addresses of where the child will be staying. (iii) return airline tickets for the child, (iv) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   date of intended travel and itinerary, (ii) addresses of where the child will be staying. (iii) return airline tickets for the child, (iv) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.  ) addresses of where the child will be staying. (iii) return airline tickets for the child, (iv) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.  i) return airline tickets for the child, (iv) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.  ) proof of registration with the australian smart travellers website – https://www.smartraveller.gov.au/ (v) an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   an undertaking that the parent will not leave a child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   dates of intended travel and itinerary, (b) addresses of where the child will be staying, (c) return airline tickets for the child, (d) an undertaking that the mother will not leave the child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   addresses of where the child will be staying, (c) return airline tickets for the child, (d) an undertaking that the mother will not leave the child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   return airline tickets for the child, (d) an undertaking that the mother will not leave the child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   an undertaking that the mother will not leave the child under the age of 18 years old unaccompanied in the country being visited.   all documents, birth certificates, citizenship by descent and passports for the child are to be held by the parent they live with, (b) the parent whom the child live with must ensure that the child has all government requirements met so they can reside in australia such as tax file number and medicare number, (c) all [country d] and australian passports and citizenship documentation must be kept current and renewed prior to expiry of such, and (d) both parties agree to equally share the costs associated with keeping the documentation for the child current.   the parent whom the child live with must ensure that the child has all government requirements met so they can reside in australia such as tax file number and medicare number, (c) all [country d] and australian passports and citizenship documentation must be kept current and renewed prior to expiry of such, and (d) both parties agree to equally share the costs associated with keeping the documentation for the child current.   all [country d] and australian passports and citizenship documentation must be kept current and renewed prior to expiry of such, and (d) both parties agree to equally share the costs associated with keeping the documentation for the child current.   both parties agree to equally share the costs associated with keeping the documentation for the child current.   keep the other parent informed at all times of their residential address and email address within twenty-four (24) hours of relocation, (b) keep the other parent informed of the names and addresses of any treating medical or allied health practitioners who treat the child and authorise those practitioners to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the child, (c) inform each other about any emergency or critical injury or accident or health issue for the child with twelve (12) hours, (d) ensure that the other parent’s details are placed on any form (medical or educational) requesting information in relation to the mother and/or father, (e) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   keep the other parent informed of the names and addresses of any treating medical or allied health practitioners who treat the child and authorise those practitioners to provide the other parent with information that they are lawfully able to provide about the child, (c) inform each other about any emergency or critical injury or accident or health issue for the child with twelve (12) hours, (d) ensure that the other parent’s details are placed on any form (medical or educational) requesting information in relation to the mother and/or father, (e) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   inform each other about any emergency or critical injury or accident or health issue for the child with twelve (12) hours, (d) ensure that the other parent’s details are placed on any form (medical or educational) requesting information in relation to the mother and/or father, (e) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   ensure that the other parent’s details are placed on any form (medical or educational) requesting information in relation to the mother and/or father, (e) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s education, location of the child’s schools, costs associated with any changes regarding relocation, and costs of extra-curricular activities, (f) ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   ensure that discussions are held with the other parent prior to making decisions regarding changes to the child’s medical and dental needs, and (g) ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   ensure that the child’s vaccinations are kept up to date.   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child, [w] about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak of the other parent and their partners and extended family respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent and their partners and extended family in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (d) not discuss with the child any adult issues arising in their current or future parenting arrangements.   speak of the other parent and their partners and extended family respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent and their partners and extended family in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (d) not discuss with the child any adult issues arising in their current or future parenting arrangements.   not denigrate or insult the other parent and their partners and extended family in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, and (d) not discuss with the child any adult issues arising in their current or future parenting arrangements.   not discuss with the child any adult issues arising in their current or future parenting arrangements.
mother’s orders sought
independent children’s lawyer’s orders sought
a) prior to the decision being made in relation to the child [w] and give him seven days in which to provide a response in relation to his views, b) following the father providing a response to the mother, the mother have a further 7 days to consider his views and provide a further response to the father and c) once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so. d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change [w]’s surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.
b) following the father providing a response to the mother, the mother have a further 7 days to consider his views and provide a further response to the father and c) once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so. d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change [w]’s surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.
c) once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so. d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change [w]’s surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.
d) nothing in these orders permits the mother to change [w]’s surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent.
father’s evidence  his son x did not want to be involved in “drama” (e.g. the long-running litigation), which the father said has not helped, (b) he said he did not believe that the mother had provided the children with a lot of encouragement, (c) at the same time, he said that he did not entirely blame the mother, (d) he said he was “a young man” (it was unclear what this meant), and (e) he said that when in country b, his sons were young men who were “sitting up all night watching cartoons, laughing, sleeping all day” and “taking showers that were hours on end”, he said he raised these issues, which contributed to the strained relationship with the children.[48]   he said he did not believe that the mother had provided the children with a lot of encouragement, (c) at the same time, he said that he did not entirely blame the mother, (d) he said he was “a young man” (it was unclear what this meant), and (e) he said that when in country b, his sons were young men who were “sitting up all night watching cartoons, laughing, sleeping all day” and “taking showers that were hours on end”, he said he raised these issues, which contributed to the strained relationship with the children.[48]   at the same time, he said that he did not entirely blame the mother, (d) he said he was “a young man” (it was unclear what this meant), and (e) he said that when in country b, his sons were young men who were “sitting up all night watching cartoons, laughing, sleeping all day” and “taking showers that were hours on end”, he said he raised these issues, which contributed to the strained relationship with the children.[48]   he said he was “a young man” (it was unclear what this meant), and (e) he said that when in country b, his sons were young men who were “sitting up all night watching cartoons, laughing, sleeping all day” and “taking showers that were hours on end”, he said he raised these issues, which contributed to the strained relationship with the children.[48]   he said that when in country b, his sons were young men who were “sitting up all night watching cartoons, laughing, sleeping all day” and “taking showers that were hours on end”, he said he raised these issues, which contributed to the strained relationship with the children.[48]
mother’s evidence
expert reports of ms f  [x] said his mother told him to come and talk to me. he said he lived with his mother and wanted to keep going how he was now. [x] advised he kept in contact with his father as much as he could, sending him a few texts a week, "nothing crazy". regarding why he wanted to live with his mother, [x] said she represented "a better fit" and "i get to hang out with my siblings". in terms of what he liked at his mother's, [x] said he liked being around his mother, liked his house and school and everything about it. he said that there was not anything he did not like. [x] said he had no specific reason for not wanting to live with his father, just saying he preferred to be with his mother. [x] said he was not upset when his parents separated, commenting, "it's their marriage, not mine. they can do what they want". he did not know what was best for his younger siblings and said he got on well with them. when asked what he would wish for if he had three wishes, [x] said he would first want to go home and sleep as he had been sick for three days after hurting his back playing [sports]. his second wish was that his back was better, and he did not have another wish. in his spare time, [x] said that he played [sports], went to school, played games and stuff, and helped when needed, including keeping his room tidy. [x] said he had liked everywhere he had lived. he said he stayed three months longer than his mother did in [country b] and was home-schooled there was, staying with a group of [country d] kids. he said his father liked to say that he came and got him while his father came and told him he was taking him for a trip and then refused to take him back to [country d]. [x] said there was not much he could do about it, and he resigned and said he had to live with what had happened. [x] told me that he was not religious. [y] aka [y] when asked why he had to see me, [y] said it was to talk about stuff like his parents' divorce, what would happen and what he would like to happen. he said that he had not talked to his father since his father left [country b], commenting, "he's a dick". [y] went on to say that his father was very manipulative and narcissistic and that he engaged in "slightly stalker-ish" behaviour. [y] related how his father had deviously used a friend to send him a message at school. he said this jeopardised his relationship with this girl because he could not trust her. [y] had not told his father that he was transgender. he said his father was very christian and very set in his ways. [y] described [mr dyer] as homophobic and said he was unsure how his father would react. he said he did not feel safe around his father because he could become quite angry sometimes. [y] said it was easier to block his father and not talk to him. [y] volunteered he had to deal with the trauma of his childhood and the challenges represented by his gender issues. although he could not remember a lot of his childhood, [y] recalled everything had been exceptionally bad, and his father had been mentally abusive. he said being home-schooled had not helped. [y] recalled hiding with his siblings because there was a lot of yelling in the household but said he could not remember any physical abuse. [y] said it was hard to figure out what was normal because of his childhood. he said he and his siblings were raised to be manipulated and controlled, like a cult. he said his father's family had been very christian, and when he was younger, he had little contact with his mother's family because they did not like his father, and he did not like them. [y] said his father had never worked but rather prayed hard for money because he believed the lord would help them. [y] said they moved around and stayed with friends or anywhere people gave them housing. he and his siblings were home-schooled because they moved so much. in [y]'s opinion, his mother did not have a choice and could not leave. after briefly discussing some of his issues beyond the scope of this report, [y] again said that he did not want to see his father and apologised for how awkward it had been to see him with me. indeed, he said he had not wanted to come into the observation session but wanted to be there for [w]. [y] said that he did not like his brother [z] seeing their father because he got very depressed before going and afterwards. he described [w] as very mature for her age so that she "kind of" understood what was going on. [y] described her mother's partner, [mr h], as "very cool, awesome" and said he was very supportive and talked to them. if the court told him he had to see his father, [y] told me, "i'd fucking plummet mentally, go down, it wouldn't be fun". according to y, his mother was very supportive either way and said it was up to them whether they saw their father and could see him if they wanted to do so. [y] said he would feel free to contact his father if he wanted to. [y] said he has no longer at all religious. he said he had been raised to love jesus and had not been allowed to watch shows with magic in them. his father had not liked frozen. [y] said his father would tell them to pray for food and said it had all been very weird, and he had not understood the restrictions. he did say they had not been entirely alone because both of his parents had some nice friends. [z] in response to my query regarding why he had to talk to me, [z] immediately told me it was because "i don't want to spend time with dad, and i came here to say that. i don't want to see him anymore, no time at all". [z] was opposed to even spending less time with his father. [z] explained that he became really sad the day before he had to go to his father. he complained that his father did not give him a choice in life and that he had to do what his father wanted. [z] complained that his father dragged him to places without even asking him, and "if i say no, he keeps pushing it on me". [z] said he did not pay much attention to how his sister [w] felt but said he had seen her not wanting to go a couple of times. when asked what he liked at his mother's, [z] said his mother asked him if he wanted to do something and did not force him. he said he felt happy and not sad at his mother's. [z] could not think of anything he did not like at his mother's or anything he liked at his father's. if he had three wishes, [z] said he would wish not to see his father ever again, become successful and find out what he wants to be when he grows up. when asked about his mother's attitude to him going to his father's, [z] thought she was worried about him because he was really sad when he went to his father's. he explained his mother would drop him at school on friday morning and complained that his backpack was really heavy. [z] told me that his father was staying with "a bit of an old lady", and he had to share a room with his sister. he volunteered that he was an atheist and did not believe in god. [z] said he did not tell his father this because he was scared of him a lot, especially if he did not like what he said. if the judge told him he had to see his father, [z] said, "i think i'll be really depressed and really sad". he told me he stayed in his room for a lot of the time without saying much. [z] said he would be very happy if he did not see his father and said he worried a lot about going to the extent that it affected his schoolwork because he found it hard to focus. his father did not know how he felt, but his mother did. [z] said he played video games and did stuff on his phone in his spare time. he said he had friends at school, played [sports] sometimes and was close to all of his siblings. in conclusion, [z] reiterated he was worried about what would happen. he said his mother had already taken him to a doctor who recommended counselling for him. [w] [w] told me she had to see me about what she wanted to do regarding seeing her father. she said, "to be honest, i don't want to keep going", in a hesitant manner. [w] said she did not know why this was but said if her father wanted to go somewhere and they were playing on the computer, he did not listen. [w] said she wanted to spend less time with her father, perhaps one or two nights. she told me she missed her mother when she was at her father's. when asked what she liked at her mother's, [w] said she liked having three cats and her mother treated her well. she could not think of anything she did not like that about her mothers. when asked what the good things were at her father's, [w] said he gave them candy. when asked what she did not like about her father's, [w] said that he would yell at many people when he got angry. if she had three wishes, [w] said her first wish would be to fly, her second wish would be to stay with her mother forever, and her third wish would be to speak to her cats to communicate with them. [w] told her she was in year 1 at school and had friends there. she said her father did not have enough money to get a house and was trying to get the money to get one but kept spending it.
evaluation this assessment considers the future living and time spending arrangements for [x], [y], [z] and [w]. the children's wishes appear central to this matter. their parents' former lifestyle choices and their mother's subsequent rejection of their father's belief-based way of life have been integral in influencing the children's strong alignment with their mother. indeed, three of the children's four older brothers have entirely rejected their father, having no relationship with him. [ms dyer] advised her oldest son, [mr j], was engaging in therapy to address the trauma of his childhood. [ms dyer] alleged that [mr dyer] was very controlling during their relationship and made all the decisions, harassing her to accept his views to the extent she doubted herself and lost all self-confidence. [mr dyer]'s behaviours were consistent with a pattern of coercive control designed to intimidate, isolate, and control his ex-wife and their children. his behaviours and lifestyle choices changed his family's day-to-day life, including daily activities like school and work. the family led an itinerant lifestyle based on their reliance on the charity of others. currently, [x] appeared to have reached a balance that suited him regarding spending time with each of his parents. at his age, he appropriately focused on his own activities, including sport. [y] was much more troubled. he was trying to sort out his gender issues and had no confidence that his father would be in any way supportive of him. indeed, [mr dyer] erroneously thought [y] was a lesbian, rather than a transgender male. [y] has had no relationship with his father for two years and did not want one. to his credit, he attended the observation session with his father to look after his little sister. during the session, [y] appeared very comfortable and pressured. it would be entirely counter-productive to force any relationship between [y] and [mr dyer] at the current time. indeed, it seemed that [mr dyer] had accepted this. i did not get the sense that [ms dyer] would counteract any future wish by [y] to see his father. from his presentation and based on his mother's and siblings’ reports, it was apparent that [z] is a very troubled boy. his father said he had problems settling when he came to him. [z] was withdrawn at home, and his mother reported some suicidality to the extent she had sought medical advice and a referral to a psychologist. [z] was very strongly opposed to continuing to see his father, advising he was scared of him. suicidality in children is very concerning, and, in my opinion, the court should heed [z]'s wish not to spend time with his father until he has undergone a course of psychological therapy. if he feels more resilient after this and expresses any wish to see his father, then perhaps he could do so initially for brief periods only. after initially saying she did not want to see her father at all, [w] said she only wanted to go for one or two nights. as with the other family members, [w] struggled with her father not listening to her. if [z] is allowed to no longer see his father, this leaves [w] having to go by herself. it might be better if she goes during the day only, given her age. unfortunately, [mr dyer] did not acknowledge the contribution of his behaviours to the demise of his relationships with his children. ostensibly in the most amicable possible manner, he blamed [ms dyer] for making him out as the bad guy to the children. denial of behaviours and attempting to manipulate the perceptions of others about the intent and nature of behaviours is a feature of coercive control. [mr dyer]'s ability to change his behaviour and perhaps heal his relationships with his children by identifying how his behaviours have negatively changed their lives is limited by his lack of insight into his abusive behaviour. [mr dyer] attempted to cast aspersions on [ms dyer]'s new relationship by suggesting she and her partner, [mr h], were sexually indiscreet. [ms dyer] appeared genuinely horrified by his allegation, and the children spoke highly of [mr h]. why and how [mr g] recorded his mother's behaviour was unclear, and his behaviour certainly should not be encouraged. by separating, [ms dyer] has significantly changed her children's lives. she no longer relies on the precarious charity of others and is modelling the value of studying and working to her children. [ms dyer] reported being very attentive and emotionally available to her children, now feeling free to encourage them to talk to her about their feelings, issues, and problems. appropriately, [ms dyer] has sought psychological intervention for [z]. the difference in these parties’ values and lifestyle choices is reflected in their attitude to being vaccinated against covid-19. they cannot communicate with each other at all. recommendations it is therefore respectfully recommended that [ms dyer] has sole parental responsibility for these children. that the children are in their mother's primary care. that no orders are made for [x], [y], aka [y], and [z], to spend time with their father. that [w] has daytime contact only with her father.
responses to further questions: what recommendations, if any, do you have so far as steps that should be taken by the father to strengthen and improve his relationship with [z] and [w]? 1.1 [z], aged twelve, and [w], aged six, primarily lived with their mother and spent four nights a fortnight with their father, from after school on friday to before school on tuesday, on alternate weekends. 1.2 as noted in my report, [z] was highly resistant to spending any time with his father, complaining his father did not understand him and only engaged in activities that he wanted to do without seeking [z]'s advice regarding his preferred activities. [w] wanted to spend less time with her father, complaining he did not heed her wishes about what she wanted to do and expressing concern that he would yell when angry. 1.3 the children's message to their father that he should adopt a much more child-focused approach was clear. their relationship would improve f [mr dyer] could hear and respond to his children's advice. if [mr dyer] is ever to achieve an open, warm relationship with his children, he needs to be able to assure them that he is willing to discuss and accept them adopting values and paths in life different to his own. are there any therapeutic pathways that you would recommend for:
a. the father b. the mother c. any of [w], [z] or [y]
2.1 mr and [ms dyer] would benefit from post-separation individual counselling such as that offered at [k families] and participating in any additional group programs the centre considers appropriate. 2.2 appropriately, [z] advised his mother was arranging individual counselling for him. [y] might benefit from specialist assistance to facilitate his gender transition at his own pace. what support and education do you recommend, if any, for the parents to assist the children in strengthening or repairing their relationships with the father? 3.1 see 2. please detail the capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s emotional and intellectual needs, 4.1 parenting capacity can be defined as the ability of parents or caregivers to respond appropriately to their children's developmental needs and to be able to adapt to their children's changing needs over time. children require a secure, predictable lifestyle to facilitate their emotional development and well-being. before separating by virtue of their unusual lifestyle, neither parent in this matter could provide the children with the stability and security required in their lifestyle to promote optimal emotional security. since separating, [ms dyer] has made significant efforts to address this, recognising the difficulties inherent in her and [mr dyer]'s previous lifestyle. [mr dyer] has not been able to access his own accommodation and continues his somewhat unusual living arrangements. 4.2 it is questionable whether [mr dyer] can effectively balance the needs of an older woman with those of young children when the children come to stay with him. in his environment, it cannot be easy to relax and attend to his children's needs and wishes for various activities. 4.3 children also need secure financial arrangements, and [mr dyer]'s unpredictable income stream makes his ability to provide for his children somewhat questionable. 4.4 the continuing dispute demonstrates that both parents have failed to protect the children from their conflict and hostility. the parents disagree on how much time the children should spend with their father. [ms dyer] has also raised concerns about [mr dyer]'s willingness to attend to the children’s physical care. 4.5 in terms of their emotional development, children need to feel heard and noticed. [mr dyer]'s children complain he does not do this. indeed, his relationships with his three older sons and [y] have broken down completely. parents and other caregivers are essential resources for children in managing emotional arousal, coping, and behaviour. 4.6 children also need to be assisted in developing skills to express their emotions best. to this end, parents need to model appropriate behaviours, and it is concerning if [mr dyer] sometimes cannot do this when trying to manage any frustration and anger. while he maintains such a rigid belief system, [mr dyer] might not be assisting his children in developing empathy for the feelings of others. children must be encouraged to respect and understand a wide range of viewpoints and value systems. 4.7 providing for a child’s intellectual needs requires an ability to assist them with mental processes such as attention span, understanding information, reasoning, learning, remembering, problem-solving, and thinking from birth until adulthood. children benefit from stimulating, challenging, and supportive environments in which to develop skills in language and communication, as well as reading, writing, mathematics, and problem solving, which serve as a foundation for healthy self-regulatory practices and modes of persistence required for academic success. both parents should be able to assist the children with their intellectual development in the short and long term, although [mr dyer] will have to become more flexible in his approach and convey love and respect to engender a sense of security.
ms f’s oral evidence
written submissions on behalf of the father
introduction the father agrees and adopts the following orders that are sought by the independent children’s lawyer: order 1, order 2, order 3 and 4, and order 7, 8 (b) (i), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) save that the father seeks an order that w spends time with him 4 nights each fortnight from after school friday to before school tuesday, 9, 10, 2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. the father proposes the following in respect of: order 8 (a), that the father spend time with [w] every second weekend from 3.00pm friday to 4.00pm sunday, (i) order 8 (b) (ii) that during the long summer school holiday period: from noon on saturday to noon on the following saturday from 9.00am, 31 december in odd numbered years to 4.00pm on 7 january and a further week in late january, and in even numbered years for one week in early january and a further week in late january in even years,   order 8 (b) (ii) that during the long summer school holiday period: from noon on saturday to noon on the following saturday from 9.00am, 31 december in odd numbered years to 4.00pm on 7 january and a further week in late january, and in even numbered years for one week in early january and a further week in late january in even years,
c. on dates to be advised by the father at least 21 days in advance and on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year. the mother shall be at liberty to suspend [w]’s time with the father twice a year for no more than 21 nights if she is holidaying overseas provided that the father’s holiday time is not suspended in january. that the parents be restrained from using the child to deliver cards, messages or gifts to the other parent or sibling (order 11 of the father’s proposed minute of orders).
parental responsibility currently, the father spends limited weekend time with [w] from after school friday to 4.00pm sunday each alternate weekend, and no weekend time with [z] as a consequence of the orders made on 3 june 2022, save for time with the father should he wish to do so. the father seeks a continuation of order 4 of the consent interim orders made on 3 june 2022 with [w] to spend time with the father from afterschool friday at times as agreed between the parents but failing agreement from afterschool friday to 4.00pm sunday. it is common ground, notwithstanding the current orders, that [w] and [z] have contact with their father whilst at school when the father is rostered on the tuck shop canteen duties, and having undertaken these duties since 25 march 2021 on two or three occasions per week. the father has an ongoing commitment as a parent in continuing his involvement at [w] and [z]'s school. the mother is aware the father attends the [m school] and that the father interacts with [z] and [w], having brief chats with them and speaking with their teachers, when delivering their school lunches and no issue has been raised by the father so far as the father’s presence at the school is concerned (father’s affidavit, paragraphs 17(d)(i)(ii)(iii), 36, 44, 64, 75 and 81). the mother also admitted in cross-examination that [w] and [z] had a close relationship with the paternal grandparents and that the children have spent time with the father and the paternal grandparents on a regular basis (father’s affidavit, paragraphs 14(g) and 35 (i) from 20 january 2021 to 26 january 2021 with [w] and [z], paragraph 35(iii) from 25 june 2021 to 3 july 2021 with [w] and [z], and paragraph 35 (vi) from 7 april to 14 april 2022 with [w] and [z]). more recently, the paternal grandfather had a fall in his home at [city c]. upon [z] becoming aware of this, [z] forwarded a text message to his paternal grandfather in relation to the fall (father’s affidavit, paragraph 70, 71 and 72 and bundle of exhibits – [z]'s text message). the mother raises concerns in respect of the father’s capacity to care for and accommodate [w] and [z] whilst they have been in his care and further alleges that [w] has returned hungry from spending time with the father. the father denies the mother’s allegations (mother’s affidavit, paragraphs 10, 11, 13, and 17). the father sets out in detail his involvement with the children and care of [w] and notes that no such issue was raised in respect of [z] returning hungry after spending time with the father (father’s affidavit, “[w]’s hygiene”, paragraphs 90 to 97). the mother and [ms f] indirectly raise unsubstantiated concerns in respect of accommodation and living arrangements, that the father has at [ms n’s] home. the father sets out clearly in his affidavit the nature of his relationship with [ms n], a long-time friend of the father’s mother. the relationship is one of friendship and the provision of care when [ms n] requires assistance. the father also provides handyman duties as [ms n] is in her 80’s (affidavit of [ms n], paragraph 3 and 4). [w] and [z] have both spent time at [ms n]’s home and [ms n] has observed the relationship between the children and their father (affidavit of [ms n], paragraphs 7 to 12). orders sought by the mother the mother proposes that [w] spend time with the father as follows: every second weekend from 9.00am to 5.00pm saturday, during the school holidays: during term 1, 2, and 3 school holiday period from 9.00am saturday to 4.00pm on sunday on the middle weekend. during the long summer school holiday period from 9.00am saturday to 4.00pm on sunday for one weekend in january with dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of the new school year. from 10.00am to 2.00pm on the father’s birthday if a weekend or 3.00pm to 6.00pm if a school day. from 9.00am good friday to 4.00pm easter saturday. from 3.00pm to 6.00pm on [w]’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. from 10.00am to 2.00pm on father’s day. from 11.00am on 25 december to 9.00am on 26 december. commencing 2023, and every odd year thereafter from 9.00am 31 january to 4.00pm on 1 january. the independent children’s lawyer proposes to suspend [w]’slimited time with the father for up to 4 occasions per year for no more than 21 cumulative nights if she is holidaying, and she is to offer make-up time within 3 months. the mother has not provided the father notice in relation to any holiday proposal. the father does not agree with the independent children’s lawyer’s proposal and seeks that order be amended to two occasions per year for each party and not in january. it is submitted that [w] would not be able to maintain a meaningful relationship with the father given the restricted time that the mother proposes in her final orders and is inconsistent with her assertion in her trial affidavit filed 26 september 2022, at paragraph 21 that “i tell the children that both [mr dyer] and i love them and have supported them spending time with [mr dyer]”, the mother’s case does not encourage the children’s relationship with the father. the mother seeks to restrict the father’s time with [w] to such an extent that [w] would not have any overnight time with the father during the school term and only one overnight during school holidays limited to a night at a time. this would prevent the father from ever being able to travel away with [w] or [z] to [city c] or any other destination, should [z] wish to spend time with his paternal grandparents. the limited time that the mother proposes that the father has only day time contact with only one overnight during school holiday period is not consistent with the mother’s assertion that she encourages [w]’s relationship and [z]'s relationship (subject to his wishes) with the father on any view. the limited time does not permit [w] or [z] subject to his wishes to enjoy time with the father and is clearly inconsistent with the best interests of [w] and [z], subject to his wishes. the mother asserts that she has endeavoured to encourage [w] that the father and [w] have established since the father moved to canberra in or around christmas 2019/2020. the father is concerned that the mother is not committed to facilitating [w]’s relationship with the father or the father’s extended family, even though the mother has failed to provide any adequate reason for her lack of support. the mother does not object to [w] or [z], subject to his wishes, spending holiday or weekend time with their paternal grandparents in circumstances where the father resides in canberra and the paternal grandparents reside in [city c]. the father, despite being in receipt of a low income continues to pay child support of approximately $150 a week. the father concedes there are times when his income is zero and he is forced to backpay his child support obligations, however the father continues to pay support (father’s affidavit, paragraphs. family reports in the child inclusive conference memorandum to the court dated 6 may 2021, family consultant ms l noted that, “... neither [w] nor [z] reported any concerns regarding their father.” [z] further advised the family consultant, “that he would like to live in an equal shared care arrangement with his parents because this is ‘fair’”. [w] said that, she wants her parents to reunify, and for all her family to live in the same home together. the father’s engagement as a volunteer on tuck shop duty since 25 march 2021 indicates his commitment as a parent in undertaking such duties. the father sets out his routine with [w] during weekends and the activities they involve in. in relation to [w]’s hygiene, the father sets out his routine. the consultant – [ms f] opined in her addendum to family report dated 30 july 2022 that, “the continuing dispute demonstrates that both parents have failed to protect the children from their conflict and hostility.” the mother in her trial affidavit says, “that she tells the children that both [mr dyer] and i love them and have supported them spending time with [mr dyer].” it is stated in section 60i(d) certificate that the mother did not make a genuine effort to resolve the issue or issues in dispute. on 14 september 2020 the mother has received a section 60i(d) certificate from advance mediation solutions stating that the mother had not engaged in the mediation process . at (d), both the father and the mother, “[mr dyer] and [ms dyer] attended family dispute resolution with [ms mariner] and the other party to the proceedings, but [ms dyer] did not make a genuine effort to resolve the issue or issues in dispute”. the mother also states in her affidavit filed 7 december 2020, paragraph 18 “... i tell the children both [mr dyer] and i love them. i put the children first and i have promoted the children’s relationship with [mr dyer].” the orders dated 16 december 2020 directed that the parents attend family dispute resolution on or before the third week of the first term. the mediation in fact did not take place until 8 april 2021. the father offered to fund a private mediation did not eventuate due to a legal aid funding issue (father’s affidavit of 26 september 2022, paragraph 16). risk factors the orders sought by the mother on a final basis significantly reduce and marginalize the father’s time with [w] and [z] subject to his wishes, support a finding that the mother has no investment in supporting [w] having a meaningful relationship with her father, notwithstanding the assertions made by the mother that she encourages the children to have a relationship with the father (mother’s trial affidavit filed 26 september 2022, paragraph 21, second sentence “i tell the children that both [mr dyer] and i love them and have supported them spending time with [mr dyer]”). the short and long-term impact of the mother’s antipathy towards the father on [w]’s social and emotional development, and her capacity to have healthy adult relationships is potentially at risk. the general antipathy towards the father in the mother’s household potentially places [w] in the invidious position of being exposed to negative sentiment about him. given the opinion expressed by [ms f], family consultant in paragraph 4.4 of her addendum, ‘the continuing dispute demonstrates that both parents have failed to protect the children from the conflict and hostility.’ the father concedes that the birthday card delivered by [w] was on any view not appropriate in the context of [w] being placed in a position to delivering the card to [y], as the content of the card itself, which deeply upset [y]. the father acknowledges upon reflection that the card and its delivery was insensitive and hurtful to [y]. in the father’s affidavit filed 3 june 2022, he acknowledges at paragraph 25 (f) that he was aware that [y] was struggling with identity issues and trying to find themselves and that it bought tears to his eyes. the father accepts that the parents are restrained from involving the children in any further communications involving the children in the delivery of any communications between the parents, including gifts and cards. protective factors the father further demonstrated his commitment as a parent in completing the parenting after separation course on 5 september 2022 and the parenting after separation course completed on 16 september 2022. the father has demonstrated unequivocally his commitment and child focus as a parent in relinquishing in its entirety his superannuation entitlement in the sum of approximately $53,000 whilst retaining for himself his modest chattels in his possession (father’s affidavit of 26 september 2022, paragraph 101). the father is cognizant of his responsibility in relation to paying child support and bringing up to date any arrears that may occur. the father’s engagement as a volunteer on tuck-shop duty since 25 march 2021 indicates his commitment as a parent in undertaking such duties at the school. factors – family violence the parents separated on 15 march 2019. it is now approximately 3½ years post-separation. neither parent has not sought a family violence order against the other, either in the act or a domestic violence order in queensland. the father concedes that following the separation that he sought medical assistance following the breakdown of the marriage. the mother deposes in her trial affidavit that she does not suffer from any mental health issues. resolution it is submitted that the applicant father has during the course of these proceedings demonstrates in the form of the final orders he seeks, a focus on the best interests of the children, the subject of these proceedings, by agreeing with and seeking orders in the final orders as set out by the independent children’s lawyer, save that: weekend time pursuant to order 4 of the interim consent orders of 3 june 2022 be continued as a final order, during the long summer school holiday period: from noon on saturday to noon on the following saturday from 9.00am, 31 december in odd numbered years to 4.00pm on 7 january and a further week in late january, and in even numbered years for one week in early january and a further week in late january, and on date to be advised by the father at least 21 days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year. the mother shall be at liberty to suspend [w]’s time with the father twice a year for no more than 21 nights if she is holidaying overseas provided that the father’s holiday time is not suspended in january. that the parents be restrained from using the child to deliver cards, messages or gifts to the other parent or sibling (order 11 of the father’s proposed minute of orders).
written submissions on behalf of the mother
primary considerations: meaningful relationship to the extent that it is safe the mother does not assert a physical risk to the subject child when spending time with the father, although she raises concerns consistent with neglect. the significant risk alleged relates to emotional and psychological harm to [w] and to the other children in her household. the evidence establishes a strong risk of emotional and/or psychological harm by reference to: the father’s consistent failure to respect the children’s wishes unless told to him directly by the relevant child, and sometimes even after that has occurred, the six older children’s rejection of the father, [z] and [y]’s rejection coupled with their self-harming behaviours, the father’s lack of insight about the impact on the children of his behaviour generally, the father's sending messages to the children through [w], exemplified by [y]’s birthday card, and the impact on [w] of being the only child of the sibling group living with the mother in canberra to be spending time with the father. [w] is of an age where she enjoys spending time with her father, referred to in the oral evidence of [ms f] as a developmental ‘sweet spot’. the older children have each in turn rejected their father (apart from [mr g]) and this seems consistent with their development of individual identities. if a tree is measured by the fruit it bears, there is small hope for the future of the father’s relationship with [w] as she ages. this is particularly so as the father lacks insight. in response to criticism around [y]’s birthday card, rather than act consistently with the forensic portrayal of his sensitivity and concern set out at paragraph 25 of his affidavit filed on 3 june 2022, the father consistently referred to [y] as ‘she’ and ‘her’ in his evidence, and proposed a future solution to send no card at all. it appears that when faced with an immovable difference of opinion, the only tool in the father’s parenting tool box is rejection. [w] is close to [y] and to her other siblings. if they are upset by the father’s communications to or about them, this must have an impact on [w]. the mother spoke of her efforts to reduce conflict around this issue in her oral evidence. the father could not acknowledge any action by him that could have negatively impacted upon the children’s relationship with him, eventually passing all responsibility to the mother. this evidence was given in the face of a history where: the mother alleges that the father spoke poorly about her in front of the children, including them in their marital issues prior to separation, the father moved to australia with two of the eight children for a holiday and refused to return. his evidence was that this decision was in part because he had decided the situation in [country b] was untenable, and his keeping some of the children in australia might ‘encourage’ the mother to agree with him, the father did not return the children to [country b], even for a visit to their mother and siblings and he did not communicate with or visit any of the other children until the mother had returned to australia with most of the children, the father sent [x] a screenshot showing he had a balance of $12,000 in an account that the mother could no access, at a time when the mother and children were financially struggling in [country b], once the family were in australia, the father did not take up opportunities to communicate with or spend time with the children, particularly following his arrival into canberra in early 2021. the father also spoke with [w] about the upcoming court proceedings and very specific details of his communications with the mother, in spite of orders to the contrary. importantly, the father could not see that these were examples of the conduct sought to be restrained. the mother deposed to the impact on [w] of such conversations. if the father cannot recognise the behaviour that causes harm, he cannot limit or cease that behaviour. there is no evidence that could satisfy the court that the father's conduct will change, or that he has the tools or motivation to change. accordingly, the risk of harm to [w] is ongoing and can only be ameliorated by limiting orders for time with her father. additional considerations the views and wishes of the children were expressed to [ms f] in the family report that recommended daytime only contact for [w]. at trial, the father seemed to suggest that the difference in the children’s views between the child impact report and the family report provided some support for his theory that the mother did or said something to change the children’s views. context is everything. at the time of the child impact report, the father had just moved to canberra in december 2020 and started regularly seeing the children in april 2021. one month later, at the ages of 10 (almost 11) and 5, the children spoke with the court child expert. interviews for [ms f]’s report took place in april 2022. at that stage, time had been occurring for a year and the children were familiar with what post-separation time with the father was like. [z] had experienced very poor mental health towards the end of 2021 and the children had witnessed [y]’s struggles with his identity and his mental health. the mother’s affidavit filed 26 september 2022 covers extensively her communication with the children about time with the father4. she was not challenged on this area. the children have a very good relationship with the mother and [w] spoke to [ms f] about missing her mother when she spent time with the father. [w] was initially reluctant to spend any time with her father but then indicated she would spend some limited time with him, leading to the family consultant’s comments about her willingness being consistent with her developmental stage. the sibling group is described by everyone as very close with one another. it is important, then, to consider the sibling group and the impact on [w] of extended separation from her siblings as well as the icl's questions to [ms f] around the impact on [w] of being “different”. the limitation of time to one weekend day a fortnight allows [w] to have special time with her father but not miss out on time with her other five siblings in her mother's home. extended holiday periods, when spent with the paternal grandparents, have an added advantage of time spent with [mr g]. it appears common ground that the father failed to properly explore or take advantage of all of the opportunities to spend time or communicate with children that were offered to him by the mother. he did not regularly communicate with the children in [country b] when he was in australia, he did not regularly communicate or spend time with them when they returned to australia, and when he moved to canberra, he did not spend time with the children in spite of at least seven offers by the mother. his evidence that his failure to spend time was somehow the result of advice is not credible. as already canvassed, those choices by the father are likely to have had an impact on the children. on no assessment of the evidence could it be considered that the father has discharged his financial obligation to the children. that includes the period where the father was in australia and the mother and most of the children were in [country b]. that exchange with the father was astonishing. he knew it cost approximately $5,000 a month to live in [country b] and those costs were being met by donations. he acknowledged that the level of donations changed when he told the mother that the family should move to australia, although he was reluctant to indicate whether he had suggested or agreed to reductions in donations upon his departure to australia. there is no reason the court would not accept the mother’s evidence that she and the children were living on a tiny fraction of the donations that had been available during the period before the father travelled to australia for a short holiday, yet simply did not return. the father is assessed to pay child support and discharged almost all the arrears in the days prior to the final hearing. his evidence was that this was made possible by a loan from a “parishioner”. while the father’s evidence around his ministry was confused and incredible, it is relevant only to the issue of whether the father can provide appropriately for [w]’s daily needs. in the mother’s submission, the father did not provide evidence of any reliable capacity to do so. the father’s evidence that aside from ‘ministry expenses,’ all his food, living expenses, some flights, his child support obligations and all costs of activities with [w] are paid from profit achieved by selling cars with [mr g]. when pressed for details, this income earning activity became like the miracle of the loaves and fishes: profits are split between the father and [mr g], some profit is reinvested in the next car, cars cost between $500-$1000 to purchase, profits are about $500 - $750 each, they have bought and sold six cars this year. at most, the father’s income from this activity was $3,000 - $4,500 for the ten months prior to the final hearing. the evidence does not establish that the father has the practical capacity to financially care for [w] for extended periods of time, or indeed for any periods of time. on the basis of his oral evidence, it is not clear that the father resides in canberra – flying in only to spend weekend time with [w] before spending 11-12 days in queensland with [mr g] and the paternal grandparents. that evidence undermines the affidavit evidence provided by the father and [ms n]. for reasons already set out, the father has shown limited capacity to provide for [w]’s needs, including her emotional development, which would be impacted by the father's negative attitude towards the mother. while that attitude may be seen as a reflection of his lack of insight into his own behaviour, the father’s fixed view that the mother is responsible for the older children’s rejection of him (because he hasn’t “done anything wrong”) presents a risk to [w]. if he is unable to protect her from his negative view of the mother, it is undoubtedly detrimental to her. family violence the mother’s evidence of the father’s controlling conduct, particularly in the period prior to separation, was compelling. when taken with the evidence as a whole, including [ms f]’s comments as to the father’s rigid belief system, it shows a pattern of conduct consistent with the father having very limited ability to respect the views of others. the father showed an intolerance for [y] and [z], at different times he pressured the mother and the children to agree with his views, including the concession made in his evidence that staying in australia with [z] and [mr g] was in part an attempt to have the mother agree with his views about the family leaving [country b]. more recently, he resisted the mother’s requests for the children to receive psychological treatment, or participate in the [o] programme, meaning the children were unable to be assisted until the mother obtained sole parental responsibility in june 2022, and in the face of multiple requests, he did not return passports or pay child support until the days prior to the hearing. the father’s conduct, while satisfying the definition of family violence under the act, does not present a physical risk to [w] but serves to highlight the risk to her emotional and psychological safety. it is acknowledged that the risk is likely to increase as [w] develops independence, but it is a present and ongoing risk. as [z] has said “i’m worried about [w] because she always says yes to dad”. the orders sought by the mother and the icl balance the risk to [w] with her right to a meaningful relationship with the father. those orders should be made.
written submissions by the independent children’s lawyer
the icl notes that the submissions of the applicant father and respondent mother and continues to seek orders that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the four children, [x] born [in] 2006, [y], and known as [y], born [in] 2007, [z] born [in] 2010, and [w] born [in] 2015. however, it is also submitted that the mother should keep the father informed about decisions she wishes to make concerning [w]’s long term welfare and accordingly the icl proposes the following order, which appears to be consented to by the parents. notwithstanding order 3, except in an emergency, the mother must advise the father about all proposed major long term health and educational decisions in relation to the [w] and: prior to the decision being made in relation to the child [w] and give him seven days in which to provide a response in relation to his views, following the father providing a response to the mother, the mother have a further 7 days to consider his views and provide a further response to the father and once that response is provided to the father, the mother can make the decision 7 days thereafter, providing she advises the father that she has done so. nothing in these orders permits the mother to change [w]’s surname or permanently to relocate to a country outside australia without the prior written consent of the father or first obtaining a court order dispensing with the father's consent. furthermore, it is submitted that it is in the best interests of the four children that they live with the mother, and this is by consent of the parties. it is likewise in the 3 older children’s, [x], [y] and [z], best interests that they spend time with the father in accordance with their wishes. this proposed order is also by consent. the primary issue in dispute is the time that [w], aged 7, spends with the father. the father seeks fortnightly contact every second weekend from 3pm friday until 4pm on sunday. he also seeks additional time during the school holidays. over the long summer holidays he seeks two periods of a week and alternate weekends from friday to tuesday. the mother has sought orders in accordance with the minutes of orders proposed by the icl, i.e. that [w] spend time with the father as agreed in writing between the parents, but failing agreement, as follows: every second weekend from 3pm friday to 5.00pm saturday. during the school holidays: during the term 1,2 and 3 school holiday period from noon on the second saturday to noon on third saturday weekend. during the long summer school holiday period from noon on saturday to noon on the following saturday for one week in early january and a further week in late january on dates to be advised by the father to the mother in writing at least twenty one days in advance and not on the weekend before the commencement of term 1 of the new school year. from 10.00am to 2.00pm on the father’s birthday if a weekend or 3.00pm to 6.00pm if a school day, from 9.00am on good friday to 4.00pm on easter saturday. from 3.00pm to 6.00pm on [w]’s birthday if she is not already in the father’s care. from 5 pm on the preceding saturday until to 5.00pm on father’s day. from 11.00am on 25 december to 11.00am on 26 december, commencing 2023 and every odd numbered year thereafter from 9.00am on 31 december to 4.00pm on 1 january. the icl also submits that it is in the interests of all of the children who live with the mother, if the mother is able to suspend the father’s time with [w] to go on a holiday, whether domestic or international, on up to 4 occasions per year for 3 weeks and in such case the mother should provide the father with make-up time within 3 months. accordingly, the order sought by the icl and consented to by the mother is as follows: the mother shall be at liberty to suspend [w]’s time with the father on up to 4 occasions per year for no more than 21 cumulative nights if she is having a holiday in australia or overseas with the children provided that: if travelling within australia she has given the father written notice of her intention to travel 14 days in advance or as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing. if travelling overseas she has provided written notice in compliance with order 12. that the mother provide make up time to the father within 3 months of her return from her holiday. the father seeks that the suspension apply to each parent but for only twice a year but not to occur in january. the father is concerned that the mother has not supported [w]’s right to have a meaningful relationship with him. on the other hand, the mother points to the breakdown in the parenting relationship being a long and gradual process, which was already under strain in [country b] and then became exacerbated by the father’s domineering behaviours, his disregard and dismissal of the mother’s feelings, views or wishes, the severe financial strain and pressures of being dependent on the uncertain charity of others, the father staying in queensland without any agreement or discussion and the fact that the children gradually moved away from their father emotionally due in large part to his ambivalence in taking the opportunity to spend time with them after separation. the father admitted to having poor mental health in 2018 and 2019 and he does appear to have been neglectful so far as taking the opportunity to spend time and communicate with the children during this time, being concerned with his own personal struggles and issues. having experienced the primary care of the mother and the absence of the father post separation the children became more reliant on the mother to meet their needs and no doubt also experienced the reduction in the day-to-day conflict and friction between their parents as a benefit. certainly, the mother not feeling disempowered or oppressed in her daily life would have translated into a happier environment for them. the children of their own accord drifted apart from the father, and so far as [y] and [z] are concerned, this became more and more acute and resulted in a rejection of them wanting to spend time with the father. [y] had already decided that she wanted nothing to do with that father in may 2021 when the cic report by [ms l] was prepared. the trauma and emotional cost to [y] and [z] of the having a relationship with the father was ultimately deemed by the children themselves to be too onerous and upsetting and both [y] and [z] experienced severe depression and anxiety, manifesting in self harm and thoughts of suicide. this extreme behaviour was a direct response to the intolerable situation they perceived themselves to be faced with if forced to spend time with the father and the father quite properly has decided not to pursue any orders requiring them to spend time with him. there is no evidence of the mother alienating, either deliberately or unintentionally, the children from their father, but the fact that, save for [mr g] and [w], the parties’ other 6 children have become estranged from him does call into question how capable the father was as parent and the children’s subjective experiences of being parented by him would seem to have been negative particularly in recent years.. at the time of the cic report [x] told [ms l] that the father came across as being invasive and accordingly he was distancing himself, and one can see that the same dynamic is likely to be an operative factor in the children’s views of their father, as the father’s personality that emerged under cross examination was one that exhibited some notable traits of being fairly rigid in his thinking and experiencing difficulty with appreciating the children’s or the mother’s point of view or perspectives. in many of his answers the father demonstrated little insight as to the effect of his behaviour on the children or the mother. the icl agrees with the submissions made by ms davis the mother’s counsel in paragraphs 9 to 16 of her submissions as this was the impression conveyed by the father in giving his evidence. the family consultant [ms f] at page 21 paragraph 93 of her family report dated 30 april 2022 expressed her concern about the father not acknowledging his contribution to the demise of his relationship with his children. the new way of life experienced by the children in their mother’s household has been of benefit to them and is a stark contrast to and more in line with mainstream parenting and living arrangements of contemporary families than the previous lifestyle the family experienced pre-separation. it is hardly surprising that the children are unable or unwilling to transition back and forth between the two. the father has not seen fit to undertake the necessary steps to adjust his parenting and lifestyle to accommodate the children’s preferences and is unlikely to do so in the future as he did not appear to be aware of reasons for the children’s rejection of him. the father is genuine in his belief that [w] enjoys her time with him and that this should be maintained and extend to consecutive overnights on a regular fortnightly basis. the difficulty is that the father’s accommodation in canberra and his independent financial means are uncertain, and he also gave evidence that he regularly flies to queensland on a fortnightly basis to spend time with his parents and [mr g]. the father appears wholly dependent on others to put a roof over his youngest child’s head to spend time with her. to ensure that [w] has the best chance of being properly cared for in bother her parents’ homes it is submitted that one overnight per fortnight is sufficient to ensure she maintains a relationship with her father whilst also being secure and settled in the home of her mother and 3 older siblings. being closest in age to [z] and [y] puts her in the position of being influenced by their feelings and it would be too big a burden on her to have to spend more than one night a fortnight away during school term. this is more contact than recommended by [ms f] but given her age [w] would likely be able to cope with being away from her mother for this time. the icl agrees with the submissions of the mother’s counsel concerning the s 60cc (3) additional considerations. the icl also notes the ambivalence of the child’s views and her insecurity about her relationship with her father page 17 paragraph 76 family report. [w]’s secure attachment is with her mother, and her siblings are also very important to her. but her uncertainty about her father is a direct result of his unavailability to her post separation and is also enmeshed with her siblings’ rejection of her father. loyalty conflicts may become problematic in the future so the court should be cautious about making orders for extended time with the father. [w] is vulnerable because of her age and the father’s challenges with parental sensitivity and ability to perceive the children’s feelings and communications are a risk factor. it is hoped the father will respond more competently as a father to [w] than he has in recent years to his older children. the father’s parenting capacity to meet [w]’s needs, physical, financial and emotional, is adequate for short stays and during times when he will be assisted by his parents in [city c] and this will allow [w] to connect with [mr g].
written submissions on behalf of the father in reply
outline of principle
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s.60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.  7] for our part, we echo the view expressed by the trial judge of the serious nature of depriving the father of contact in circumstances where that appears to have been engineered by the mother, without any fault on the part of the father at all. this cannot be in a child's best interests. [178] it also does not appear to us to be appropriate for a parent to be able to manipulate the family law system to such an extent that the other parent's hope of ever seeing the child again, rests upon the possibility that she may wish to seek him out in later adolescence or adulthood. [179] we think that a family court would not be doing its duty if it were to simply give in to these sorts of considerations, except in the most extreme case and only then, when a positive determination is made that the welfare of the child requires it.
given the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the court must consider the conduct of the parents, not with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other, but to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the custody of one or the other.
consideration and disposition   up until separation, it was largely the case that the father made all major decisions, notably in relation to where the family lived, and certainly how the family lived, specifically upon “benefactions”, broadly described. since separation, in colloquial but very practical terms, most if not all of the children “have voted with their feet”, all but one child (who lives in city c) live with their mother, and have little or nothing the do with the father, (b) it follows from this that, largely since separation, most day to day and longer-term decisions have been made, and have had to be made, by the mother who remains with little financial support (e.g. such as child support) from the father because he is unable to file tax returns and remains financially, and in all other respects, dependent upon donations from others who are directly or otherwise somehow associated with his very narrow, and narrowly christian “ministry”, (c) because of the father’s lack of, or inability, to undertake daily and longer-term planning due to his indigent situation, for many years and currently he has been, and remains, unable to provide for the family and the children in particular other than via benefactions. necessarily, this must make the proper and reasonable practice of planning (and reasonably providing) for, for example, the schooling needs of the children, family holidays, medical care and the like, completely problematic. such day-to-day, and longer-term, realities, in my clear view, show an astonishing ignorance or denial on the father’s part of the need for his family, and the children in particular, to have a degree of certainty, routine and predictability in relation to basic needs, and having a degree of reasonable confidence (and expectation) that their needs will be met, (d) it follows from the evidence and the comments above that the court can have no confidence in the father’s capacity “to provide for the needs of the children”, which must include their physical, emotional and intellectual needs. again, the fact that the children have essentially refused to have any contact with him is perhaps the most eloquent, tragic and strident assessment and comment on the father’s parenting, his capacities more widely, and his relationship with the children. it also highlights the father’s abject refusal and/or inability even to acknowledge, let alone address, the plight of, and circumstances surrounding, the lack of relationship with most of his children. his fundamental silence (or deflection) on this aspect, despite many questions about it, was and remains alarming. his lack of insight on such matters was quite disturbing. he plainly has no plan to address pretty much anything to do with the children and the ongoing support they require. effectively he has abandoned the parenting playing-field, and barely knows where or how to find the field or even to cheer from the side-line. these are abjectly serious and concerning assessments of the deficiencies of the father’s parenting. everything has effectively been left to the tender care of the mother, who, for the most part, undertakes her lot, dumped on her by the father with zero resources, faithfully and thoroughly, (e) these comments apply with equal force (for the purposes in particular of sub-paragraph (i)) regarding the deeply unfortunate but blindingly obvious deficiencies, in my view, of the father’s irresponsible approach to parenting. there has been no obvious weekly, monthly or longer-term plan, no obvious provision for basic, daily necessities of life for the children, including their education. everything relied upon the father’s “ministry” and benefactions, such as they are. while the history of providence in all manner of circumstances cannot be doubted (again the instances of mother teresa and francis of assisi may be noted among countless others), almost invariably, radical, new enterprises of christian endeavour have been by those who do not have a spouse and a large number of children. it is also regularly the case that such new enterprises occur by reference to some connection to an established ecclesial organisation, and no less importantly the “fruit” of their labour becomes manifest “along the way.” while there are notable exceptions to some of these general “criteria” or examples, they remain classic instances of “the good tree bearing good fruit.”[77]   it follows from this that, largely since separation, most day to day and longer-term decisions have been made, and have had to be made, by the mother who remains with little financial support (e.g. such as child support) from the father because he is unable to file tax returns and remains financially, and in all other respects, dependent upon donations from others who are directly or otherwise somehow associated with his very narrow, and narrowly christian “ministry”, (c) because of the father’s lack of, or inability, to undertake daily and longer-term planning due to his indigent situation, for many years and currently he has been, and remains, unable to provide for the family and the children in particular other than via benefactions. necessarily, this must make the proper and reasonable practice of planning (and reasonably providing) for, for example, the schooling needs of the children, family holidays, medical care and the like, completely problematic. such day-to-day, and longer-term, realities, in my clear view, show an astonishing ignorance or denial on the father’s part of the need for his family, and the children in particular, to have a degree of certainty, routine and predictability in relation to basic needs, and having a degree of reasonable confidence (and expectation) that their needs will be met, (d) it follows from the evidence and the comments above that the court can have no confidence in the father’s capacity “to provide for the needs of the children”, which must include their physical, emotional and intellectual needs. again, the fact that the children have essentially refused to have any contact with him is perhaps the most eloquent, tragic and strident assessment and comment on the father’s parenting, his capacities more widely, and his relationship with the children. it also highlights the father’s abject refusal and/or inability even to acknowledge, let alone address, the plight of, and circumstances surrounding, the lack of relationship with most of his children. his fundamental silence (or deflection) on this aspect, despite many questions about it, was and remains alarming. his lack of insight on such matters was quite disturbing. he plainly has no plan to address pretty much anything to do with the children and the ongoing support they require. effectively he has abandoned the parenting playing-field, and barely knows where or how to find the field or even to cheer from the side-line. these are abjectly serious and concerning assessments of the deficiencies of the father’s parenting. everything has effectively been left to the tender care of the mother, who, for the most part, undertakes her lot, dumped on her by the father with zero resources, faithfully and thoroughly, (e) these comments apply with equal force (for the purposes in particular of sub-paragraph (i)) regarding the deeply unfortunate but blindingly obvious deficiencies, in my view, of the father’s irresponsible approach to parenting. there has been no obvious weekly, monthly or longer-term plan, no obvious provision for basic, daily necessities of life for the children, including their education. everything relied upon the father’s “ministry” and benefactions, such as they are. while the history of providence in all manner of circumstances cannot be doubted (again the instances of mother teresa and francis of assisi may be noted among countless others), almost invariably, radical, new enterprises of christian endeavour have been by those who do not have a spouse and a large number of children. it is also regularly the case that such new enterprises occur by reference to some connection to an established ecclesial organisation, and no less importantly the “fruit” of their labour becomes manifest “along the way.” while there are notable exceptions to some of these general “criteria” or examples, they remain classic instances of “the good tree bearing good fruit.”[77]   because of the father’s lack of, or inability, to undertake daily and longer-term planning due to his indigent situation, for many years and currently he has been, and remains, unable to provide for the family and the children in particular other than via benefactions. necessarily, this must make the proper and reasonable practice of planning (and reasonably providing) for, for example, the schooling needs of the children, family holidays, medical care and the like, completely problematic. such day-to-day, and longer-term, realities, in my clear view, show an astonishing ignorance or denial on the father’s part of the need for his family, and the children in particular, to have a degree of certainty, routine and predictability in relation to basic needs, and having a degree of reasonable confidence (and expectation) that their needs will be met, (d) it follows from the evidence and the comments above that the court can have no confidence in the father’s capacity “to provide for the needs of the children”, which must include their physical, emotional and intellectual needs. again, the fact that the children have essentially refused to have any contact with him is perhaps the most eloquent, tragic and strident assessment and comment on the father’s parenting, his capacities more widely, and his relationship with the children. it also highlights the father’s abject refusal and/or inability even to acknowledge, let alone address, the plight of, and circumstances surrounding, the lack of relationship with most of his children. his fundamental silence (or deflection) on this aspect, despite many questions about it, was and remains alarming. his lack of insight on such matters was quite disturbing. he plainly has no plan to address pretty much anything to do with the children and the ongoing support they require. effectively he has abandoned the parenting playing-field, and barely knows where or how to find the field or even to cheer from the side-line. these are abjectly serious and concerning assessments of the deficiencies of the father’s parenting. everything has effectively been left to the tender care of the mother, who, for the most part, undertakes her lot, dumped on her by the father with zero resources, faithfully and thoroughly, (e) these comments apply with equal force (for the purposes in particular of sub-paragraph (i)) regarding the deeply unfortunate but blindingly obvious deficiencies, in my view, of the father’s irresponsible approach to parenting. there has been no obvious weekly, monthly or longer-term plan, no obvious provision for basic, daily necessities of life for the children, including their education. everything relied upon the father’s “ministry” and benefactions, such as they are. while the history of providence in all manner of circumstances cannot be doubted (again the instances of mother teresa and francis of assisi may be noted among countless others), almost invariably, radical, new enterprises of christian endeavour have been by those who do not have a spouse and a large number of children. it is also regularly the case that such new enterprises occur by reference to some connection to an established ecclesial organisation, and no less importantly the “fruit” of their labour becomes manifest “along the way.” while there are notable exceptions to some of these general “criteria” or examples, they remain classic instances of “the good tree bearing good fruit.”[77]   it follows from the evidence and the comments above that the court can have no confidence in the father’s capacity “to provide for the needs of the children”, which must include their physical, emotional and intellectual needs. again, the fact that the children have essentially refused to have any contact with him is perhaps the most eloquent, tragic and strident assessment and comment on the father’s parenting, his capacities more widely, and his relationship with the children. it also highlights the father’s abject refusal and/or inability even to acknowledge, let alone address, the plight of, and circumstances surrounding, the lack of relationship with most of his children. his fundamental silence (or deflection) on this aspect, despite many questions about it, was and remains alarming. his lack of insight on such matters was quite disturbing. he plainly has no plan to address pretty much anything to do with the children and the ongoing support they require. effectively he has abandoned the parenting playing-field, and barely knows where or how to find the field or even to cheer from the side-line. these are abjectly serious and concerning assessments of the deficiencies of the father’s parenting. everything has effectively been left to the tender care of the mother, who, for the most part, undertakes her lot, dumped on her by the father with zero resources, faithfully and thoroughly, (e) these comments apply with equal force (for the purposes in particular of sub-paragraph (i)) regarding the deeply unfortunate but blindingly obvious deficiencies, in my view, of the father’s irresponsible approach to parenting. there has been no obvious weekly, monthly or longer-term plan, no obvious provision for basic, daily necessities of life for the children, including their education. everything relied upon the father’s “ministry” and benefactions, such as they are. while the history of providence in all manner of circumstances cannot be doubted (again the instances of mother teresa and francis of assisi may be noted among countless others), almost invariably, radical, new enterprises of christian endeavour have been by those who do not have a spouse and a large number of children. it is also regularly the case that such new enterprises occur by reference to some connection to an established ecclesial organisation, and no less importantly the “fruit” of their labour becomes manifest “along the way.” while there are notable exceptions to some of these general “criteria” or examples, they remain classic instances of “the good tree bearing good fruit.”[77]   these comments apply with equal force (for the purposes in particular of sub-paragraph (i)) regarding the deeply unfortunate but blindingly obvious deficiencies, in my view, of the father’s irresponsible approach to parenting. there has been no obvious weekly, monthly or longer-term plan, no obvious provision for basic, daily necessities of life for the children, including their education. everything relied upon the father’s “ministry” and benefactions, such as they are. while the history of providence in all manner of circumstances cannot be doubted (again the instances of mother teresa and francis of assisi may be noted among countless others), almost invariably, radical, new enterprises of christian endeavour have been by those who do not have a spouse and a large number of children. it is also regularly the case that such new enterprises occur by reference to some connection to an established ecclesial organisation, and no less importantly the “fruit” of their labour becomes manifest “along the way.” while there are notable exceptions to some of these general “criteria” or examples, they remain classic instances of “the good tree bearing good fruit.”[77]
associate: dated: 10 february 2023
dated: 10 february 2023
[1] other, not quite so young children, such as y (formerly known as y) and z, were also part of the litigation by virtue of not having yet acquired their majority. however, the father confirmed that he only sought orders in relation to w.[2] more generally, see the brief discussion of “fundamentalism” in the oxford dictionary of the christian church, (ed. a. louth) fourth edition, volume 1 (oxford: oxford university press, 2022) at 745 – 746. hereafter “louth, christian dictionary” followed by volume and page number.[3] see similar text in lk 6,37 – 42.[4] in the absence of any relevant detail by the father about his ministry, other than in the most general terms, it might be assumed (it certainly cannot be put any higher) that the religious tradition that might more closely resemble his ministry is some form of evangelicalism. see the article under this title in louth, christian dictionary vol.1 pp.670 – 671.[5] in his affidavit of 14th october 2020, (par.2), the father deposed that he was ordained as a pastor of the city e non-denominational centre. the provenance of this ordination, in any relevant respect, was not explained. [6] see transcript (17th october 2022) pp. 35 & 36. hereafter, such references will simply be “t” followed by the page number.[7] t 34.[8] t 31 – 33.[9] a typically erudite and compelling account of a select part of this tradition regarding care for the poor, is peter brown’s poverty and leadership in the later roman empire (the menahem stern jerusalem lectures) (hanover & london: university press of new england, 2002).[10] see mt 7,15-16; 12,33. it is sufficient to set out only the latter text (12.33): “make a tree sound and its fruit will be sound; make a tree rotten and its fruit will be rotten. for the tree can be told by its fruit.” the extensive – in time and breadth – philosophical and theological (judeo-christian) tradition and understanding of “fruit” (karpos – κάρπός) is summarised in many classic reference books, such as a greek-english lexicon of the new testament and other early christian literature (third edition) (ed. f.w. danker) (chicago & london: the university of chicago press, 2000) 509 – 510.[11] t 48 – 50.[12] t 31 – 32. [13] t 32 – 33, 40. [14] t 33. [15] t 33.[16] t 33, [17] t 34. [18] t 34 – 35, 37. [19] t 35. [20] t 35 – 37. [21] t 37 – 38. [22] t 39 – 40. [23] t 41.[24] t 41 – 42.[25] t 42. [26] t 43 – 44. [27] t 48 – 50. [28] t 50.[29] t 51.[30] t 51.[31] t 52.[32] t 52.[33] t 54, 56 – 59.[34] t 60 – 61. [35] t 61 – 62. [36] t 62.[37] t 62-63.[38] t 16. [39] t 64 – 65. [40] t 65 – 68. [41] t 78 – 79. [42] t 79 – 80. [43] t 80.[44] t 80 – 81. [45] the shorter oxford dictionary (fifth edition) defines “penumbra” as “any partial shade or shadow around a thing; a surrounding area of uncertain extent.”[46] t 82 – 84. [47] t 84 – 86.[48] t 86. [49] t 87. [50] t 90. [51] t 99 – 100. [52] t 103- 104. [53] t 106 – 107. [54] t 107. [55] t 108.[56] t 108 – 109. [57] t 109 – 111. [58] t 112 – 113. [59] t 113.[60] t 113 – 114. [61] t 114. [62] t 114.[63] t 18. [64] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93], as well as the later comments by the high court, by reference to fox v percy albeit in a different context and for different purposes, in lee v lee [2019] hca 28; (2019) 266 clr 129 at [55] – [56].[65] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[66] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[67] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[68] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[69] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[70] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[71] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[72] bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662 at [34] – [35] and [43]. of course, in considering a child’s views, the court should also be mindful of potential consequences if orders are made that are contrary to any expressed views of a child or children. [73] in the marriage of r [2002] famca 383; (2002) 169 flr 243; 29 fam lr 230.[74] among other places, see the full court decision in partington v cade (no.2) [2009] famcafc 230; (2009) 42 fam lr 401 at [48] and [56]. partington v cade (no.2) must now be read in the light of the full court’s recent stern qualifying comments in isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) 65 fam lr 288.[75] in the marriage of kress (1976) 13 alr 309.[76] there are multiple positive comments by the children scattered throughout ms f’s first report about the mother’s partner recorded above.[77] among many instances of supremely radical christian life-styles that led to abundant “fruit” only after death, there is the remarkable life of charles de foucauld, the former french viscount who later became a solitary monk who lived among the tuareg tribes in and around the sahara desert in algeria until he was killed by bandits in 1916. wherever he lived in abject poverty during his life, and obviously after his conversion from a life of raucous debauchery and relentless affairs, he always subjected himself to the authority of the local bishop of the area, and remained further subject to a long-time spiritual guide, a priest in paris. following his death his saintly life gave rise to multiple, world-wide communities of women and men; his sanctity is formally recognised by the catholic, anglican and episcopal churches. the definitive english biography of foucauld, a translation of the original french version in 1997 of the same title, is by jean-jacques antier, simply entitled charles de foucauld (trans. j.s. smith) (san francisco: ignatius press, 1999).[78] among the immense array of material written by, and about, augustine, see the encyclopaedic and magisterial, as well as generally stunning, study by serge lancel, st augustine (trans.a. nevill) (london: scm press, 2002) chapters xii – xv, and perhaps the better known (in the english-speaking world) peter brown’s, augustine of hippo (revised edition) (london: faber & faber, 1967 & 2000) chapters 11 – 13.