last updated: 23 december 2021
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
birk & farwell [2021] fedcfamc2f 234
orders
the court orders that:
1. within 14 days the parties are directed to bring in minutes of orders to give effect to these reasons.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
1 in this case i must determine how the property of the parties, after a cohabitation in a de facto relationship of 13 and a half years where they raised two children, should be divided or adjusted between them. the applicant de facto husband is mr birk (‘the husband’) and the respondent de facto wife is ms farwell (‘the wife’). the background of this relationship is set out in the interim decision known as birk & farwell [2020] fcca 2732 following a contested interim hearing.
2 the dispute is to how their property should be divided or altered in accordance with part viiiab of the family law act 1975 (cth) (‘the act’) and largely, but not entirely, revolves around the weight to be given to the disparate initial contributions of the parties back in 2005.
3 at the commencement of this hearing the parties' property division and the living arrangements for their children were in issue. the matter had been estimated to take three days of hearing time. the evidence included a very detailed private family report that consisted of 240 paragraphs over 83 pages in a small font and as a result of questions to the expert from the parties, and whether or not they could be answered was itself a dispute, a further 26 pages (in the same font) of detailed answers to those questions that covered a further 61 paragraphs. the observations and opinions of the expert were, on first reading, compelling. however because of the range of factual disputes relevant to the children's welfare i was pessimistic that it was even remotely possible to conclude the matter within the estimated three days.
4 the parties were both represented by solicitors and counsel. the hearing was conducted in person in a courtroom. at the commencement of the matter at 10.00am on the first day the parties' counsel requested that the matter be stood down as they wished to conclude discussions and i agreed.
5 during the afternoon of the listed first day counsel announced that they had reached a settlement in regard to the children's matters and final parenting orders were then made in detailed terms. those orders provided for the children to live with the wife and spend, initially five nights over six days per fortnight with the husband, moving to six nights over seven days on satisfactory completion of further alcohol testing of the husband, as well as one half of school holidays.
6 the dispute about property division proceeded over the remainder of the day and the following day. although robust and detailed arguments were pursued by both sides, the efficiency of counsel in presentation of their respective cases and cross examination meant that the property dispute concluded at the end of the following day, that is the matter took a total of two days, including the time well spent on negotiations. without the parties' common sense, courage, concentration on their children's best interests and assistance from their solicitors and counsel, and the resultant agreement about the children's living arrangements, the final hearing would have taken many days and would likely have had to have been adjourned part heard for many months. that is unless other cases awaiting final hearing were to be “bumped” to conclude this case.
evidence relied upon
7 the husband relied upon the following evidence: (1) husband's further amended initiating application filed 24 march 2021, (2) husband's affidavit of evidence in chief filed on 24 march 2021, (3) husband's financial statement filed 24 march 2021, (4) husband's affidavit in reply filed on 29 april 2021, and (5) husband's outline of case filed on 28 april 2021.  husband's further amended initiating application filed 24 march 2021, (2) husband's affidavit of evidence in chief filed on 24 march 2021, (3) husband's financial statement filed 24 march 2021, (4) husband's affidavit in reply filed on 29 april 2021, and (5) husband's outline of case filed on 28 april 2021.
8 the husband had filed an affidavit of his father mr o and dr p which were ultimately not relied upon for the determination of the property proceedings nor was the affidavit of the family report writer dr q.
9 the wife relied upon the following documents: (1) wife's further amended response filed on 21 april 2021, (2) wife's affidavit of evidence in chief filed on 21 april 2021, (3) wife's financial statement filed 21 april 2021, (4) wife's first financial statement filed on 29 january 2020 (relied upon in final address without objection), (5) wife's financial statement filed 16 september 2020 (relied upon in final address without objection), (6) outline of case filed on 28 april 2021, and (7) exhibits w1 and w2.  wife's further amended response filed on 21 april 2021, (2) wife's affidavit of evidence in chief filed on 21 april 2021, (3) wife's financial statement filed 21 april 2021, (4) wife's first financial statement filed on 29 january 2020 (relied upon in final address without objection), (5) wife's financial statement filed 16 september 2020 (relied upon in final address without objection), (6) outline of case filed on 28 april 2021, and (7) exhibits w1 and w2.
10 the wife had filed an affidavit by ms r and another by mr s which were ultimately not relied upon for the determination of the property proceedings nor was the affidavit of the family report writer dr q.
the parties
11 the husband lives in melbourne, is 48 years of age and is an professional and he is currently employed, working five days per week, at the rate of about $220,000 per annum.
12 the wife lives in melbourne in the former relationship home, is 49 years of age, is employed in a technology area is a manager and, working four days per week and now earns $180,000 per annum. this income translates, for a 5 day working week, an earning capacity roughly comparable to the husband’s.
13 the parties’ have two children, x now 11 years and y now six years. the parties commenced cohabitation in november or december 2005 and separated on 3 february 2019. at separation the wife remained living in the former relationship home. hence the parties have each contributed within the meaning of section 90sm(4)(a), (b) and (c) of the act from cohabitation to final hearing for about 15½ years. by community standards their property acquisition, conservation and improvement has been successful. they have put together equity of about $2,000,000, largely in the jointly owned former relationship home, and another $550,000 or so in superannuation as well as raising two children and maintaining significant careers and earning capacities.
a summary of the remaining property dispute
14 i found the husband and the wife to be an open, honest and careful witnesses. the parties’ credit was not in issue. aspects of the reliability of the wife’s recollection of events years ago were explored and demonstrated the greater reliability of recollection assisted by contemporaneous source documents over mere recollection.
15 the wife bought in quite a bit of equity in a unit or flat, significant cash, some shares and some superannuation. the extent of that equity in the flat at cohabitation, although conceded to be substantial, was also in dispute. the husband bought in very little by way of assets and some credit card debt.
16 in addition the wife seeks what can be described as a “one pool” approach of superannuation and non-superannuation assets and the husband seeks that those different types of assets be treated differently. there is also a dispute about the costs or compensation for a subpoenaed witness relating to the children’s orders issue who was not called but who appeared and sought expenses or compensation of income forgone as, he said, a result of putting aside work to be available to give evidence when required.
17 there is a dispute as to how the modest value of the parties’ motor cars should be treated. not long before separation the husband purchased another motor car for his use. the wife retained the “old” car. at separation the husband took the new car with him. the wife replaced the “old” car by purchasing a new one from what is agreed to be her “part property” settlement. by the end of the hearing there was a dispute whether both parties’ cars should be simply left out of the asset “pool” or whether values, and if so what value, should be attributed to them.
18 there is dispute about whether the wife should be treated as having partial property settlements of $204,580 or $194,580 and if it is to be $194,580 whether, on the husband’s side his partial property settlement should be regarded as $203,000 or $193,000 plus $10,000 characterised as maintenance. the $10,000 maintenance claim, in the alternative only arose on the first day of the final hearing to rebut or deal with the (also brand new) contention that the wife’s agreed part property was $10,000 less than previously contended. from a few months before separation until shortly before the final hearing the husband was unemployed.
19 the wife sought an overall division of property and superannuation 65% to her and 35% to the husband. the husband seeks a division of non-superannuation property of 52.5% to the wife and 47.5% to himself and for a base amount super splitting order to equalise the amount of the parties’ current superannuation balances.
20 the application of settled law was said by each party to favour his or her case.
law of alteration of property of a de facto relationship
21 this as an application for property alteration or settlement pursuant to part viiiab of the act and i set out the key provisions that it is common ground i am to apply.
22 section 90sm(1), (3) and (4) of the act states:
section 90sm – alteration of property interests (1) in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or  in property settlement proceedings after the breakdown of a de facto relationship, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or  in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the de facto relationship in the property, or
... including: (c) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (d) an order requiring:  an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship, or (ii) the relevant bankruptcy trustee (if any),
to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.
... (3) the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. (4) in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or (ii) otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.  the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the de facto relationship, or a child of the de facto relationship: (i) to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the de facto relationship or either of them, or  the contribution made by a party to the de facto relationship to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the de facto relationship and any children of the de facto relationship, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the de facto relationship, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 90sf(3) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the de facto relationship or a child of the de facto relationship, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the de facto relationship.
23 by section 90sm(4)(e) i am to take into account section 90sf(3) and that provision states as follows:
section 90sf – matters to be taken into consideration in relation to maintenance (3) the matters to be so taken into account are: (a) the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support:  the age and state of health of each of the parties to the de facto relationship (the subject de facto relationship ), and (b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment, and (c) whether either party has the care or control of a child of the de facto relationship who has not attained the age of 18 years, and (d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support: himself or herself, and (ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and ) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain, and the responsibilities of either party to support any other person, and (f) subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  subject to subsection (4), the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,  any law of the commonwealth, of a state or territory or of another country, or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside australia,
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party, and a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable, and (h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to:  the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income, and (i) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor's debt, so far as that effect is relevant, and (j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party, and (k) the duration of the de facto relationship and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration, and (l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party's role as a parent, and (m) if either party is cohabiting with another person--the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation, and (n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 90sm in relation to: the property of the parties, or (ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party, and (o) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (ii) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under this part in relation to: (i) a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (p) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to:  a party to the subject de facto relationship (in relation to another de facto relationship), or (ii) a person who is a party to another de facto relationship with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and  the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under part viii in relation to: ) a person who is a party to a marriage with a party to the subject de facto relationship, or (iii) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them, or (iv) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by subparagraph (i) or (ii), and (q) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.  any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the subject de facto relationship has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the subject de facto relationship, and (r) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account, and (s) the terms of any part viiiab financial agreement that is binding on either or both of the parties to the subject de facto relationship, and (t) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on a party to the subject de facto relationship.
24 those provisions were brought into the act (and hence give this court the task of determining property alteration or property settlement arising from de facto relationships) from 1 march 2009. the concepts within those provisions (largely but not entirely) mirror corresponding provisions in part viii of the act that apply to property alteration or property settlement arising from legal marriage.
stanford v stanford
25 in the high court of australia case of stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52, (2012) flc 93-518 (‘stanford’) the majority stated some fundamental propositions about section 79 proceedings. section 90sm(3) mirrors section 79(2) and so stanford is applicable in this case.
26 in stanford the essential issue was whether it was just and equitable to make any property order at all, in circumstances where the consortium vitae or marriage relationship had not broken down by way of a separation. the parties had become physically separated due to the ill-health of one of them and that party being in residential care and the other remaining in the matrimonial home. the proceedings for the party in ill-health were conducted by a case guardian who was also the beneficiary under the will of that party.
27 the family court of western australia had made an order for a property settlement that would have necessitated the sale of the former matrimonial home where the husband continued to reside. for 37 years prior to the wife moving to a nursing home, the parties had made their matrimonial home in a house registered in the husband's name.
28 the wife’s expenses in accommodation were being met and she had the benefit of a sum set aside in the event she needed anything further. it was the second marriage for both of the parties. the wife's case guardian was a daughter from her previous marriage. the husband appealed to the full court of the family court of australia and before the conclusion of that appeal the wife died.
29 in the high court the husband’s argument that there was no power in the circumstances to make a property settlement order was dismissed and the case turned on whether, considering section 79(2), it was just and equitable in to make a property settlement order at all and whether the circumstances of section 79(8) of the act, which relates to the continuation of proceedings after the death of the parties, had been complied with.
30 the high court varied the order of the full court and found that in the circumstances it was not just and equitable that a property settlement or property alteration order be made at all (and also that section 79(8) had not been complied with). this was so despite 37 years of marriage and contribution by the wife. section 79(4) contribution, even 37 years of it, was not to be conflated with the section 79(2) “just and equitable” requirement but should be considered separately and first. the result of the high court's order was that the property settlement order as originally made was dismissed with costs.
31 apart from the general observations about section 79 the high court also observed that community of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common law and that it should not be concluded that the making of an order is just and equitable only because of, or by reference to, the matters in section 79 without a separate consideration of section 79(2).
32 the majority observed at [37]:
[37] first, it is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order by identifying, according to ordinary common law and equitable principles, the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property... the question posed by s 79(2) (and/or section 90sm(3)) is thus whether, having regard to those existing interests, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order.
33 the majority continued at [41-42]:
[41] ...the fundamental propositions that have been identified require a court have a principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated or unstated assumptions and agreements about property interest during the continuance of the marriage. [42] in many cases where an application is made for property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice by made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and the wife. no less importantly, the express implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship... and the assumption that any adjustment of those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4) (and/or section 90sm(3)).
34 in this case it is common ground that the parties no longer have, and will not have in the future, the common use of the major asset of the parties, the jointly owned former relationship home.
35 in addition to those considerations each party here contends that it is just and equitable that i make section 90sm(4) property alteration orders. because of those matters i find that it is just and equitable to make property alteration orders in this case.
36 in stanford the high court did not go on to comment upon how section 79(4) should be applied where it was just and equitable that a property alteration or settlement order be made. stanford was not concerned with the nuts and bolts of how section 79(4), or section 90sm(4), was to be applied in the ordinary run of cases, to the extent there is such a thing.
the preferred approach
37 in keskin & keskin and anor [2019] famcafc 236, (2019) flc 93-932 (‘keskin’) the full court, strickland, kent & austin jj, at [44] approved what was the age old and pre stanford “preferred approach” as to the how the nuts and bolts of section 79(4), and hence section 90sm, fitted together:
[20] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”. the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) – the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) – ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) – the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...
38 that preferred approach set out at [39] of hickey and hickey and the attorney-general [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 (‘hickey’) is as follows (citations omitted):
[39] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
39 lest it be said there is a conflict between the high court’s disavowal of “entitlement” to a section 79 order by mere separation and/or section 79(4) contribution on the one hand, and the use of the word “entitlements” in the hickey passage cited above i regard the use of that word in the above context as synonymous with “assessment.” i will have regard to what i find to be the contribution based assessment rather than entitlement.
40 the division or adjustment of property acquired over the parties’ lifetime is a serious, stressful and emotionally intense legal matter. many family lawyers find that failing to have regard to the preferred approach in negotiations, mediation or litigation (including submissions) is likely to widen the areas of dispute and make resolution by agreement more difficult and often results in a party, or both, merely seeking what he or she simply wants or regards as fair from his or her point of view.
41 the preferred approach assists me in making a principled and orderly determination of the parties’ property dispute and the parties helpfully addressed me about those matters.
step one: identify the property and liabilities
42 the parties’ respective affidavits and outlines of case set out the assets and liabilities of the parties as follows.
non-superannuation assets
item[1]
owner
husband value
wife value
note
1
c street, suburb d
joint
$1,750,000[2]
$1,750,000
agreed
2
cba #...31 (re: c street) 04,990)
14 c street, suburb d equity
$1,245,010
3
g road, suburb d
$850,000
to be sold
4
cba #...66 (re: g road, suburb d, est. selling costs) 04,524) ($20,000)
g road, suburb d equity
$225,476
estimated
5
shares at 16.04.2021
wife
$130,000
6
i pty ltd
nominal
7
h pty ltd 2017 automobile only asset
husband
no value included
$14,500[3]
part cars dispute
8
part property settlement
$203,020
9
$204,580
$194,580[4]
dispute
10
g road, suburb d offset #...21
nil
n/a
11
estimated sales costs g road, suburb d
included above
12
cgt on the sales of g road, suburb d and e street, suburb f[5]
not calculated
13
cgt sale shares $40,000[6]
$6,000
wife’s car
not included
parties bank accounts
total non-superannuation assets
$2,008,086
$2,018, 586[7]
item
husband value
14
l super(at 06.04.2021)
$218,140
15
j super (at 07.04.2021)
$146,207
16
k super(at 07.04.2021)
$180,152
17
t super (as 30.06.2021)
$7,594
total of wife’s superannuation
$333,858
$333,953
$95 diff
total of parties superannuation
$552,093[8]
$552,201[9]
close to agreement
total assets
husband:
total of all assets[10]
$2,560,179
$2,570,679
43 the difference between the parties is a total of $10,500 and can be explained thus: (a) the husband puts #9, the wife's partial property settlement, at $10,000 more on her side or as her "keep" (or she puts it at $10,000 less). (b) the husband excludes both his and her cars, hence $14,500 less on his "keep" and $6,000 less on her "keep".  the husband puts #9, the wife's partial property settlement, at $10,000 more on her side or as her "keep" (or she puts it at $10,000 less). (b) the husband excludes both his and her cars, hence $14,500 less on his "keep" and $6,000 less on her "keep".
the cars “in or out” dispute
44 the disagreements about the value of second hand motorcars are overrepresented among the usual suspects of the things that cause parties to disagree about the value of their own and the other side’s assets. often both sides overvalue the second hand motorcars of the other side. usually second hand motorcars are not collectible and usually depreciating at an astonishing rate from the brand-new purchase price. frequently the time and angst and resultant legal fees getting agreed values or expert valuations about the parties’ respective second hand motorcars outweighs the utility of the dispute (even where the motorcar is a utility). frequently the available online facility of “redbook” or like service is utilised to resolve these disputes by agreement. unfortunately where there is a dispute about everyday second hand motorcars the court cannot use, or permit the parties to put in evidence the value from such service unless that is agreed.
45 it is likely that such assertions of value out of court, unless they could be characterised as a business record, would be hearsay. whether a redbook “valuation” could be a business record was not argued before me and i proceed on the usual basis that a redbook “valuation”, when relied upon by one party in court, would be hearsay and inadmissible. the parties proceeded on this basis.
46 the husband’s approach, as part of a concise and economical conduct of his case, to determining the pool was to leave out minor assets such as furniture and motorcars which both parties had. there is much to commend such an approach unless it causes injustice. the wife’s approach was almost the same except she sought to attribute value to the parties’ motorcars and her “car” being an allowance on trade in when she purchased a new car (from the part property already included in the pool). her case was that the husband’s motorcar was worth roughly double what her “trade in” was and consistent with the requirement to identify all of the parties’ assets and liabilities as at the time of the hearing sought to include the motorcars at the first stage of the preferred approach by using what her counsel asserted was redbook values. she put her (traded in) car at $6,000 and the husband’s existing car $12,000.
47 given the parties’ efficiency at reducing the property dispute to its essential components it is unfortunate that this dispute could not be resolved by experienced lawyers, but sometimes a further small concession by a party can be the straw that breaks the camel’s back. i am, of course, not privy to the dynamics of attempts to resolve this issue.
48 although the parties’ motorcars are not major assets they are not insignificant. the car dispute is not de minimis. unless agreed otherwise, the first step of the preferred approach requires me to determine the value of all of the parties’ assets even those minor assets but provided that the value of the minor assets is not vague, mere guesswork or insignificant or de minimis in proportion to the overall dispute.
49 in his outline of case and through oral submissions the husband did not attribute any value to either motorcar, his or the wife’s traded in motor car. neither party can be regarded as having expertise in attributing a value to second-hand motorcars hence i cannot attribute any weight to their own opinions of the value of the other party’s motorcar if such opinions were admissible.
50 the husband asserts that because the wife was able to purchase, after separation in june 2020, a new motorcar for in the order of $50,000 and he was not, and where neither party seeks to include that new motorcar as an asset in the pool, it is just and equitable not to include that motorcar, or the trade-in allowance the wife said she received or the value of the husband’s 2017 motorcar.
51 in final address when rebutting the alternative argument concerning the $10,000 being the spousal maintenance issue, the wife’s counsel asked that i look at the two financial statements (being in the form prescribed by the relevant rules at that time) previously sworn or affirmed and filed on the 27 january 2020 and on 16 september 2020. there was no objection to that by the husband’s counsel and i looked at those documents and i was addressed on them.
52 according to the 27 january 2020 financial statement, when the wife was working, she said, three days per week for 44 weeks per year her average weekly income was $2,411 plus share dividends of $244 giving an average weekly income she said of $2,655 and her total expenses she said were $2,406 per week. she described having funds in a bank account ending in #...43 of $73,000 and in another account ending in #...69, of $85,000.
53 according to the wife’s 16 september 2020 financial statement, her weekly income was $3,149 plus share dividends of $192 giving an average weekly income she said of $3,341 and her total expenses, she said, were $3,559 per week. she described having funds in a bank account ending in #...78 as only $19,528 and in another account ending in #...69, only $29,924, but she described a recently purchased new motor car in the document as having a current value of $52,000 and i infer that was the approximate purchase price. she asserted she received a $6,000 trade-in allowance on a car that she had acquired during the parties cohabitation.
54 the inference is overwhelming that the reduction in money in the bank is at least partly because of the purchase of the $52,000 motorcar. the inference is overwhelming that the funds in the wife’s bank accounts, at least in part, related to her part property settlements. in those circumstances to count the whole of the partial property settlement and the asset of the motorcar purchased with those proceeds would be double counting.
55 the husband’s counsel asserted that the wife had not specifically said where the funds for the purchase of the motorcar came from in her affidavit of evidence in chief. notwithstanding that i find that the wife purchased the new car directly or indirectly with the funds attributed to her by way of partial property settlement. all of those funds will be included as held by the wife for the wife’s “keep” in the final property alteration analysis. it is not suggested that the purchase of the husband’s 2017 model motorcar was purchased by him with partial property settlement funds after separation and i infer that he retained this car acquired during the parties’ cohabitation.
56 hence unless the parties agree it is not just and equitable to simply leave both cars out of the pool of assets as one party seeks.
57 in this case each party had recently sworn a financial statement. in the husband’s financial statement he attributed a value of $14,500 to his motorcar. the wife’s outline of case attributed a value to her motorcar of $6,000, (that being said to be the trade in value of the car she had at separation). that she had received such an allowance when she purchased a later model, the $52,000 car described above, was not in dispute. the wife sought, when dealing with motor cars, to use the trade in value, as the value of her car. it is just and equitable that i do so: the alternative is the value of the trade in just disappears. as a general rule parties should account for significant assets disposed of after separation.
58 one alternative where there is a dispute about the value of assets and the parties have not put any expert or admissible evidence before the court is for the court to order the sale of those disputed assets and the proceeds to be divided as the court determines. in this case it was not submitted that i should, nor did i raise this option with the parties. the parties’ lawyers would know that that is always an option open to me in the case of a dispute about the value of an asset. in this case the expense, trouble and strife of the sale of the husband’s motorcar and the supervision of that sale to ensure it is at arm’s length would far outweigh the benefit to the parties of the value of the motorcar being determined in that manner.
59 in discussion with counsel i raised the issue of whether the husband’s assertion in his financial statement as to the value of the motor car to be retained by him would be admissible as an admission against interest and the wife’s counsel asserted it could be. but this discussion was in passing only and consideration of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (‘the evidence act’) sections 76 (opinion evidence is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about which the opinion was expressed), section 81 (the opinion and hearsay rules do not apply to previous representations that contain an admission against interest) and the dictionary definitions of admission and previous representation are not without complication when applied to a representation contained in an affidavit that is “relied upon” as evidence in chief in the proceedings. it is not appropriate to go down that burrow without more considered argument.
60 i must have regard to the parameters of the factual disputes relevant to my determination that the parties, in adversarial proceedings, set.
61 in this case the recent financial statement of the husband, adopted as true and correct in evidence in chief and relied upon as part of his evidence in chief, is in evidence. in final address the wife’s counsel moved to adopt and press upon the court that value that the husband had asserted. hence there was, in the end, no dispute as to the value of the husband’s second hand motorcar. the husband’s case never moved from the value asserted. his case was that regardless of the value, whether agreed or otherwise, it should not be included in the pool of assets.
62 hence i find that the husband’s motorcar should be regarded as a value as he attributed to it in his financial statement, and with which the wife’s case ultimately agreed, of $14,500 and that value included as part of his “keep” in the asset pool.
63 the same applies to the issue of the amount attributed the wife’s motorcar (traded in). there was not a dispute that the wife in fact received allowance of $6,000 as she asserted on the trading of that motorcar. the dispute was whether any value at all should be attributed to motorcars: retained and/or traded in. hence i find that the value of that trade in should be as she asserted it in her outline of case, $6,000 and that value included as part of her “keep” in the asset pool.
the wife’s partial property settlements $194,580 or $204,580?
64 the husband sought to characterise funds that the wife had received or had the benefit of as partial property settlements to the extent of $204,580. the wife sought to characterise those partial property settlements as $10,000 less: that is $194,580.
65 in opening the wife by her counsel asserted that $10,000 paid to the husband, and part of his $203,020 had come from the $204,580 that were asserted to be all partial property settlements and hence the wife should be regarded as receiving only $194,580 as partial property settlement. in closing address the wife’s counsel put it again and thus:
...i have $204,000 of joint funds and you have $203,000 joint funds, and from my joint funds i pay you $10,000, and then when we come to court the joint funds are then apportioned against each party as to who got what of those joint funds. that’s the test.
66 as a matter of logic that proposition makes sense. the issue is whether the evidence demonstrates the factual platform for the proposition. had the wife, in fact, paid to the husband $10,000 of “his” $203,020 from “her” $204,508 that she received as partial property settlement, there would be substance in the position.
67 it was put to the husband that from the wife’s $204,508 she paid to the husband $10,000 and he said he had no knowledge where that money came from. it was also put to him that her (the wife’s) evidence is that it (the $10,000) came from the $204,508. the husband acknowledged that he “had heard that’s her evidence”.
68 in the wife’s trial affidavit, filed 21 april 2021, at paragraph 100 the wife set out in a convenient table the funds she had received or retained which totalled $204,508. in the same table she set out the funds that she said the husband had received which she said totalled $203,020.
69 the table at paragraph 100 also purported to set out the source of the funds received. there was no suggestion in that table that any of the funds received by the husband in the $203,020 sought to be characterised as partial property settlement on his side had been sourced or paid to the husband from the $204,508 that the wife had received or retained.
70 a table similar to the table at paragraph 100 was included in the wife’s further amended initiating application filed 21 april 2021 where an order was sought that sum received or retained following separation be characterised as partial property settlements: to the wife $204,580 and to the husband $203,020. no mention was made of $10,000 included in the $204,580 to the wife as being subsequently, and from those funds, being paid to the husband.
71 in the recital of the orders sought in the wife’s outline of case filed 28 april 2021, that is mere days before the first day of final hearing on monday 3 may 2021 that wife sought a declaration that she had received part property in the sum $204,580.
72 given the care and detail of the wife’s affidavit of evidence in chief, and the wife’s further amended initiating application filed 21 april 2021, i would have expected to see a reference to such matter had it occurred.
73 when the wife was asked questions by the husband’s counsel, mr robinson, there was the following exchange:
mr robinson: when was it you changed your position from saying, “i want to be treated as having $204,580 worth of part property settlement, to now only saying, “i want to be treated as having $194,580”?--- the wife: i would say that is more my lawyers advise me that there was an accounting error that it should be coming off because it came from my personal funds. mr robinson: so my question was when? the wife: when? mr robinson: yes? the wife: that probably would have been when developing the outline of case i imagine. i’m not sure exactly the right-exact date. mr robinson: so have you got some document that shows where this $10,000 comes from?--- the wife: i will be able to produce the document. it came from my i business account on 22 may. mr robinson: so the company hh business account is where you paid your income into. is that correct? ----- the wife: my income when i was contracting, so before my current job. ... mr robinson: ...but as i understand it the evidence you’ve just given, that the $10,000 came from an account that your income and jobkeeper were being paid into?--- the wife: that is correct. mr robinson: that’s correct? the wife: that is correct-where the money came from, yes. mr robinson: and if you do produce that document, will i see any monies going into that account that aren’t your income and jobkeeper?--- the wife: i don’t think so, but i would need to check.
74 at paragraph 183 of her affidavit of evidence in chief filed 21 april 2021 the wife referred to the funds in the i bank account are a combination of pre-tax funds and gst collection and as such did not provide a true representation of income or available funds. although dealing with a different topic this evidence is consistent with the passage referred to above.
75 at paragraph 184 of the same affidavit the wife set out another table of funds received by the husband and wife since separation (excluding the $73,000 loan from the wife’s mother) and the total was said to be $274,149 on the husband’s part and $424,841 received by the wife. this table included what was said to be income received by the parties including jobkeeper received by the husband up to 8 april 2021 being shortly before the final hearing and $10,000 superannuation withdrawal on the husband’s side as well as “balance of money spent on credit cards” which appears to be a notional amount. however that table is consistent with the table set out in the further amended initiating application and the table at paragraph 100 of her affidavit filed 21 april 2021.
76 in final address the wife’s counsel (at page 108 of the transcript) asserted as follows,
...the characterisation of the amounts that my client says, “i paid from my account to the husband”- the accounts have been put aside and treated as though they contain, effectively, what the parties have had. your honour, by logic, it must have come from the account. if one looks at the tables that are drawn from the dates on which those payments are made, on the evidence of my client, she paid the amount over- the $10,000 over on the may date... that can only have come from savings. my learned friend said, well, it might have come from earnings. yes, it might have. if you then treated- and this is where the argument becomes circuitous----
77 i interrupted counsel and the following exchange occurred:
his honour: the $10,000 payment was to come from a specific account - ...43, mr sweeney: yes. his honour: the witness says it came from the-she doesn’t use those numbers-the i account. mr sweeney: it came from the business account. yes. yes. his honour: and she says that the i account is what jobkeeper and income went into. mr.sweeney: absolutely. his honour: yes.
78 the wife’s counsel then went on to address and rebut the alternative argument that if the $10,000 was included as partial property settlement to the wife $10,000 should be deducted from what was otherwise conceded to be partial property settlement on the husband’s side and treated as spousal maintenance paid to him.
conclusion as to the $10,000
79 i will not recite every point or argument that each side advanced but i have read the transcript of proceedings in writing these reasons and have considered, and taken account of, all arguments put.
80 based on the evidence and taking into account the parties arguments i conclude that it is proper and just and equitable to regard the wife’s partial property settlements as $204,580 not $194,580: that is to include the controversial $10,000 as partial property settlement. i do so for the following reasons. the wife had until the drawing of the outline of case herself characterised the whole of the $204,580 as partial property settlement. the evidence does not disclose that the controversial $10,000 came from those funds, that is the $204,580. the evidence discloses that the controversial $10,000 came from the wife’s i account and that was the account into which the wife paid her income and jobkeeper notwithstanding that in her affidavit she deposed to moving money between accounts. it has not been established that the $10,000 came from the partial property settlement to contradict what was set out in application, affidavit and outline of case.
81 because of my findings about the $204,580 partial property settlement i do not need to consider the alternative argument of the husband of “take $10,000 from my side as spousal maintenance”. the husband has conceded, and opened his case on the basis, that the sum of the $203,020 should be treated as partial property settlement.
82 however there may be substance in the point when the wife’s counsel asserted in final address:
... you can’t just simply say, “that’s a lump sum, and for some reason i will sing kumbaya and then make it all maintenance. it has got to be a legal approach to it. the legal approach... is not just a vibe...
83 it is unnecessary for me to address the argument asserting the $10,000 could not be characterised as lump sum maintenance nor is it necessary to address the issue of whether, if it is not to be characterised as lump sum maintenance whether it automatically becomes partial property settlement.
conclusion as to the pool of assets and liabilities
84 the word “pool” is not mentioned in the act but it is convenient to adopt that frequently used shorthand description of all of the parties assets and liabilities at the time of the hearing. i conclude the pool is, again using the table from the husband’s outline of case for convenience, as follows:
item[11]
value
c street, suburb d, c street, suburb d
agreed
cba #...31 (re c street, suburb d)
c street, suburb d equity
g road, suburb d, c street, suburb d
cba #...66 (re g road, suburb d estimated selling costs)
agreed agreed
estimated
shares (various) at 16.04.2021
h pty ltd 2017 automobile only asset
$14,500
by the court
agreed[12]
g road, suburb d offset #...21
estimated cost g road, suburb d
cgt on the sales of g road, suburb d and e street, suburb f[13]
cgt sale shares $40,000[14]
$2,028,086
superannuation assets
notes
super l at 06.04.2021
super j at 07.04.2021
k super at 07.04.2021
t super at 30.06.2021
total wife’s superannuation
total parties superannuation
$552,093[15]
total of all assets[16]
85 the wife’s ‘keep’ from the above pool is:
cgt sale shares $40,000[17]
cgt on remaining shares if sold to raise payment to husband
wife’s non-superannuation ‘keep’
$340,580
less cgt x 2[18]
86 the husband’s ‘keep’ from the above pool is:
agreed[19]
husband’s non-superannuation ‘keep’
$217,520
87 the remaining joint non-superannuation assets of the above pool are:
item[20]
agreed to be sold
cgt on the sales of g road, suburb d and e street, suburb f[21]
total joint non-superannuation assets
$1,470,486
but less cgt
88 hence the pool can be summarised as follows:
wife’s non-superannuation ‘keep’(but less cgt on the $40,000 shares sold and to be sold to comply with these orders)
total non-superannuation assets/liabilities
$2,028,586
husband’s superannuation
wife’s superannuation
total superannuation
$552,093
agreed figure
total all assets (if appropriate to total)
$2,580,679
89 the parties did not address section 90xo of the act, and as the value of superannuation interests were agreed and i infer agreed to be accumulation funds, did not need to be. i infer the parties superannuation interest are not covered by a superannuation agreement or a flagging order or a waiver notice as referred to in section 90xo. for the purpose of section 90xt(2) i find the value of the parties interests are as was agreed for the purpose of this hearing and as recited above.
step two: assessment of contributions - section 90sm(4)
90 i now assess the direct and indirect financial contributions of the parties and the direct and indirect non-financial contributions of the parties to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of the property of the parties and the contribution to the welfare of the family of the parties including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent as required by section 90sm(4). i will for convenience refer to all of those concepts within those sections as “contribution” as the parties’ counsel did in submissions to me.
91 it is helpful to assess such contribution in percentage terms and the parties sought that i do so.
92 the wife in outline of case contended, “that there should be an adjustment of 2.5% to the respondent and contributions in the exercise of weighing all of the contributions from the commencement of the relationship to date”, and maintained that position in opening and final address. i took this is the equivalent of asserting that overall the husband should be regarded as contributing in the proportion of 47.5% and the wife 52.5%.
93 the major dispute in the case is the weight to be attached to the common ground fact that the wife bought in to the relationship substantial property and the husband brought in a small debt.
94 it was put by the husband’s counsel that apart from the disparity of initial contributions the parties’ respective contributions should be regarded as about equal to the date of the hearing. as i understood this expression this was merely a shorthand way of identifying where and why the parties disagreed about the very different contribution assessments each pressed. this was not expressly adopted by the wife’s counsel but there was no dispute or demur from that proposition as a convenient means of identifying where the parties disagreed when assessing contribution.
95 all contributions that fall within section 90sm(4) must be taken into account. while i find shorthand identification of the contribution elements in dispute helpful, and the use of such approach in negotiations is ubiquitous among family lawyers, the ultimate decision cannot be made by segmentation and/or concentration upon a particular element of the contribution matrix.
96 in wallis & manning [2017] famcafc 14, (2017) flc 93-759 (‘wallis & manning’) the full court (citations omitted) observed:
19. by... submissions the parties approached the assessment of contributions by suggesting that “an adjustment” should be made to a result reached otherwise by reference to a miscellany of other contributions. her honour adopted a similar approach. such an approach is by no means uncommon to both the presentation of cases and the structure of judgments. it is convenient in this case, as it is more broadly, so as to describe a contribution or contributions of a particular type said to have particular importance and to distinguish it or them from other contributions. 20. yet, that approach must also ensure that the “myriad of other contributions” and the duration over which, and circumstances in which, the miscellany of other s 79(4) contributions were made is not accorded a subsidiary role. the essential s 79(4) task is for “trial judges [to] weigh and assess the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the parties throughout the period of their cohabitation”. ... 110. the approach adopted by the parties (at first instance was) that “the contributions of the parties would be equal aside from gifting by the husband’s father of significant parcels of land which remain in existence at the present point in time”... for the reasons given earlier, we reject that approach, the gifts by the husband’s father should be taken into account as a contribution together with the miscellany of other contributions made by each of the parties over the course of their marriage.
97 the same approach was applied in benson v drury [2020] famcafc 303, (2020) 62 fam lr 1, at [35-36] where the full court observed:
[35] the central question raised by this appeal is how a judge takes into account the contributions of one party, found to have been made significantly more arduous by the conduct of the other, when assessing contributions under section 79(4)(a-c) or 90sm(4) of the act. the answer is the primary judge must take a holistic approach. the contributions which have been made significantly more arduous must be weighed along with all other contributions by each of the parties, whether financial or non-financial, direct or indirect to the acquisition conservation and improvement of property and in the role of home maker and parent. all contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise to various contributions and way one against the remainder (citations omitted). [36] that principle has its counterpart in the application of fact as described in section 75(2) or section 90sf(3) of the act (citations omitted). any adjustment to the parties at contribution based entitlements should be determined inclusively after considering all relevant factors, not by incremental adjustments in respect of each relevant factor.
98 in that case the appeal turned on how the so-called “kennon claim” should be taken into account but the observations are apposite to a dispute relating to disparate property brought into the relationship which can be described as initial contributions.
99 this is a case where the parties worked in paid employment, raised 2 children, supported each other and conserved and acquired property over 13.5 years of cohabitation and a total of 15.5 years contribution to the time of this final hearing. one factor that the parties agree must be taken into account is the property the wife brought into the relationship and another is the debt the husband brought in and that had to be repaid.
100 the husband’s counsel acknowledged the nature of the initial contributions of the wife but concentrated on the length of time and the many contributions of the parties over 15.5 years. the wife’s counsel acknowledged the 15.5 years of contribution and reminded me of that i should, consistent with the authorities, take a “holistic” approach and emphasised the importance of the wife’s initial contribution of substantial property.
101 as to contribution the wife’s counsel referred generally to the full court decisions of pierce v pierce [1998] famca 74, (1999) flc 92-844 (‘pierce’), in the marriage of money and money [1994] famca 54, (1994) flc 92-485 (‘money’) and jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78, (2019) flc 93-898 (‘jabour’). as to the issue of treating a superannuation asset alike with equity in a home or cash he referred me to the decision of c & c [2005] famca 429, (2005) flc 93-220 (‘c& c).
one pool or two pools?
102 in this case it is logical to determine whether i should assess one or two pools at this stage. in c & c the full court provided norbis type guidelines (see: norbis v norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) flc 91-712) as follows:
65. in summary, then, the trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case. if superannuation is not included in the list of property but rather made the subject of a separate pool, it will be necessary where a splitting order is sought, or extremely prudent where no such splitting order is sought (in order to ensure that justice and equity is achieved) to: (a) value the superannuation interest (according to the regulations if an order under part viiib is sought or according to the regulations or otherwise if no order is sought), (b) consider and make findings about the types of contributions referred to in s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) which have been made by the parties to the superannuation interests on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach depending on the circumstances, (c) consider the other factors in s 79(4) being the matters in s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), and (d) ensure that pursuant to s 79(2) the orders in relation to the parties' property, and any order under part viiib in relation to superannuation interests are just and equitable. 66. in the context of a consideration of the matters referred to in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of the last paragraph, the following matters may well be relevant: the relationship between years of fund membership and cohabitation, actual contributions made by the fund member at the commencement of the cohabitation (if applicable), at separation and at the date of hearing, preserved and non-preserved resignation entitlements at those times, and any factors peculiar to the fund or to the spouse's present and/or future entitlements under the fund. 67. if this approach is adopted, whereby superannuation interests are dealt with separately from property as defined in s 4(1), but are subject to the considerations in s 79(4), then not only will any contributions, both direct and indirect, by either party to such superannuation interests be more likely to be given proper recognition, but the real nature of the superannuation interests in question can also be taken into account, both in consideration of the s 75(2) matters and in the final assessment of whether the ultimate order is just and equitable. 68. when we refer to “the real nature” of the relevant superannuation interest, we are referring to the fact that notwithstanding that its value according to the regulations may well be calculated to be a very significant amount, that superannuation interest may be no more than a present or future periodic sum, or perhaps a future lump sum, the value of which at date of receipt is unknown.  value the superannuation interest (according to the regulations if an order under part viiib is sought or according to the regulations or otherwise if no order is sought), (b) consider and make findings about the types of contributions referred to in s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) which have been made by the parties to the superannuation interests on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach depending on the circumstances, (c) consider the other factors in s 79(4) being the matters in s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), and (d) ensure that pursuant to s 79(2) the orders in relation to the parties' property, and any order under part viiib in relation to superannuation interests are just and equitable.
103 consistent with these observations, in welch & abney [2016] famcafc 271, (2016) flc 93-756 (‘welch & abney’) at [60] the full court adopted the authority of another full court in semperton v semperton [2012] famcafc 132, (2012) 47 fam lr 626 (‘semperton’) where observations of murphy j in another case, concerning a pension, were adopted. the full court in welch & abney observed:
59. the full court’s reasons in semperton... emphasised that whilst a trial judge has a discretion as to how superannuation interests will be treated in a particular case, the discretion is guided by statements of principle, including that the nature, form and characteristics of the subject interest must be considered, whether or not a splitting order of the interest is made. 60. in emphasising these principles the plurality quoted extensively from the judgment of murphy j in hayton v bendle [2010] famca 592, (2010) 43 fam lr 602, a case concerning a judicial pension... the following paragraphs have particular resonance in the instant context:
105. ...it has always been the task of courts making orders pursuant to s 79 to properly examine the nature, form and characteristics of the property forming part of the pool for division. variety in the nature of such property is by no means uncommon... 106. there has never been a requirement for different types of property to be treated the same as other types of property, nor has there ever been a requirement for different types of property to be treated differently. the nature, form and characteristics of the property has always been recognised... 107. what is crucial is that the nature, form and characteristics of all components (or groups of components) of the “pool” to which s 79 orders might apply are considered. that is neither more nor less true of “superannuation interest”. “superannuation interest” — particularly unvested superannuation interests — can be seen as being of a nature, and having a form and characteristics, markedly different from, say, real property... ... 117. the characteristics of the pension — which see it as starkly different from, say, the cash proceeds from the sale of the former matrimonial home — need to be taken into account within the broad-based discretion provided for by s 79 in general and the assessment of contributions in particular (difficult though that may be).
61. crucially, at [175] of their joint judgment the plurality in semperton emphasised that the mandatory requirement expressed in s 90mt(2) of the act to determine an amount in relation to a “superannuation interest” as defined arises only when the superannuation interest is to be split.
104 so in considering the nature, form and characteristics of the all of the parties assets the matters i take into account include the following. consistent with the efficient approach of counsel and although never expressly stated the parties proceeded on the basis that the superannuation of each was of an accumulation type and that the statements of each fund accurately stated the value of the individual interests.
105 in this case the parties’ are 48 and 49 and both are capable of earning, by general community standards, a decent income. they will have the responsibility of supporting their children, now aged 11 and 7 for many years, including the likely issue of school fees. when the modest amount of superannuation the parties have now and what they will be able to contribute over coming years and the likely need to provide for retirement are considered it is unlikely that either party will retire from remunerative employment for many years. the most pressing need of both parties is the need to provide for their own and the children’s support which includes the provision of the most suitable home each is able to obtain. when divided between them what each party ends up with is, relative to the cost of housing in the city they live in, modest.
106 hence, absent poor health, there is little prospect that either will retire from the paid workforce in the foreseeable future. their asset of superannuation will not be available to assist house or support them and their children in the foreseeable future. their superannuation is a valuable and important asset but will likely only be available to them in the future.
107 where the parties’ ages mean they could retire and access superannuation if they wished, soon or immediately, the advantageous taxation environment of income from superannuation may well mean that superannuation is a more desirable asset.
108 until the parties are in a position to access their superannuation that asset, although valuable, has the limited benefit to them of being provision for the future. it will not now and in the foreseeable future, fund the deposit on a home or provide security to a lender for a loan to purchase a home or provide income to pay rent on a home.
109 hence i find that it is not appropriate, for these parties, at this stage of their lives, to treat a dollar of a superannuation as equivalent to a dollar of cash or equity in real estate. and so i proceed on the basis that i will treat and consider superannuation differently to the parties other assets.
non-super contribution including initial contributions
110 the wife’s case as to contribution was succinctly set out at part j [1-7] of her outline of case. those submissions bear repeating:
1. at the date of cohabitation the respondent had substantial assets with a value representing between 30% to 32.4% of the current asset pool available for division. 2. the respondent’s pre-cohabitation assets were used by the respondent as security to enable the parties to purchase and acquire the e street, suburb f property, the c street, suburb d property and the current family home thereby improving their financial position. 3. in comparison, the applicant had no assets and had liabilities by way of 3 credit card debts amounting to approximately $25,000. 4. financial contributions were made on behalf of the respondent during cohabitation by way of an interest free loan of $73,000 received from the respondent’s mother. that loan was placed in the mortgage offset account and saved the parties in excess of $20,000 in interest payments which would otherwise have been paid on the mortgage. 5. the respondent was in gainful employment during cohabitation save for a period of 10 months and a further period of 2 years and 8 months when she had the responsibility for the day to day care of the 2 children of the relationship. part of these 2 periods of unemployment were taken as paid maternity leave during which the respondent continued to receive an income. in 2015 the respondent received a redundancy payment of $66,000 which again was utilized into the acquisition, maintenance and improvement of the matrimonial assets. 6. the respondent’s direct and indirect financial contributions to the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the asset pool is far greater than that of the applicant’s. 7. the respondent made a substantial contribution to the welfare of the family in her capacity as homemaker and parent to the children for whom she was primarily responsible during her period of unemployment totalling 3 ½ years and by way of restricting her employment to part time since the birth of the first child in 2009.
111 the husband’s case placed greater weight on the many years of contribution during co habitation including a time when he was, he said, the primary care giver when he was without employment outside the home, but caring more for the children as the wife pursued her career. when the children were little the wife was a full time homemaker and parent and the husband worked. he had resigned his employment in august 2018, 6 months prior to separation.
112 the husband’s outline of case made the following observations about contribution:
1. the applicant contends that there should be an adjustment of 2.5% to the respondent on contributions in the exercise of weighing all of the contributions from the commencement of the relationship to date. 2. those contributions (that all need to be identified and weighed over the duration of the relationship and to date, include but are not limited to (others detailed in submissions): the initial contributions of the respondent: (i) being: her suburb b property with a mortgage of approximately $25,424.84 as at the date of cohabitation. the value is disputed, and as the best evidence the applicant relies on a property that he says was the same size in the sane block that sold two years after the parties commenced cohabitation for $340,000. in any event, for this purpose the value is around about what either party asserts as the difference is unlikely to effect the outcome, as it is an initial contribution to be weighed with all other contributions. this asset was intermingled with the parties other properties, and (ii) she had shares totalling approximately $10,000 and savings of around $150,000 as at november 2005. (b) the applicant worked full time or thereabouts for the majority of the relationship and contributed his income towards the parties’ day to day expenses, with the respondent working part time for periods after the birth of the children. (c) the applicant was solely responsible for and paid all mortgage repayments upon the e street, suburb f property being purchased in october 2007, until settlement of the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, due to the respondent’s contributions of $120,000 from her saving she entered the relationship with towards the purchase price. (d) upon the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, which was purchased by drawing down on the mortgage secured over the suburb b property and in effect cross securing the mortgage secured over all properties owned at the time, the applicant equally shared in the repayments of all mortgages and all expenses of all properties including the suburb b property. this continued upon the purchase of the c street, suburb d property which required the parties to refinance all loans secured over the other properties in joint names, and, to the extent these amounts have been paid it has continued right up to the date of the hearing. (e) in terms of contributions to the welfare of the family, financially the parties pooled their income and resources (through a joint account) and jointly expended on/ contributed to relationship expenses of all kinds and their properties, for the benefit of the family for the period of the relationship and after separation in the terms set out in the applicant’s material. (f) the applicant made a contribution to the respondent’s superannuation that built up during the relationship by contributing in all the terms set out herein, on a global pool, as the contributions do not need to be linked. (g) the applicant’s employment being relatively flexible throughout the relationship broadly equally shared in the homemaker and carer tasks over the relationship, and until mid-august 2018 until separation the applicant primarily cared for the children.  being: her suburb b property with a mortgage of approximately $25,424.84 as at the date of cohabitation. the value is disputed, and as the best evidence the applicant relies on a property that he says was the same size in the sane block that sold two years after the parties commenced cohabitation for $340,000. in any event, for this purpose the value is around about what either party asserts as the difference is unlikely to effect the outcome, as it is an initial contribution to be weighed with all other contributions. this asset was intermingled with the parties other properties, and (ii) she had shares totalling approximately $10,000 and savings of around $150,000 as at november 2005. (b) the applicant worked full time or thereabouts for the majority of the relationship and contributed his income towards the parties’ day to day expenses, with the respondent working part time for periods after the birth of the children. (c) the applicant was solely responsible for and paid all mortgage repayments upon the e street, suburb f property being purchased in october 2007, until settlement of the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, due to the respondent’s contributions of $120,000 from her saving she entered the relationship with towards the purchase price. (d) upon the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, which was purchased by drawing down on the mortgage secured over the suburb b property and in effect cross securing the mortgage secured over all properties owned at the time, the applicant equally shared in the repayments of all mortgages and all expenses of all properties including the suburb b property. this continued upon the purchase of the c street, suburb d property which required the parties to refinance all loans secured over the other properties in joint names, and, to the extent these amounts have been paid it has continued right up to the date of the hearing. (e) in terms of contributions to the welfare of the family, financially the parties pooled their income and resources (through a joint account) and jointly expended on/ contributed to relationship expenses of all kinds and their properties, for the benefit of the family for the period of the relationship and after separation in the terms set out in the applicant’s material. (f) the applicant made a contribution to the respondent’s superannuation that built up during the relationship by contributing in all the terms set out herein, on a global pool, as the contributions do not need to be linked. (g) the applicant’s employment being relatively flexible throughout the relationship broadly equally shared in the homemaker and carer tasks over the relationship, and until mid-august 2018 until separation the applicant primarily cared for the children.  the applicant worked full time or thereabouts for the majority of the relationship and contributed his income towards the parties’ day to day expenses, with the respondent working part time for periods after the birth of the children. (c) the applicant was solely responsible for and paid all mortgage repayments upon the e street, suburb f property being purchased in october 2007, until settlement of the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, due to the respondent’s contributions of $120,000 from her saving she entered the relationship with towards the purchase price. (d) upon the purchase of the g road, suburb d property in november 2008, which was purchased by drawing down on the mortgage secured over the suburb b property and in effect cross securing the mortgage secured over all properties owned at the time, the applicant equally shared in the repayments of all mortgages and all expenses of all properties including the suburb b property. this continued upon the purchase of the c street, suburb d property which required the parties to refinance all loans secured over the other properties in joint names, and, to the extent these amounts have been paid it has continued right up to the date of the hearing. (e) in terms of contributions to the welfare of the family, financially the parties pooled their income and resources (through a joint account) and jointly expended on/ contributed to relationship expenses of all kinds and their properties, for the benefit of the family for the period of the relationship and after separation in the terms set out in the applicant’s material. (f) the applicant made a contribution to the respondent’s superannuation that built up during the relationship by contributing in all the terms set out herein, on a global pool, as the contributions do not need to be linked. (g) the applicant’s employment being relatively flexible throughout the relationship broadly equally shared in the homemaker and carer tasks over the relationship, and until mid-august 2018 until separation the applicant primarily cared for the children.
113 the husband’s case was that cohabitation commenced in november 2005 and the wife’s case was that the date of commencement of cohabitation was december 2005. nothing material turns upon that month of time in dispute. the wife set out her account of the parties’ initial contributions as follows:
57. at the date of cohabitation, i had the following assets: (a) i was the sole registered proprietor of real property known and situate at a street, suburb b (“suburb b”) which i had purchased in 1998 for approximately $150,000. at the date of cohabitation the mortgage balance on the suburb b was approximately $25,000. it was tenanted and the rental income paid for the mortgage and all outgoings. at the date of cohabitation i estimate that the suburb b property was valued at between $380,000 to $420,000.  i was the sole registered proprietor of real property known and situate at a street, suburb b (“suburb b”) which i had purchased in 1998 for approximately $150,000. at the date of cohabitation the mortgage balance on the suburb b was approximately $25,000. it was tenanted and the rental income paid for the mortgage and all outgoings. at the date of cohabitation i estimate that the suburb b property was valued at between $380,000 to $420,000. approximately $150,000 in savings, (c) approximately $10,000 in publicly listed shares, (d) a motor vehicle and household furniture. (e) superannuation entitlements of approximately $46,000 which i had accumulated over the previous ten years, that is from approximately 1995.  superannuation entitlements of approximately $46,000 which i had accumulated over the previous ten years, that is from approximately 1995.
58. despite the applicant working in the technology industry for in excess of ten years and having a higher salary, he had no assets at the date of cohabitation. indeed, he had various debts including three credit card defaults at the anz, nab and i believe hsbc totalling in excess of $25,000. as a result of the applicant’s bad credit rating, he was unable to obtain finance. i believe that his lack of assets at that time was due to him having a serious drug and alcohol habit.
114 the husband set out his account of the wife’s initial contributions as follows:
94. at the commencement of cohabitation ms farwell had: (a) a property situated at a street, suburb b secured by a mortgage. ms farwell provided a copy of her commonwealth bank complete home loan summary account number ending #...06 which confirmed that as at september 2005 the mortgage was around $25,424.84 at the time. as far as i'm aware and based on a property in the same block, i understand that was roughly equivalent i.e. both 2,445m2, 1 bathroom and 1car space that sold nearly two years after separation i.e. the property at a street, suburb b for $345,000. annexed hereto and marked with the letters "-6" is a true copy of the transfer of land document for a street, suburb b. as the transfer shows, on this evidence the prope11y was valued between an estimated $300,000 to $340,000. i therefore estimate the equity to have been approximately $275,000 to $315,000, (b) shares totalling around $10,000, as her discovered documents show, made up as follows: (i) 510 company ee shares at $9.14 as at may 2005 equating to $4,661, (ii) 51 company ff shares at 7.10 as at november 2005 equating to $377.40, and (iii) 1,500 company gg shares at $3.50 as at november 2005 equating to $5,250.  a property situated at a street, suburb b secured by a mortgage. ms farwell provided a copy of her commonwealth bank complete home loan summary account number ending #...06 which confirmed that as at september 2005 the mortgage was around $25,424.84 at the time. as far as i'm aware and based on a property in the same block, i understand that was roughly equivalent i.e. both 2,445m2, 1 bathroom and 1car space that sold nearly two years after separation i.e. the property at a street, suburb b for $345,000. annexed hereto and marked with the letters "-6" is a true copy of the transfer of land document for a street, suburb b. as the transfer shows, on this evidence the prope11y was valued between an estimated $300,000 to $340,000. i therefore estimate the equity to have been approximately $275,000 to $315,000, (b) shares totalling around $10,000, as her discovered documents show, made up as follows: (i) 510 company ee shares at $9.14 as at may 2005 equating to $4,661, (ii) 51 company ff shares at 7.10 as at november 2005 equating to $377.40, and (iii) 1,500 company gg shares at $3.50 as at november 2005 equating to $5,250.  510 company ee shares at $9.14 as at may 2005 equating to $4,661, (ii) 51 company ff shares at 7.10 as at november 2005 equating to $377.40, and (iii) 1,500 company gg shares at $3.50 as at november 2005 equating to $5,250.
ms farwell claims that she had others hares such as company bb, company cc and company n however, from the statements provided the shares were purchased in 2006, during our relationship. annexed hereto and marked "-7" is a true copy of the share statements for company bb, company cc and company n disclosed by ms farwell. (c) savings of around $159,961 as at november 2005, as her disclosed statements show.  savings of around $159,961 as at november 2005, as her disclosed statements show.
115 the husband conceded he brought in few assets, little superannuation and that i find to be modest credit card debt and that must be taken into account and i do.
116 by the conclusion of the hearing the parties agreed that the wife brought in existing equity in the a street/suburb b property (extent in dollars disputed), cash of almost $160,000 ($159,961), shares totalling approximately $10,000 and superannuation (at the date of cohabitation) of about $46,000.
117 although it was acknowledged that the wife brought in significant equity in the a street/suburb b property the parties disagreed as to the value of that property at the commencement of cohabitation and hence the extent of the equity. it was common ground that the mortgage upon that property at the commencement of cohabitation was $24,425 (rounded).
118 the parties did not undertake a retrospective valuation of the a street/suburb b property. the wife based her opinion of the value of the property as at cohabitation on her own knowledge and judgment. i accept she honestly attempted to do so.
119 the husband based his opinion on annexure -6, the transfer of land record (of another flat of similar description in the very same block) dated 24 april 2007 but executed by the transferors on 4 march 2007 and endorsed for stamp duty on 3 may 2007 with consideration of $345,000. the contract of sale would likely have been entered into some 30/60/90 days before hand. the parties cohabited from november or december 2005. this transfer/contract of sale is some year and a bit later. because of this, not unreasonably, the husband asserted the value of the wife’s flat at cohabitation was only a bit less and in the range of $300,000 to $340,000.
120 although the wife did not state in affidavit what the basis of her opinion of value was in cross examination she said:
mr robinson: in your affidavit, you estimate your suburb b property at being between 380 and 420. you don’t have any basis for that, do you? the wife: just on the recent sales similar to what the applicant provided, except that my property that i owned was in a much better location, so it was a big property of 23 units, and mine was in the very back right-hand corner of the property. it had also been updated his honour: (slow down) and you’re referring to recent – a recent sale that mr birk identified, and ? yes. i had looked up the sales as well. mr robinson: do you have any copies of those sales you looked at? the wife: no, but i’m sure that they’re available. his honour: no, hang on. ......just cut the witness off. mr sweeney: yes. his honour: she was answering the question. mr robinson: sorry, your honour. his honour: your unit was in a bigger property ? the wife: no, no his honour: one of 23? the wife: so there’s 23 properties – 23 apartments in the property. mine was in a better location. mine was in a very back corner of the property, and it had also his honour: but which one had 23 apartments? the one that mr birk identified or the one that – your one? the wife: it’s in the same apartment block. his honour: i see? so he had identified a previous... the wife: ...sale in that apartment block, and i had looked those up as well. his honour: yes? the wife: and my property had, at that point his honour: and yours was at the back? the wife: very back, yes. and at the point of purchase of that property, my property had also been updated to a degree before i did further renovations. so it had beautiful floorboards, it had archways, it was a better-quality property, and that’s what i based my valuation on. (see: page 78-79 of the transcript dated 4 may 2021)
121 the only “sale” in evidence was the transfer referred to above. it is not disputed that the flat was sold for $588,000 in april 2015 (the wife’s [72] was not disputed or replied to) that is almost 9.5 years later. the parties both made many contributions within the meaning of the act in the meantime. selling costs would have been deducted.
122 the parties’ inexpert opinions would ordinarily not be admissible. here neither objected to the others inexpert opinion. the wife’s case was that her flat of comparable size in the same block but superior in presentation and in a different position was of value at a point about 15 months earlier, of $35,000 to $75,000 more than the flat the subject of the transfer. that is between 10% and 21.7% more notwithstanding it is about 15 months earlier. on the wife’s case in the intervening 9.5 years until its sale the property rose in value between $208,000 and $168,000 and there was some renovation in that time. but for the court, notwithstanding the joint invitation to do so, to impose upon the parties a third inexpert opinion, whether of a third range of value or to adopt one of the parties’ ranges, would not be appropriate. notwithstanding that the parties frame the issues to be determined, their exhortation for the court to attribute a value to the flat in late 2005 would merely mean a guess informed only by the parties’ inexpert opinions. section 144 of the evidence act effectively prohibits me from making my own inexpert inquiries. unlike the parties the court has not inspected the flat or the block of flats although the area is well known.
123 i am unable to find what the value of the wife’s flat was. it was conceded by the husband that the mortgage was only $25,000 and that the equity was in the range of $275,000 to $315,000 and i find that it was at least that amount and that it ultimately contributed about $588,000 after 9 ½ years of cohabitation. the wife made other initial contributions of substantial value being almost $160,000 plus $10,000 worth of shares. she also had a motor car and furniture.
124 i proceed on the basis that the wife had substantial equity in the property and with the cash she had available could have brought the property in unencumbered (but then with about $25,000 less cash) and that 9.5 years later that property contributed $588,000 less selling costs and likely cgt and plus some unquantified annual net of tax income and that the family finances were assisted by property the wife bought in being security for subsequent purchases. the husband brought in a, modest for his income, credit card debt. the parties shared some expenses from late 2005. the wife was able to purchase the second property, the e street, suburb f property, with the assistance of the security of and equity in the first property, the a street/suburb b property.
125 the husband commenced direct contribution to mortgage payments from january 2008, when the second property purchase settled, notwithstanding no property was registered in his name. at that time $430,000 was borrowed, secured on the existing property and the newly purchased one, and initially the arrangement was that the husband made the payments on $230,000 of the that debt and the wife made or arranged the payments on the remaining $200,000 of debt.
126 the wife took maternity leave and worked full time as a homemaker and parent after each child was born, periods of 10 months and 32 months (wife’s outline at page 11/22), and save for a substantial redundancy payment and a repayable loan from the wife’s mother, the husband provided the sole income to the household. some of his income was distributed to the wife and then to her superannuation fund during such periods of fulltime employment as homemaker and parent. she was at those times not in paid employment but was not unemployed, she was very much employed in caring for two little children while the husband brought in the family income. however this period of about 3.5 years in total is about a quarter of the relationship. the joint, but different, endeavours over this period were significant. the husband’s role as income earner was as significant as the wife’s role of homemaker and parent.
127 their different but joint efforts meant they retained and improved the a street/suburb b property over the next 9.5 years after co-habitation, purchased and retained the second property (the e street, suburb f property), purchased and retained the g road, suburb d property and purchased and retained the last matrimonial home, the c street, suburb d property. the parties’ capital fortunes were closed linked to the residential property market and their ability for one or both, at different times, to maintain well paid employment. those choices of investment involved both of them, and however arrived at, have worked well.
128 the assets the wife brought in were made good use of in advancing the family finances and/or to some degree retained.
129 the parties worked hard over about 13.5 years together and raised two children and by the end of that cohabitation had acquired substantial equity in several properties including their major investment being the matrimonial home.
post separation contribution
130 the husband sought to change jobs late in the marriage. between resignation and final hearing he applied for dozens of positions, (see the table at [31] of his reply affidavit filed 29 april 2021 and the last 2 entries of his affidavit filed 24 march 2021). while he was not in paid employment the wife was and he undertook more of the homemaker and parent role to a modest degree.
131 post separation contribution spans from february 2019 to the last day of hearing being 4 may 2021, a period of about 27 months. contributions during the relationship span more than 13 years. in affidavit evidence each party criticised the post separation expenditure of the other. the wife alleged the husband’s expenditure in the circumstances of his being unemployed was profligate and that his being unemployed was his choice.
132 the wife’s evidence included:
186. the applicant and i equally met the mortgage payments on all properties and outgoings on the properties since separation, noting that the g road, suburb d property was tenanted until late april 2019 and the e street, suburb f property tenanted until late nov 2019. 187. the applicant has met some of the children’s expenses and other joint expenses, however i estimate i have spent at least $10,000 more than the applicant. i also note the applicant includes items in his list of joint expenses that i do not agree are “joint expenses” (e.g. y’s school fees of $1,498 which includes a “personal donation” to the school). 188. following separation, it was clear to me that the applicant was deliberately prolonging the proceedings and refusing to work, recklessly depleting the matrimonial assets. 189. i formed the view that there was no advantage in me being frugal and attempting to save money and accordingly i made a conscious decision to spend my post separation earnings on myself and the children. ... 192. in july 2019 to february 2020, by this time i had my confidence back and had begun socialising with friends again and went on a number of holidays. this part of the year was very expensive with multiple family holidays, an overseas holiday to country u, both children’s birthdays, christmas and several days at the tennis. despite significantly more expenses, during this period i reduced my credit card spending to an average of $3,700 per month (as i had begun paying cash for the majority of my day to day expenses – groceries, hair and beauty, dinners, household items etc). ... 195. in response to paragraph 90(b) i say as follows: (a) i was raised by a single mother with strong financially literacy who educated me that if i could not pay off my credit card in full by the due date then i should cut it up. she taught me to put funds into the credit card (so it was in credit) so that i never had to pay the bank interest. this is a practice i have done most of my life. as such, i often deposit funds onto my credit card, especially if i know i have got some large bills coming up or if i am going on holidays – so that if i need to withdraw funds directly from my credit card, i’m not charged interest. when the applicant and i went on overseas holidays, we also did this. in 2019, i was invited on a trip to country u with my friend ms r for her brother’s 50th birthday. i knew i would have some expenses leading up to that trip and i also wanted to ensure i had money on the credit card in case of an emergency while in country u and so that i could make withdrawals directly from my credit card without interest penalty. following that trip, i left the money on the card. despite trying to limit my credit card use, it was still required for ongoing purchases. (b) i also went through a phase where i wanted to replace as many items in the house as i could to rid myself of the applicant’s presence – these funds were used to replace kitchenware, linen, furniture, add new artwork etc.  i was raised by a single mother with strong financially literacy who educated me that if i could not pay off my credit card in full by the due date then i should cut it up. she taught me to put funds into the credit card (so it was in credit) so that i never had to pay the bank interest. this is a practice i have done most of my life. as such, i often deposit funds onto my credit card, especially if i know i have got some large bills coming up or if i am going on holidays – so that if i need to withdraw funds directly from my credit card, i’m not charged interest. when the applicant and i went on overseas holidays, we also did this. in 2019, i was invited on a trip to country u with my friend ms r for her brother’s 50th birthday. i knew i would have some expenses leading up to that trip and i also wanted to ensure i had money on the credit card in case of an emergency while in country u and so that i could make withdrawals directly from my credit card without interest penalty. following that trip, i left the money on the card. despite trying to limit my credit card use, it was still required for ongoing purchases. (b) i also went through a phase where i wanted to replace as many items in the house as i could to rid myself of the applicant’s presence – these funds were used to replace kitchenware, linen, furniture, add new artwork etc.
...
196. in response to paragraphs 90(c) and 90(d), i say that it is reasonable to assume that the applicant and i have similar daily expenses, although i would have higher additional children’s expenses given, they spend more time with me. i started to pay these day-to-day expenses with cash, and i also took $5,000 cash to country u as spending money which i exchanged for us cash during my stay. the table at paragraph 185 above clearly outlines what other funds have been spent on. i have also ensured that my legal fees currently totalling around $_100,000 are up to date. unfortunately, due to covid (and given these constant legal requests about my spending), i have to reverted back to using credit card and will do so until legal proceedings are over. ... 202. despite advising the court on multiple occasions that he was under financial hardship, the applicant has deposed to spending $51,000 on entertainment including food out, drinks and group get togethers. this expenditure does not include take away food or alcohol purchased which his credit card statements indicated at least an additional $15,000. i verily believe that contrary to the applicant’s statements that his expenditure “reasonable, unavoidable and in no way excessive or wasteful”, his expenditure on entertainment in the circumstances of his unemployment is extravagant.
133 it is clear that the wife’s discretionary expenditure, including expenditure on the children, increased after separation.
134 in the lead up to the final hearing both parties sought and obtained further well paid employment. in that circumstance, unsurprisingly, the husband’s evidence of many applications for employment while unemployed was not challenged. the husband was unemployed from august 2018 until separation in february 2019 and in this period did more of the school pick-ups while the wife worked 4 days each week. both parties set out great detail of the extent of his or her expenditure of the children. it is clear that despite being unemployed the husband’s expenditure on the children’s expenses did not decrease. his expenditure on his household including the children continued to be significant. he spent less on holidays than the wife but more on alcohol.
135 post separation the children did not go without any material accoutrement of modern middle class living in the western world in either household after separation. the wife had the benefit of occupying the major asset of the parties, the former matrimonial home and the husband had the advantage of occupying the more modest accommodation of one of the parties’ investment properties. both parties continued to contribute more or less equally to the shortfall between mortgage payments and rent received.
136 post separation the wife largely funded her expenditure, including expenditure for the benefit of the children, from earning an income and the husband funded his expenditure, including expenditure for the benefit of the children, from borrowings from his family and the funds now designated (by agreement between the parties) as part property settlement.
137 the post separation commitments were met as asserted by the wife at [86-87] of her affidavit and this evidence was not in dispute.
86. in subsequent conversations, the applicant and i agreed that out of our personal accounts we would each contribute equally to: (a) all mortgage repayments (from the money withdrawn at separation and now in our respective personal accounts) (b) agreed household expenses (including body corporate fees, rates, insurances, school expenses etc), and (c) be personally responsible for all other household expenses including utilities, gardening, cleaning, food, petrol, own clothing & beauty etc. 87. in july 2019, the applicant defaulted on his share of the mortgage repayments. this was subsequently paid back including the default fees and he requested the additional funds from the mortgage redraw facility which he believed were additional funds paid since separation. i agreed to do this and on 1 august 2019 we both attended the cba c street, suburb d branch to organize the redraw of $18,386 from the family home mortgage which was then split equally with both the applicant and i receiving $9,193 each.  all mortgage repayments (from the money withdrawn at separation and now in our respective personal accounts) (b) agreed household expenses (including body corporate fees, rates, insurances, school expenses etc), and (c) be personally responsible for all other household expenses including utilities, gardening, cleaning, food, petrol, own clothing & beauty etc.
138 in august 2020 the parties negotiated a mortgage pause that continued until hearing. while the wife’s post separation expenditure was somewhat more indulgent than previously, including the replacement of household items to rid reminders of the husband and holidays and outings, i am unable to find that her expenditure was unwarranted, wasteful or extravagant in the circumstances of her earning her own not insignificant income from employment. while meeting necessary commitments she was otherwise entitled to get on with her separate life as she saw fit, see nhc & rch [2004] famca 633, (2004) flc 93-204 (‘nhc and rch).
139 the parties disagreed about the extent to which the husband’s back injury and alcohol consumption impeded his efforts to seek work. the parties, sensibly did not spend time expecting me to resolve that dispute and i do not do so. the husband’s efforts at obtaining employment are set out in his affidavit and referred to earlier. i accept that evidence. the husband was ultimately successful in obtaining employment in february 2021. i am unable to find that the husband did not pursue employment and/or did not attempt to utilise his earning capacity. i am unable to find that the husband’s post separation expenditure was unwarranted, wasteful or extravagant in the circumstances of the family income pre separation and the extent of the parties’ assets that were effectively drawn upon and his efforts to obtain work and earn an income.
140 by employing her earning capacity built up over the relationship the wife was able to fund, directly or indirectly, the controversial $10,000 being part of the part property settlement.
141 i take into account that post separation the husband supported himself, the parties mortgages and agreed expenses of the children when they were with him, directly or indirectly, from borrowings from family and part property settlements until he obtained employment in 2021.
142 post separation both parties cared for the children and contributed as homemaker and parent but not equally. notwithstanding that the husband sought more of that burden and joy the wife has post separation undertaken a greater part of that burden and joy. initially the husband cared for the children over a two night alternate weekend and another night in the other week, school holidays, and other occasions when requested to do so but not on occasions when he was unable to due to illness or back pain (as he asserted) or when he was affected by alcohol or hung over (as asserted by the wife). the post separation alcohol abuse test result showed excessive use of alcohol on that occasion and the husband deposed he was surprised at the result.
143 the parties did not conduct the proceedings on the basis that i should determine that dispute about alcohol consumption and i am unable to and i do not making any finding as to that potentially contribution impacting controversy. however for a period post separation the husband’s parenting and homemaking contribution was less than the wife’s and she continued to work as well. however that contribution necessarily changed because of the breakdown of the de facto relationship. the observations of the full court in fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57, (2015) flc 93-638 (‘fields & smith’) as to a change of post separation parenting contributions at [191] is apposite:
[191] ...there is nothing to suggest that because the wife’s contribution to the welfare of the family was less than it had previously been, it in any way reflected upon, or was connected to, the change in the asset position of the parties by the time of trial. indeed, the evidence is clear in this case that what had been acquired and achieved up to separation simply carried on thereafter, albeit with differing contributions by the parties but reflecting what they had previously put in place...
144 the significant matter post separation is that the wife worked hard to care for the children and work four days each week. the husband cared for the children to the extent he could by the parties’ agreement but he also, while unemployed and seeking employment, for substantial periods, applied capital now agreed to be credited to him as part property to meet property obligations in equal share and to fund his care of the children as required by the parties’ joint expectations. that application of “part property” must be had regard to, to a modest degree, in the contribution assessment.
145 the authorities direct me to give weight to substantial initial, or extrinsic, direct contributions to the parties’ assets. but all contributions of the parties of the particular case must be taken into account and i do so. relative to the pool after 13 ½ years of co-habitation and a further two years of post-separation contributions, that is 15 years of many disparate contributions, the initial contributions must be regarded as substantial and must be given significant weight and i do so. however those initial contributions do not overwhelm the following 15 years of the parties contributions.
146 in lovine & connor and anor [2012] famcafc 168, (2012) flc 93-515 the full court observed:
[80] most importantly, it is to be considered in the light that the 30 per cent disparity produced by a 15 per cent adjustment on the divisible pool was, in real money terms, $4,075,000. [81] we are satisfied that his honour did not sufficiently analyse the effect of such an adjustment in real money terms as he was bound to do (steinbrenner & steinbrenner [2008] famcafc 193, wayne & wayne [2010] famcafc 33 at [106], clauson & clauson [1995] famca 10, (1995) flc 92-595, phipson & phipson [2009] famcafc 28). that, of itself, vitiated the exercise of discretion and establishes that the learned trial judge’s reasons were inadequate thus enlivening appellate intervention.
147 i take into account the effect of the division i have determined in percentage and real money terms, including the disparity between the parties’ assets in the end result as to contribution. the husband in seeking a 52.5/47.5 split effectively asserted there should be a 5% contribution disparity between the parties that translates into a disparity of $101,400 of the determined pool. this would not recognise the extent of the wife’s initial contribution compared to the size of the pool. the wife in seeking a 65/35 split effectively asserted there should be a 30% contribution disparity between the parties that translates into a disparity of $608,000 of the determined pool. this would not recognise the extent of the husband’s contributions over the 13.5 years of cohabitation and the contributions in the two and a bit years since, a total 15 years of contribution, as well as taking into account the size of the wife’s initial contribution.
148 i now move from words to figures. taking into account all of the evidence, the relevant law and authorities, and giving appropriate weight to all of the parties’ contributions i regard the wife’s contribution as being 57.5% and the husband’s as 42.5%. the disparity of contribution after about 15 years of contribution is 15% and hence of the determined non superannuation pool of $2,028,586 (but less cgt) that 15% disparity is in the order of $304,200 or $300,000 (in the non-superannuation assets).
superannuation contribution
149 the parties agreed that at about the time of cohabitation the wife had a superannuation account, subject to the terms of the relevant funds of $45,000. the husband asserted, unchallenged, and i accept, he had superannuation of under $5,000 or so and about two years later about $9,000. i do not know how much less than $5,000.
150 by the time of trial superannuation was thus:
151 the wife’s case is that the existing superannuation entitlements reflect proportionally the time or periods of contribution, the wife having contributed for 10 years prior to cohabitation and that it would not be just and equitable to make any superannuation splitting order. i do not know if that contribution was a lot or a little relative to her income over that period. the wife’s $46,000 will have continued to accumulate with the not specified growth of australian superannuation since then.
152 the husband points to the several years of when the wife was the full time homemaker and parent and the superannuation contributions to her account from his income and the many years of the parties disparate contributions that he says end up in it being just and equitable to have overall equality of contribution and hence superannuation splitting orders to equalise the parties superannuation balances as at final hearing. that would result in a superannuation payment splitting order of about $58,000 from the wife’s superannuation to his.
153 on the wife’s case this means an end result of a disparity of $115,800 or the wife’s having a little more than half as much again in superannuation than the husband. on the husband’s case the $46,000 the wife brought in is outweighed by the parties many years of subsequent contribution. i am not persuaded either position has appropriate regard to the wife’s initial, or at cohabitation, $46,000 of superannuation and the parties 15 years of disparate contributions since. i do not find, in the circumstances, that the wife’s initial contribution of her superannuation is as significant to the superannuation assets as her initial contribution is to the non-superannuation assets.
154 balancing all of the parties’ contributions i regard contribution to superannuation as being in the proportions of 55% to the wife and 45% to the husband, a disparity of 10% or about $55,000. unless this contribution outcome is adjusted at the next stage this would result in a superannuation payment split calculated as follows: (a) parties’ total superannuation: $552,093 at 45% to the husband = $248,441 total. (b) $248,441 less the husband’s existing superannuation of $218,140 = $30,301.  parties’ total superannuation: $552,093 at 45% to the husband = $248,441 total. (b) $248,441 less the husband’s existing superannuation of $218,140 = $30,301.
step three: s90sf(4) (d)-(g) inc. section 90sf(3) (“other factors”)
155 i deal with non-superannuation assets first. the husband contends there should be no section 90sf(4)(e)/90sf(3) adjustment of the contribution position. the wife contends there are factors that justify an adjustment, particularly the greater time the children will be in her care, at least in regard to the non-superannuation assets. the orders will not impact upon either parties ability to earn an income. the parties have similar ages and earning capacities. save for the husband’s back complaint they are in good health and the husband’s back complaint does not prevent him earning his income. each takes from this relationship the very valuable resource of intact professional earning capacities. the wife has at the end of the section 90sm(4)(a-c) contribution exercise about $300,000 more than the husband. the wife will have the care of the children, to a modest degree, more than the husband, that is on about the 20 fortnights of the school year (government schools) either 4 nights more (the existing 5/9) or 2 nights more (if the 6/8 comes into place). in the other roughly 12 weeks of holidays, almost a quarter of the year, the parties will have the children roughly equal time. neither party is cohabiting with another person. both parties can support themselves and the children to a reasonable standard relative to that enjoyed in the relationship. no formal child support has been applied for, assessed or is paid. if applied for, the appropriate child support would be assessed and likely paid by the husband.
156 the husband has at least the moral obligation to repay the modest loan to his father. i give little weight to this.
157 a significant expense the parties will have is private school fees. at [8] of his reply affidavit the husband said:
8. in reply to paragraph 3, there is no application for secondary schooling before the court. having said that, i have agreed for x to attend w school for year 7 and have agreed to pay half the school fees and related costs.
158 i find that the husband takes pride in, and makes a point of, payment of paying what he sees as half the children’s expenses. i take into account that he will pay half x’s substantial private school fees.
159 i must have regard to the actual sum that an adjustment effects. in all of those circumstances the third step adjustment should be small and 1.5% of the non-superannuation assets giving a disparity of 3% (of $2,028,586 less cgt) or about $60,000 (less the cgt adjustment) more to the wife than the husband on account of these “other factors”. such adjustment is modest relative to the pool but not insignificant relative to either parties post tax annual income.
160 as to the superannuation assets the circumstances do not command or warrant any third step or “other factors” adjustment. the parties’ superannuation will not be available to them for many years hence. to attempt to determine their financial circumstances then would be mere speculation. when the parties become entitled to his or her superannuation will depend partly upon his on her choice and circumstances at the time.
conclusion
161 i will deal with the subpoena costs issue and the form of the orders separately at the end of these reasons. i conclude and determine that the non-superannuation assets should be divided 59% to the wife and 41% to the husband. if the wife can raise the sum necessary she can retain the former matrimonial home. i do not know whether the g road, suburb d property has sold or for how much but proceed on the basis it has been or will be sold for a sum in the approximate order of what the parties expected it to sell for. the effect of those orders is as follows:
162 the non-superannuation pool is $2,028,586 and 41% of that to the husband and 59% to the wife has the following effect (noting all calculations do not take account of the impact of yet to be assessed or calculated cgt): (a) $2,028,586 at 41% = $831,720 total to the husband but depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the extent of cgt which he will bear 40% of. the husband retains or has had the benefit of his ‘keep’ including part property settlements of $217,520, hence the total of further payments to him (in the event the wife can retain the former matrimonial home by payment within 60 days of orders) will be in the order of $614,200 (less cgt effect) or 41% of the proceeds of sale of both remaining properties less that share of cgt, if she can’t. (b) $2,028,586 at 59% = $1,196,865 total to the wife but depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the extent of cgt which she will bear 59% of. the wife retains or has had the benefit of part property settlements of $340,580 that is included in that figure. (c) depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the former matrimonial home and the extent of cgt the difference between the parties will be in the order of $365,145.   $2,028,586 at 41% = $831,720 total to the husband but depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the extent of cgt which he will bear 40% of. the husband retains or has had the benefit of his ‘keep’ including part property settlements of $217,520, hence the total of further payments to him (in the event the wife can retain the former matrimonial home by payment within 60 days of orders) will be in the order of $614,200 (less cgt effect) or 41% of the proceeds of sale of both remaining properties less that share of cgt, if she can’t. (b) $2,028,586 at 59% = $1,196,865 total to the wife but depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the extent of cgt which she will bear 59% of. the wife retains or has had the benefit of part property settlements of $340,580 that is included in that figure. (c) depending upon the sale price of the g road, suburb d property and the former matrimonial home and the extent of cgt the difference between the parties will be in the order of $365,145.
163 there should be a superannuation payment split to the husband out of the superannuation interest of the wife of $30,301.
164 i find this is a just and equitable division of property and disparity of property between the parties in all the circumstances.
the form of the orders
165 the parties agreed the wife should have the opportunity to attempt to pay out the husband and if she could not then the property should be sold. now that the parties know the decision, if that opportunity to buy out the husband is still sought the wife should have 60 days from the date of the orders to do so and in default there be a sale and division of the proceeds.
166 the parties did not agree on the form of the orders to be made. i am not completely comfortable with either version of the minutes and it maybe uncertainty about the sale of the c street, suburb d property and what the actual division would be contributed to disagreement about the form of the orders. i will not, at this stage, draw the orders to give effect to my decision. there is no evidence of procedural fairness to the trustee of any of the wife’s three superannuation funds or agreement or submissions as to which fund should be split. the minutes sought by the wife did not include default orders for sale in the event the payment is not made or the many other sensible provisions such as those dealing with h pty ltd or the usual catch all provisions and declarations. the parties must take into account the cgt on assets sold and on shares to be sold (if any) to fund any payment necessitated by the effect of these reasons/orders to be made.
167 now that my decision is known i will give the parties 14 days to agree on and bring in orders that give effect to my reasons and to provide procedural fairness to the agreed superannuation fund. absent agreement it should be the fund nominated by the wife.
the costs of mr z
168 in this case the wife had issued a subpoenaed to a mr z, a friend of the husband's. mr z was commanded to attend court on monday the first day of the hearing. he did so. he is a tradesman and charges and earns his eba rate of $1,083 per day when he works. on the wife's case in the children's proceedings, when the issue of the husband's alcohol abuse and diligence in attending to the children was alive, mr z was a relevant witness.
169 the husband had not put mr z on affidavit or evinced an intention to call him to give oral evidence. the wife was concerned that the matter would proceed without mr z's evidence. the wife then issued and served a subpoena on him to attend court.
170 on 15 april 2021, that is well before being served with the subpoena. mr z had contracted or been retained for work of six days from the thursday 29 april 2021 to the following thursday. the nature of mr z's work was that if unavailable for any one or more days of the contracted days then he would be replaced for the whole period. that is the six days work would be unavailable to him even if, for example, he was released from the subpoena on the monday. like a barrister retained for a six day trial he could not come and go for a day or two during that trial: he was either available for the whole time or not at all.
171 he told me he estimated his loss at "around seven grand".
172 he was served on the evening of thursday 21 april 2021. when he received a subpoena mr z consulted a solicitor and took advice and then cancelled the work that he had available for the six days. on the morning of thursday 28 april 2021 mr z obtained different work for that day, hence his loss was then a maximum of five days.
173 on thursday 28 april 2021 (the thursday before the trial commencing on the monday) the wife's solicitor emailed mr z the usual letter sensible solicitors send to subpoenaed witnesses attempting to deal with the difficult balance of minimising inconvenience to the witness but ensuring the witness is available when required (w1 3 may 2021). the letter confirming he was required to give evidence but that he would likely be required for the following tuesday or wednesday.
174 on friday 30 april 2021 (the friday before the trial on the following monday) mr z consulted a solicitor mr aa who emailed to the wife's solicitor a letter (w1 part 2, 4 may 2021).
dear ms farwell, i refer to my earlier conversation with you and confirm that i have been consulted by mr z and he has provided me with a copy of your letter dated 28 april 2021. mr z confirms that he will be available to give evidence on 4 and/or 5 may 2021. on the basis of you letter mr z will not be in attendance at court on monday unless he receives a request from you. the nature of our client's employment is such is that he will be unable to take employment on 4 and 5 may 2021. our client works casually as a tradesman and has already forgone employment which would have commenced on thursday 29 april 2021 for a period of 6 days earning him approximately $7,000. we attach for your information copy of payslip from mr z showing that for one day's employment he would earn approximately $1,083 per day net of tax. accordingly, by being available to give evidence pursuant to the subpoena our client will be forgoing at least $2,166 in lost wages and he is seeking that your client be responsible for that lost income. if there is any further information you require regarding our client's employment or lost income, then please advise. otherwise, our client would seek that an order be made providing that his witness costs be paid for the 2 lost days' employment and would request you ensure this issue be brought to the courts attention. we have provided a copy of this letter to mr birk’s solicitors. please contact mr z monday afternoon to advise what is happening in the trail. in the event matters resolve without mr z being required to give evidence then ensure that his request for lost income is still brought before the court.
175 at some point that day counsel determined that if the wife called the witness she would be bound by the evidence in chief and not able to cross examine, that is put leading questions to the witness. unless a successful application pursuant to divisions 4-5 of part 2.1 of the evidence act was made that may well have been the case.
176 later on that friday mr z was notified by the wife's solicitor that he was no longer required to attend and that he would be excused from his subpoena. notwithstanding this notice no agreement as to mr z's costs was reached and he then elected to attend before me on the following monday to ask for costs/compensation. mr z said he expected that he would not be able to pick up work to replace the cancelled work.
177 in this case it is not only mr z who earns about $1,000 per day. the wife earns about $1,000 per day. the husband earns about $1,000 per day.
178 mr z told me his circumstances from the bar table and the long in the short of it is that as a result of cancelling work to be available at court and the very late notice that he was no longer required he would be out of pocket for about "seven grand". i had mr z sworn in the witness box and asked him on oath if what he had told me from the bar table was true and correct. he said it was. he was not challenged on his evidence by either party. his usual earnings and the fact that he would be unable to obtain replacement work was not contested. he had provided a pay slip evidencing his daily rate with mr aa’s letter.
179 the husband's counsel made clear that he did not act for mr z. the wife's counsel did not complain of the quantum of the compensation sought but rather that in the circumstances it was not appropriate that the wife be ordered to pay any of the witnesses costs and that if any costs were to be awarded to mr z they should be paid by the husband.
180 i enquired of mr z what the costs sought as compensation would be if i was to determine that they should be paid by the husband and not the wife as he sought. he told me that he would leave that in my hands and speculated that perhaps they should pay some each.
181 the submissions included the following:
mr sweeney: the issue on which the witness was to give evidence was in respect of the children’s issues, and your honour, he would have still been required to give evidence on the children’s issues. it’s a question who would have had to have called him. we issued his honour: well, who was going to wear the inference if he wasn’t? mr sweeney: absolutely, and that’s the point, your honour – that we wrote to the other side. i found out that we had subpoenaed the witness on friday, and i said, “i don’t want that witness subpoenaed and lose our right to cross-examination”, for obvious reasons. he still had to be called. we said to the other side, “if you don’t call him, we will be asking for the inferences to be drawn.” the witness has turned up here today, and we assume that had the children’s issues proceeded, he would have been a witness. his honour: somebody would have called him. mr sweeney: someone would have had to have called him, and it wouldn’t have been us, i can assure your honour, because we could have taken the benefit of an inference, particularly when you look at – the trial affidavit of the husband puts this issue in play for the very first time. his honour: yes. now, this issue, doesn’t that go to the issue of who ultimately bears mr z’s costs? mr sweeney: if mr z– i don’t think mr z will make a claim against the husband. he’s the husband’s best mate. but whether he does or he doesn’t his honour: he might. i will ask him. if i determined that it should be – now, and i’m going to assume that it should be mr birk. now, i’m told that he’s your friend, and i think you figured in dispatches in affidavits, so that’s why i remember your name. but if it was to be ultimately mr birk who was to bear the costs, would you be seeking it from him? mr z: again, your honour, whatever you deem fair. his honour: right. okay, all right, thank you. so, for your purposes, the first issue is, what is the loss you have suffered after reasonably attempting to minimise it? number one. number two – should you be paid that? and then, number three, who should pay it? and number four, ultimately who should bear it when i work out all the financial matters? so, they’re the steps that i will go through. so, mr sweeney, who is the barrister for ms farwell, says that you won’t claim your costs if mr birk has to pay, and you say to me, “i will if the judge thinks it’s fair.” is that what you’re saying?
182 the wife's argument was that mr z was a very proper witness in the husband's case and that the decision not to proceed with requiring his attendance pursuant to subpoena was made on the friday before the trial (on the following monday) in circumstances where it was obvious that an adverse inference would be drawn from the husband failing to call mr z.
183 between when mr z was given notice that he was no longer required (and his expenses not agreed) and the application for costs/compensation before me, the parties settled the children's proceedings as set out at the start of these reasons. ultimately mr z was able to leave the court at about 3.30pm on monday.
184 in responding to the application that the husband should pay the costs sought on the subpoena the husband's counsel, mr robinson referred me to a number of authorities in an effort to assist the court. each of the authorities were family court of australia authorities and dealt with rule 15.23 of the family law rules 2004 (cth) (‘family law rules’).
185 in markoska and markoska and anor (costs) [2011] famca 833 (‘markoska’) and dealing with the old rule 15.23 of the family law rules, murphy j observed:
the court’s powers 67. under the heading “who should the costs be awarded against?”, the firm’s written submissions contend that:
typically costs are awarded against the issuing party. in this matter it is submitted that the costs should be apportioned between the issuing party and the respondent husband as in the case of zova and elliott [2008] famca 166 and elliott and zova [2009] famca 49. [emphasis added].
68. those decisions of o’reilly j are relied upon in support of the submission that a person other than the “issuing party” can be ordered to pay “costs” pursuant to r 15.23. as her honour observed, the facts underpinning each of those cases were highly unusual, including, for example, the fact that one party (the wife) had issued the subpoena but the other party (the husband) had served it. her honour held in the earlier of the two cases:
63. however, rule 15.23(3), which provides that a named person may apply for the reimbursement of “substantial loss or expense” that is greater than the amount of conduct money or witness fee payable under rules 15.23(1) and (2), invites the exercise of a discretion and, it must be observed, the discretion is not fettered by the requirement that the reimbursement may be sought or ordered only against the issuing party. 64. therefore in my view it is open to me to order the reimbursement of mr zova’s substantial loss or expense (if i find there has been any) against either or both of the wife, as the issuing party, or the husband, as the serving party, or both of them by way of apportionment. 65. in short, whilst usually the issuing party is responsible for the named person’s costs (conduct money and witness fee) and loss and expense, rule 15.23(3) is not constrained to order such only against the issuing party. it is not for me to speculate whether this may be by oversight or intention. it is sufficient that i observe that whilst rules 15.23(1) and (2) contain a restraint, rule 15.23(3) does not.
69. as her honour observes r 15.23(1) and (2) are each confined by their terms to amounts being paid by “the issuing party”, whereas r 15.23(3) contains no such constraining words. however, i respectfully disagree with her honour’s conclusion that r 15.23(3) contains a separate discretionary head of power. 70. the terms of r 15.23(3) might be contrasted with the provisions of order 20 rule 17 of the family law rules 1984 (that is, the rules as they existed prior to their amendment in 2004). that rule provided:
17. where in proceedings a person being –  a respondent to an application under rule 7, or (b) a person required by an order made under rule 8 to produce a document, reasonably incurs costs or expenses on the hearing of the application or in connection with the production of the document, as the case may be, the person may apply to the court for an order as to the assessment and payment of such costs and expenses and the court may make such an order or give such directions as it thinks fit. [emphasis added].  a person required by an order made under rule 8 to produce a document, reasonably incurs costs or expenses on the hearing of the application or in connection with the production of the document, as the case may be, the person may apply to the court for an order as to the assessment and payment of such costs and expenses and the court may make such an order or give such directions as it thinks fit. [emphasis added].
71. in drafting the rules, the rule-makers, presumed to be cognisant of the provisions of the earlier rules, altered the expression “costs and expenses” to the expression “substantial loss or expense”. so, too, the specific reference to “costs or expenses on the hearing... or in connection with the production ...” was changed to make specific reference to “substantial loss or expense” and so as to provide in the sub-rule a specific reference to relevant amounts “payable under this rule”. 72. rule 15.23 appears within part 15.3 of the rules which deal generally with subpoenas. within that context, r 15.23 provides initially for the payment of conduct money sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of complying with a subpoena in an amount at least equivalent to the amount specified in part 1 of schedule 4 to the rules (15.23(1)) and, separate to that, “a witness fee” where the subpoena relates to giving evidence or to giving evidence and producing documents (15.23(2)). the entitlement to claim provided for in sub-rule (3) is, by the terms of that sub-rule, confined to a reimbursement of an amount considered reasonable that is related to either conduct money or a witness fee (as the case may be), “payable under this rule”. 73. in my view, the rule should be read as a whole and the sub-rule as governing the amounts that might be paid by an “issuing party” to a “named person” as “conduct money” or a “witness fee” as the case may be. 74. consistent with the historical context earlier referred to (e.g. bank of new south wales v withers, lucas industries v hewitt, above) the rules prescribe very modest amounts payable as a minimum or “default” (r 15.23(1) and (2)) but, in order to strike the balance referred to, for example, in the authorities just mentioned, application can be made for the issuing party to pay a greater (but reasonable) amount where loss or expense is established as “substantial”. 75. in my view the sub-rule gives power to the court to enlarge the amounts of conduct money or witness fee payable to a named person by an issuing party in compliance with a subpoena, where the claimed loss or expense can be regarded as “substantial”, where the conduct money or witness fee as the case may be is otherwise payable pursuant to sub-rules (1) or (2), and where any amount claimed is, in any event, determined by the court to be reasonable in all the circumstances of the individual case. 76. in other words, the sub-rule does not, in my respectful view, give power to the court to recompense loss or expense to a person other than the issuing party.
186 at the time of the hearing the relevant rule was rule 15a.10 of the federal circuit court rules 2001 (cth) (‘the fcc rules’) which states as follows:
15a.10 order for cost of complying with subpoena subject to rule 15a.11, the court may, on application, make an order for the payment of any loss or expense incurred in complying with a subpoena.
187 at the time of the hearing the relevant rule of the family law rules was set out at rule 15.23(2) & (3) and was as follows: (2) a named person served with a subpoena to give evidence and a subpoena to give evidence and produce documents is entitled to be paid a witness fee by the issuing party in accordance with part 2 of schedule 4, immediately after attending court in compliance with the subpoena. (3) a named person may apply to be reimbursed if the named person incurs a substantial loss or expense that is greater than the amount of the conduct money or witness fee payable under this rule.  a named person served with a subpoena to give evidence and a subpoena to give evidence and produce documents is entitled to be paid a witness fee by the issuing party in accordance with part 2 of schedule 4, immediately after attending court in compliance with the subpoena. (3) a named person may apply to be reimbursed if the named person incurs a substantial loss or expense that is greater than the amount of the conduct money or witness fee payable under this rule.
188 the rules of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), (as this court now is) relating to compensation of a witness called on subpoena is as follows:
6.35 cost of complying with subpoena if not a party (1) this rule applies if: (a) a subpoena is addressed to a person who is not a party to the proceeding, and (b) before complying with the subpoena, the person subpoenaed has given the issuing party notice that substantial loss or expense would be incurred in properly complying with the subpoena, including a particularised estimate of the loss or expense, and (c) the court is satisfied that substantial loss or expense is incurred in properly complying with the subpoena. (2) unless the court otherwise directs, the amount of the loss or expense estimated under paragraph (1)(b) is payable by the issuing party. (3) the court may fix the amount payable having regard to the scale of fees and allowances payable to witnesses in the supreme court of the state or territory where the person is required to attend. (4) the amount payable is in addition to any conduct money paid. (5) if a party who is to pay an amount under this rule obtains an order for the costs of the proceeding, the court may:  a subpoena is addressed to a person who is not a party to the proceeding, and (b) before complying with the subpoena, the person subpoenaed has given the issuing party notice that substantial loss or expense would be incurred in properly complying with the subpoena, including a particularised estimate of the loss or expense, and (c) the court is satisfied that substantial loss or expense is incurred in properly complying with the subpoena.  unless the court otherwise directs, the amount of the loss or expense estimated under paragraph (1)(b) is payable by the issuing party. (3) the court may fix the amount payable having regard to the scale of fees and allowances payable to witnesses in the supreme court of the state or territory where the person is required to attend.  if a party who is to pay an amount under this rule obtains an order for the costs of the proceeding, the court may: allow the amount to be included in the costs recoverable, or (b) make any other order it thinks appropriate.
189 the scheme of the new rule 6.35 is different to the old rules. if substantial loss or expense of a witness is to be considered, rule 6.35(1)(b) sensibly requires notice of the substantial loss or expense before complying with the subpoena to be given to the issuing party. if the court is satisfied that the loss or expense, as previously notified, "is incurred in properly complying with the subpoena" (rule 6.35(1)(c)), then, unless the court otherwise directs, the previously notified and properly incurred loss or expense is payable by the issuing party.
190 hence in the 2001 fcc rules there is a presumption that the issuing party will pay the notified and properly incurred loss or expense but there is a residual discretion as to whether payment should be made and by whom.
191 the court may, not must, take into account the supreme court scale of witness expenses of the state where the person is to attend. in victoria s.r. 16/2021, appendix b at 3 sets out those costs as follows:
3 any other witness – per day $174.80 (b) but if the witness is remunerated in any employment by wages, salary or fees, the amount lost by the attendance but in any event not to exceed in any one day. $816.80 the costs court may allow in addition any appropriate reasonable expense incurred by the witness, e.g. child minding expenses. a witness attending in more than one proceeding shall be entitled to a proportionate part only of the expense of the proceeding. the costs court may allow a country witness, in addition to the above expenses, a reasonable sum for the actual expense of travel to and from the place of trial or hearing and for maintenance or sustenance. for this purpose, a witness who does not reside within 50 kilometres of the place of trial or hearing is a country witness.  but if the witness is remunerated in any employment by wages, salary or fees, the amount lost by the attendance but in any event not to exceed in any one day. $816.80
192 in that jurisdiction unless the rules are departed from the maximum daily expense lost for a witness is "not to exceed in any one day - $816.80". this is a substantial amount but less than the daily ordinary charges of the parties and the amount lost by mr z.
193 further where a costs order is made the court may, not must, allow the costs payable to a subpoenaed witness to be included in the costs recoverable or make "any other order it thinks appropriate".
194 this new rule overcomes the limitations of the old rule 15.35 identified in markoska.
195 there is a new transitional practice direction which says:
1.4 the new rules apply to all proceedings in the court commenced before 1 september 2021 but not finally determined before that date in accordance with the transitional arrangements set out in part 2 below. 1.5 the court retains the discretion to dispense with compliance with any provision of the new rules at all times, including where application of the new rules would operate unfairly or cause injustice.
196 in the circumstances of this case, and to avoid injustice, i apply the rules as at the time of the subpoena issue but i take into account the scheme of the new rule now applying, but i am not bound by the new rules.
197 the courts of the law very firmly set their face against a witness "gouging" or attempting to gouge or opportunistically pick up an "earn" from the service of a subpoena. on the other hand it is in the interests of the administration of justice that subpoenaed witnesses should unquestioning comply with a subpoena and it is not unreasonable that reasonable costs and income forgone by attending court be compensated and particularly where the loss is substantial.
198 in this case it may, not would, have been the case that an adverse inference was drawn against the husband's case had mr z not been called if the case had proceeded. however, in this case, that does not determine whether mr z should receive witness costs, or who should pay them or their quantum. i acknowledge that mr z is a friend of the husband’s. however that does not determine from whom mr z should look for his costs. for what appeared good reason the wife issued the subpoena that compelled mr z to cancel work to be available to attend.
199 i do not know and do not place any weight on the unknown taxation consequences of a payment of compensation or witness costs. it is not disputed that mr z is a friend of the husband's. the effect of mr z's evidence was that if the costs were to be borne by the husband, his friend he may not press for payment.
200 i take into account all of the evidence and submissions but the most significant matters in the exercise of my discretion are: the wife issued the subpoena to the named person mr z. the named person cancelled remunerative work and substantial payment therefrom to ensure he could attend court. his daily rate is roughly the same as the parties. the notice he was not required was very late, the afternoon of the last working day before the trial. no agreement as to his costs was made and there is no evidence that any proposal to pay his costs was ever made and the witness needed to attend court to seek his costs. a subpoena is a serious command of the court undertaken in the name of the court by the privilege of a party being able to summon the court's authority to compel the attendance of a person. on my division of the parties’ assets the wife will retain about $1,186,000 of assets (but less his share of cgt). i do not know if mr z was able to obtain employment on any of the following tuesday, wednesday or thursday, given he had from the previous friday to attempt to find work. the case was not about mr z but the interests of the parties. the supreme court of victoria witness costs are as set out above. the loss or expense of mr z was incurred in properly complying with the subpoena and he provided notice of that loss and expense.
201 my decision would be the same were i to apply only the rules now applying.
202 in the formal letter from mr aa of the friday before the witness asserted he would forgo "at least $2,166". $2,166 is a reasonable and proper cost or compensation for the loss and expense for the person complying with the subpoena in the circumstances of this case. balancing all those matters i find that mr z’s “loss or expense” that should be compensated is two days lost employment, being the friday and the monday in the sum of $2,166 and that should be paid by the issuing party, the wife. the payment of such cost should be made contemporaneously with the payment to the husband as defined in the orders i will make, if the wife is to retain the former matrimonial home, or to be will be paid contemporaneously with the division of the proceeds of sale if the former matrimonial home is to be sold.
associate: dated: 22 october 2021