last updated: 11 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rizk & mahfouz [2023] fedcfamc2f 139
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge blake:
principles
misuse of confidential information  if a reasonable person informed of the facts might reasonably anticipate a danger of misuse of confidential information of a former client, (b) there is a real and sensible possibility that the interest of the practitioner in advancing the case in litigation might conflict with the practitioner’s duty to keep the information confidential, and (c) to refrain from using that information to the detriment of the former client.   there is a real and sensible possibility that the interest of the practitioner in advancing the case in litigation might conflict with the practitioner’s duty to keep the information confidential, and (c) to refrain from using that information to the detriment of the former client.   to refrain from using that information to the detriment of the former client.
see: mallesons stephen jaques v kpmg peat marwick (1990) 4 war 357 at [362-363], farrow mortgage services pty ltd (in liq) v mendall properties pty ltd [1995] vicrp 1, [1995] 1 vr 1 at [5] (hayne j), sent v john fairfax publications pty ltd [2002] vsc 429 at [35] (nettle j), dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065 at [34]- [35].   what is the relevant information? (b) is that information confidential? (c) does the legal practitioner have possession of that information? (d) is the legal practitioner proposing to act against the former client in the requisite sense? (e) is there a real risk that the confidential information will be relevant? (f) is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?   is that information confidential? (c) does the legal practitioner have possession of that information? (d) is the legal practitioner proposing to act against the former client in the requisite sense? (e) is there a real risk that the confidential information will be relevant? (f) is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?   does the legal practitioner have possession of that information? (d) is the legal practitioner proposing to act against the former client in the requisite sense? (e) is there a real risk that the confidential information will be relevant? (f) is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?   is the legal practitioner proposing to act against the former client in the requisite sense? (e) is there a real risk that the confidential information will be relevant? (f) is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?   is there a real risk that the confidential information will be relevant? (f) is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?   is there no real risk of misuse of the confidential information?
see: nash v timbercorp finance pty ltd (in liq), in the matter of the bankrupt estate of nash [2019] fca 957, (2019) 137 ascr 189 (‘timbercorp’) at [64], babcock & brown dif iii global v babcock & brown international pty ltd [2015] vsc 453 at [70].
ensuring the administration of justice ] the relevant principles which guide the exercise of the court’s separate discretion are broadly as follows: (a) the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).
the evidence
29. [ms d] then said: "you were my client but now she is my client".
findings  a discussion took place between ms d and the husband regarding the state of mr b’s finances. that discussion was quick and i have little doubt ms d assured the husband that mr b would be in a position to repay the loan. given the date on which mr b ultimately repaid the loan, it seems the husband accepted the assurances given by ms d, and (b) the husband then used the opportunity while speaking to ms d to ask her some questions about the financial consequences of the breakdown of his marriage.   the husband then used the opportunity while speaking to ms d to ask her some questions about the financial consequences of the breakdown of his marriage.   the husband’s financial and family situation and his wish to refinance his properties, (b) the financial institutions that the husband was seeking or had sought finance from, (c) that the husband had separated from his wife and the wife was living in rented accommodation, (d) that the wife refused to sign an agreement prepared for the family dispute matter, (e) the location of properties in the marriage and the fact that one property was in a self-managed super fund, (f) the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   the financial institutions that the husband was seeking or had sought finance from, (c) that the husband had separated from his wife and the wife was living in rented accommodation, (d) that the wife refused to sign an agreement prepared for the family dispute matter, (e) the location of properties in the marriage and the fact that one property was in a self-managed super fund, (f) the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the husband had separated from his wife and the wife was living in rented accommodation, (d) that the wife refused to sign an agreement prepared for the family dispute matter, (e) the location of properties in the marriage and the fact that one property was in a self-managed super fund, (f) the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the wife refused to sign an agreement prepared for the family dispute matter, (e) the location of properties in the marriage and the fact that one property was in a self-managed super fund, (f) the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   the location of properties in the marriage and the fact that one property was in a self-managed super fund, (f) the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   the mortgages over the properties and the fact the mortgages were obtained through private banks with high interest rates, (g) the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   the husband’s wish to keep the house in suburb f and to sell the other properties, (h) that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the husband wished to ‘protect’ all of his assets, (i) that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the wife proposed that she be paid $200,000 in exchange for not seeking any further division of property, (j) that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the husband had a default account for a business interest loan and that he had a question about whether he could pay more into that default account, (k) that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the husband wished to transfer the property in suburb f to his brother, (l) that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.   that the husband had a ‘bit of a struggle’ to obtain refinance and had to go to different lenders.
should ms d be restrained from acting because she has confidential information of the husband?
should ms d be restrained as an incident of the court’s supervisory jurisdiction?
associate: dated: 15 february 2023
dated: 15 february 2023