last updated: 24 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
edmondson & samford [2023] fedcfamc2f 171
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
parental responsibility  w, born in 2009, (b) x, born in 2012, (c) y, born in 2014, and (d) z, born in 2014   x, born in 2012, (c) y, born in 2014, and (d) z, born in 2014   y, born in 2014, and (d) z, born in 2014   z, born in 2014
relocation
live with/spend time with  during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, and the second half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, and (ii) with the father in the second half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and the first half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (b) in the event that the father travels to city b, nsw where the children are residing, provided that the father notifies the mother at least one week prior, the children spend time with the father, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing as follows: (i) if it is a school day, from 4pm the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day, and (ii) if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day. (c) for the purposes of order 3(a) above: (i) the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the nsw government in each year, (ii) the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, (iii) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.   with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, and the second half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, and (ii) with the father in the second half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and the first half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter.  ) with the father in the second half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and the first half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter.   in the event that the father travels to city b, nsw where the children are residing, provided that the father notifies the mother at least one week prior, the children spend time with the father, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing as follows: (i) if it is a school day, from 4pm the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day, and (ii) if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day. (c) for the purposes of order 3(a) above: (i) the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the nsw government in each year, (ii) the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, (iii) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.   if it is a school day, from 4pm the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day, and (ii) if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day.  ) if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in city b, nsw until 5pm the following day.   for the purposes of order 3(a) above: (i) the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the nsw government in each year, (ii) the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, (iii) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.   the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the nsw government in each year, (ii) the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, (iii) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.  ) the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, (iii) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.  i) the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and (iv) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.  ) the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.
special occasions  on each of the children’s birthdays, the children will communicate with the parent whom they are not living with at the time from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. (b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. (c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.   on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. (c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.   with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.
changeover
communication  from 6.00pm until 6.30pm every sunday, (b) to be facilitated by the father telephoning the mother, and (c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.   to be facilitated by the father telephoning the mother, and (c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.   the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.   notify the father by email with as much notice as is reasonably practicable of any major long-term decision which she is proposing to make for the children or any of them (“the proposed decision”) and the reasons for the proposed decision, (b) will give the father the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, (c) will take into account the father’s views, and (d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.   will give the father the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, (c) will take into account the father’s views, and (d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.   will take into account the father’s views, and (d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.   will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.
restraints
counselling
other
and it is noted that these orders have been amended pursuant to rule 10.13 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction  w did not lie in the criminal proceedings, (b) the accused’s sister ms g and the accused [the father] engaged in a joint enterprise to coerce the child to record the mother, (c) w did not take the camera in his pencil case without the knowledge of the accused and his auntie ms g.   the accused’s sister ms g and the accused [the father] engaged in a joint enterprise to coerce the child to record the mother, (c) w did not take the camera in his pencil case without the knowledge of the accused and his auntie ms g.   w did not take the camera in his pencil case without the knowledge of the accused and his auntie ms g.
applicant mother’s orders sought
parental responsibility 1. that the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, namely,
a) [w], born [in] 2009, b) [x], born [in] 2012, c) [y], born [in] 2014, and d) [z], born [in] 2014
relocation that the mother be permitted to relocate with the children to [city b], new south wales. live with/spend time with 3. that the children live with the mother. that subject to the children’s time with the father progressing well noting that he is currently spending time with them on a supervised basis including that the supervised contact service provides reports that do not raise any concerns about the children in the father’s care, and unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the children spend time with the father as follows:
a) during the school holiday periods as follows: with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, and the second half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, and with the father in the second half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and the first half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. b) in the event that the father travels to [city b], nsw where the children are residing, provided that the father notifies the mother at least one week prior, the children spend time with the father, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing as follows: if it is a school day, from 4pm the day the father arrives in [city b], nsw until 5pm the following day, and if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in [city b], nsw until 5pm the following day. c) for the purposes of order 3(a) above: the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the nsw government in each year, the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12pm on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 9am on the monday before the new school term begins.
b) in the event that the father travels to [city b], nsw where the children are residing, provided that the father notifies the mother at least one week prior, the children spend time with the father, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing as follows: if it is a school day, from 4pm the day the father arrives in [city b], nsw until 5pm the following day, and if it is a non-school day, from 9am the day the father arrives in [city b], nsw until 5pm the following day.
special occasions notwithstanding these orders and unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the children spend time with each parent during special occasions as follows: a) on each of the children’s birthdays, the children will communicate with the parent whom they are not living with at the time from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day. changeover in the event that time is occurring in [town d], vic, changeovers occur out the front of [town c] primary school in [town c], and if the time occurs in [city b], nsw changeover occur at the children’s school in [city b] or such other public neutral location as agreed between the parents in writing. communication 7. that the children communicate with the father as follows: a) from 6.00pm until 6.30pm every sunday, b) to be facilitated by the father telephoning the mother, and c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call. that the parties communicate with one another via email or text message in relation to the care, welfare and development of the children. notwithstanding order 1 above, the mother will, except in the case of a medical emergency: a) notify the father by email with as much notice as is reasonably practicable of any major long-term decision which she is proposing to make for the children or any of them (“the proposed decision”) and the reasons for the proposed decision, b) will give the father the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the father’s views, and d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made. the mother will immediately notify the father by email or text message in the event of any medical emergency involving the children or either of them, any medical diagnosis and associated treatment. restraints the father is restrained by injunction from making a child concern report to the nsw department of communities and justice or equivalent body, or from directing or asking any other person to do so. that the parents are be and are hereby restrained from saying denigratory things about the other or the family of the other to or in the hearing of the children and from allowing any other person to do so. procedural orders that the mother have leave to particularise the final orders she seeks in relation to the time the children spend with the father following the release of the updated family report. that [w], born [in] 2009, [x], born [in] 2012, [y], born [in] 2014, and [z], born [in] 2014, live with the mother. that the applicant have leave to further particularise final orders.
a) on each of the children’s birthdays, the children will communicate with the parent whom they are not living with at the time from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.
b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.
c) with the mother from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day and with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day.
a) from 6.00pm until 6.30pm every sunday, b) to be facilitated by the father telephoning the mother, and c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.
b) to be facilitated by the father telephoning the mother, and c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.
c) the calls shall be on loudspeaker with the mother at liberty to terminate any telephone call if the father speaks to the children in relation to these court proceedings, the criminal proceedings with respect to the surveillance device, the children’s future living arrangements, if he denigrates the mother or members of the mother’s family or if the children wish to end the call.
a) notify the father by email with as much notice as is reasonably practicable of any major long-term decision which she is proposing to make for the children or any of them (“the proposed decision”) and the reasons for the proposed decision, b) will give the father the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the father’s views, and d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.
b) will give the father the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the father’s views, and d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.
c) will take into account the father’s views, and d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.
d) will notify the father by email of the decision which she has made.
respondent father’s orders sought
1. all previous orders be discharged. the appointed independent children’s lawyer remain in place and carry out a 3, 6 & 12 month review. parental responsibility: 3. the father have sole parental responsibility for the children, namely:
a. [w] born [in] 2009, b. [x] born [in] 2012, c. [y] born [in] 2014 and d. [z] born [in] 2014.
relocation: 4. that the father be permitted to relocate the children to [town d], victoria. live with /spend time with: 5. the children live with the father. 6. the children spend time with the mother as follows: every alternative weekend from after-school (or 3:30 pm if non-school day) until 4 pm on sunday), changeover: the father every alternative weekend drive the children to [town c] after school ( or 3.30 pm if non- school day) on friday’s with changeover to be at the maternal grandmothers house. the mother to return the children to [town d] on sunday at 4pm at the father’s and children’s residence in [town d]. during the school holiday periods as follows: the father be permitted to telephone the children once every three days that they are out of his care. with the mother in the first half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter, and the second half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, and with the father in the second half of the school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter and the first half of the school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. 9. for the purposes of order 8(a & b) above: the school holidays shall be the school holidays as determined by the vic government in each year, the school holidays shall be deemed to commence at 3pm on the last day of the school term, the middle of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12 noon on the saturday that falls in the middle of the school holiday period, and the end of the school holidays shall be deemed to be 12 noon on the sunday before the new school term begins. special occasions: notwithstanding these orders and unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing, the children spend time with each parent during special occasions as follows: a) on each of the children’s birthdays, the children will communicate with the parent whom they are not living/staying with at the time from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living/staying with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day and with the mother to pick up at the children at school on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day. christmas holidays: 11. on christmas day whoever the children are not with at that time then that parent can call the children via phone at 6pm to 6.30 pm. in 2022 and each alternative year thereafter the children to spend time with the mother from 12 noon the first day of christmas school holidays with the father to drive the children to [town c] that day with changeover to be at the maternal grandmothers house. the children to be return to [town d] by the mother in 21 days by 4 pm with changeover to be at the father and children’s residence in [town d]. in 2023 and each alternative year thereafter the father to drive the children to [town c] with changeover to be at the maternal grandmothers house after the first 21 days being with the father from the start of the christmas school holidays with the children then to be return to [town d] by the mother 3 days before school is to resume by 4 pm with changeover to be at the father and children’s residence in [town d]. communication: 12. that the children communicate with the mother as follows:
a) on each of the children’s birthdays, the children will communicate with the parent whom they are not living/staying with at the time from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living/staying with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day and with the mother to pick up at the children at school on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day.
b) on the parent’s birthdays, if the children are not living/staying with the parent who is having the birthday, the children communicate with the parent having the birthday from 6pm until 6:30pm on their birthday. c) with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day and with the mother to pick up at the children at school on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day.
c) with the father from 3pm or afterschool on the friday immediately before father’s day until 5pm on father’s day and with the mother to pick up at the children at school on the friday immediately before mother’s day until 5pm on mother’s day.
a) from 6.00pm until 6.30pm every sunday, b) to be facilitated by the mother telephoning the father, and that the parties communicate with one another via email in relation to the care, welfare, and development of the children. a) notify the mother by email with as much notice as is reasonably practicable of any major long-term decision which he is proposing to make for the children or any of them (“the proposed decision”) and the reasons for the proposed decision, b) will give the mother the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the mother’s views, and d) will notify the mother by email of the decision which he has made. the father will immediately notify the mother by email or text message in the event of any medical emergency involving the children or either of them, any medical diagnosis and associated treatment.
a) notify the mother by email with as much notice as is reasonably practicable of any major long-term decision which he is proposing to make for the children or any of them (“the proposed decision”) and the reasons for the proposed decision, b) will give the mother the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the mother’s views, and d) will notify the mother by email of the decision which he has made.
b) will give the mother the opportunity to express views by email about the proposed decision, c) will take into account the mother’s views, and d) will notify the mother by email of the decision which he has made.
c) will take into account the mother’s views, and d) will notify the mother by email of the decision which he has made.
d) will notify the mother by email of the decision which he has made.
other considerations: each parent is at liberty to attend any activities or events at which parents are ordinarily welcome. each parent is at liberty to attend any extracurricular events of the children’s at which parents are ordinarily welcome. each parent is at liberty to contact the children’s school to request any information ordinarily provided to parents. each parent is at liberty to contact any of the children’s treating medical or allied health professionals to request any information ordinarily provided to parents. the parents shall keep each other updated of current email addresses, telephone numbers and residential addresses at all times and at least within 24 hours of such details changing. the father shall keep the mother updated in relation to contact details of any medical or allied health professionals upon whom the children are attending. the parents shall each comply at all times with current state government directions in relation to covid-19 and in any other significant events that state government directions differ between new south wales and victoria the parties shall make their best efforts to arrive at a practical solution that minimises the children’s exposure to covid-19 whilst complying with these orders. in the event that minimising the children’s exposure to covid-19 effects compliance with these orders then the parties shall facilitate generous face time for that period. each party is restrained by injunction from, denigrating the other party, any partner of the other party or any member of the other party’s family to, or in the presence or hearing of the children, drinking to excess while they are responsible for the care of the children (excess being over .05), consuming any illicit drugs being affected thereby during or within 24 hours of spending time with the children, discussing family law proceedings or family law orders with the children and from allowing the children to read any documents produced for the purposes of these family law proceedings. 26. any such other orders as this honourable court deems appropriate
independent children’s lawyer’s orders sought
the mother’s evidence
... i say again, the way you talk about your drug use in your affidavit implies that your use of ice was [mr samford]’s fault?‑‑‑no. that’s incorrect. you don’t know the context. his honour: so what is the context that you say, “in order to please [mr samford]”?‑‑‑the only time that i could please [mr samford] is to do a certain sexual act on him. for me to be able to do that, i used to have to be high. thank you?‑‑‑and that’s the context.
what was the harm you had in mind at that time?‑‑‑well, the harm i was doing towards them by yelling and not being the proper mum that i needed to be because i just wasn’t there mentally at that time.
so at the time that you separated within about a week of these messages, you weren’t thinking, “he’s probably got the kids because we’ve separated and i’m not the best parent right now.”?‑‑‑no. that is not – that’s incorrect. so when you say things like, “if you’re what’s best for the kids then so be it.”, he wasn’t to interpret that as you saying, “if we separate, the kids should be with you.”?‑‑‑no. those messages – if you read like that, yes. but you don’t – still – like i said, you understand the context and what he was doing behind all those messages. his honour: so, again, what do you say ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑as in ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ the father was doing ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑he ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ in all those messages?‑‑‑he never, ever stated anything about the phone calls that was made in between ..... the baiting, the making me write certain things, making me think certain things, telling me and promising me that if i was a better person that he would come back – a whole multitude of context of things – said if i begged him and said those horrible, horrible things, that he would come back and we would be a family again. sorry. can i ask ..... in relation to any of those telephone calls, did you ever make any notes like in a diary or anywhere?‑‑‑no. i did not because i wasn’t in a good state of mind at that time.
his honour: and just before again i hand over to ms davis, if i could just ask two questions. [ms edmondson] – and again they’re both difficult questions i’m sorry, but still. in a couple of family reports you refer to being concerned are the words used about how the father will react if he does not get what he wants and that you raise, amongst other things, a risk to the children?‑‑‑correct. do you still hold those fears?‑‑‑i do more than ever, yes. more than ever?‑‑‑more than ever now. and in one of the earlier reports – and i can dig it out to get the reference – you actually refer to a concern of not just doing them harm, but killing them ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑correct. ‑ ‑ ‑ and himself?‑‑‑correct. do you still hold those .....?‑‑‑to a small degree, yes. to a small degree. thank you. and then the other one different area, but still very delicate, of course, the father says that the eldest child of you both was conceived when you raped him. you have read that?‑‑‑i have read that, your honour. can i ask what your response is to that?‑‑‑that’s an absolute disgusting thing to say. so you deny it categorically?‑‑‑100 per cent i deny it.
... other than [ms h]’s report, has anything else changed between 11 july, when you filed your affidavit, and 1 august, when you sit here before the court today?‑‑‑not – no. the father has spent time with the children, hasn’t he?‑‑‑yes. he had one supervised visit, yes. and that supervised visit – there was a report ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. there was no concerns raised in the report?‑‑‑correct. the report from the children has been good?‑‑‑correct. they had a great time?‑‑‑they had an awesome time. okay. but, nonetheless, you are saying the father’s time with the children should be restricted to holiday time only?‑‑‑yes, i do. and that is not a position that you held until you saw [ms h]’s report?‑‑‑and talking to the children, correct. and talking to the children?‑‑‑correct. and when did you talk to the children?‑‑‑the kids spoke to me the other day after they left the supervised facility, and said it was the best time that they had ever had with their dad because dad did not ask questions or make them do things they did not want to do. that’s what i’m trying to nurture right now. and that made you think holiday time only?‑‑‑after the supervised visits, yes. why?‑‑‑pardon? why? why did that mean holiday time only?‑‑‑because it takes them so long to get adjusted every second weekends, so if he only has them on the holidays, then it’s going to be a lot easier for me to resettle them over the rest of the holidays.
the maternal grandmother’s evidence
the father’s evidence
dr behrens: so when [dr s] described you as – sorry – i will just find the report. i’ve got too many folders. when [dr s] described you in this way – you understand he wasn’t able properly to assess you because you – the tests that he administered to you suggested that you weren’t answering in a frank way, you understood that?‑‑‑well, i don’t think that was his wording. well, we can go back to that if you like. at page 20 of his report – i can have it shown to you if you like, but see if you just accept this from me – at line 951:   samford] completed the pai on 12.11.2020, however, the test was deemed invalid due to the exceptionally high score on the pim scale. the positive impression involves the presentation of a very favourable impression or the denial of relatively minor faults.
so that’s really what he’s saying there, isn’t he?‑‑‑yes, i agree with that statement you just made, that’s in the report. yes. and so he wasn’t able to assess you because of that, was he?‑‑‑he had done the rest of the assessment, though. yes. he did the rest of the assessment, and he said this about you – this is at page 25 – again, tell me if you need to see the report to confirm – at line 1201:
i cannot make a psychological diagnosis of [mr samford]. he did not admit to having psychological problems. i am almost certain he has significantly under-reported any psychological difficulties he has had in the past.
and then at line 1215:
i would conclude that [mr samford] is a difficult personality, reactive in his relationship with [ms edmondson], and perhaps controlling and manipulative, but i cannot conclude that he has either a personality or psychological disorder.
so you’ve described that – that’s one of the opinions in the report that you would describe as brilliant, would you?‑‑‑well, i wouldn’t say it’s brilliant for me but ‑ ‑ ‑ you would agree with it?‑‑‑i – i, yes – i can be difficult if i don’t think i’m getting a fair go. and, what, you don’t think you’re getting a fair go in these proceedings, is that right?‑‑‑some of the things have been a bit stacked towards me, i believe.
and yet, here we have one of the major things that mum wants to do and the children are saying things that are different from what mum wants, do you accept that?‑‑‑yes, they are. so if it was the case that [ms edmondson] was telling them what to say and what to do, they wouldn’t have said, “we don’t want to go to [city b]”, would they? they would have just said, “yes, yes. we want to go to [city b]”, wouldn’t they?‑‑‑no, i disagree because they’ve made other statements, as well, that go against what she wants where they’re saying that she hits them, where [z] said that she kicked him out of the car, or something along those lines, but they’re all statements she didn’t want them to say. his honour: doesn’t that all, whether it’s about them saying, “we don’t want to go to [city b]”, whatever it is, it shows that if there is any influence that the mother has over them, that they feel sufficiently free and able to state their own views, yes?‑‑‑well, i would say it’s the extent that we don’t know like notes where i think is where some things are getting out but some things aren’t. dr behrens: so you cannot be comforted that, having seen a report of [ms h], that the children are safe and well cared for by the mother, you can’t be comforted?‑‑‑i don’t agree with that statement whatsoever.
you read that [w] described his mother – this is at paragraph 47 of the 2021 report – as:
protective and said he enjoys playing with her and showing her stuff.
do you remember reading that?‑‑‑yes. that’s not consistent with what – with those statement that you’ve said about the mother is it?‑‑‑that statement’s not. doesn’t cause you to pause and think, “maybe i’m wrong when i say [ms edmondson] never had a close bond with any of the children”. doesn’t cause you to pause and think about whether that’s right?‑‑‑no, not really. his honour: would you go so far as to say that, based upon your experience, anything positive that the children say or display, that’s recorded in any of the family reports, you don’t accept or you say it should be heavily qualified?‑‑‑but i didn’t – what was that last bit, qualified? or heavily qualified?‑‑‑i’m not sure what you’re asking there, exactly. i’m just asking, as a general proposition, based upon your experience, anything that’s stated positively about the mother’s and the children’s relationship that’s set in – set out in any reports or any of the positive interactions by the children, from your experience, you don’t accept?‑‑‑i think it’s an encouraged response. like ‑ ‑ ‑ right. no, sorry. could i have a yes or no answer? and then we can get into some of the nuts and bolts if we need to. would you accept that as a general proposition or not?‑‑‑i would accept that as a general proposition, yes. dr behrens: and it’s the case, isn’t it, that the report writers and – have spoken to other people who’ve worked with the children, you understand that?‑‑‑yes. and that the department of family and community services has carried out a comprehensive assessment of the care [ms edmondson] provides to the children in 2020, do you accept that?‑‑‑yes. so [ms e], in her report, spoke to [mr t], who i assume is the principal at the children’s school, is that right?‑‑‑he is. and at paragraph 66 of her report she records [mr t] saying:
the children attend school consistently and are appropriately dressed and have sufficient food in their lunchboxes.
remember reading that?‑‑‑i do. and does that reassure you that the children are being cared for appropriate if someone who sees them everyday during the school term is saying – and who’s responsible for their welfare says “all okay”?‑‑‑no, because there’s other things in that report that don’t go along those lines like ‑ ‑ ‑ so you’re not comforted by the principal at your children’s school speaking to a child expert writing a report and saying “the children attend school consistently, are appropriately dressed and have sufficient food in their lunchboxes”, that provides you no comfort?‑‑‑not when there’s reports in there from [mr t], as well, stating two years after the fact was made aware that [w] is still a year behind ‑ ‑ ‑
dr behrens: so you understand that [ms edmondson] is not currently in paid employment in [town c]?‑‑‑yes, i do. and that she hasn’t been able to find – her evidence is she hasn’t been able to find paid employment in [town d]– sorry, in [town c], since she lost her work in the covid pandemic?‑‑‑yes, that’s right. and you’ve acknowledged that there are limited work opportunities in [town c]. you said that yourself?‑‑‑yes. for the type of work i do, yes. and – well, for the type of work anyone does. there’s not much work in [town c]. that’s a fair statement, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. it’s a small town. and so she is living on $1500 a fortnight from centrelink. have you seen that evidence? no reason to doubt that, do you?‑‑‑there was something about $800 in there as well – every other week or something, in one – so there’s a bit of a discrepancy there, so ‑ ‑ ‑ well, you would accept that living on centrelink with four young children, she’s not going to have very much spare money, if any, is she?‑‑‑that’s judged by the government. i’m pretty sure they would be making the right ‑ ‑ ‑ no. i’m not asking about whether it’s fair or not. i’m just asking you to accept what i would have thought was a fairly reasonable proposition, that if she’s living on centrelink, there’s not likely to be any spare money, if any?‑‑‑it depends how you budget. his honour: so you won’t accept that anyone whom is on centrelink benefits, that they’re not necessarily going to be flushed with funds. do you accept that or not?‑‑‑no. it would be a struggle. you would have to be careful ‑ ‑ ‑
so, you believe that when the children have told you things in the past about the mother, that they are the truth? you believe what the children tell you?‑‑‑yes. you don’t accept that sometimes they might tell you things that aren’t true?‑‑‑no, the children have never had a need to lie to me. they know that i like the truth. so, you can’t accept the proposition that children sometimes tell adults things that they think the adults want to hear, can you not accept that?‑‑‑i think sometimes children do it to make sure they’re protecting themselves from adults around them. so, that – so, the children might say things that aren’t truthful in respect of the mother to her, but not to you, is that what you’re saying?‑‑‑yes, they might. so, you don’t believe that anything that the children have said to you about the mother and her household could be untrue?‑‑‑no, it’s all stuff that i had seen myself. could be exaggerated?‑‑‑no. and that they could be telling you some of that stuff because they think that you want to hear it?‑‑‑no. ... and you believe that in fact [ms edmondson] has said, “dad’s dumb and you are just like him,” or something like that?‑‑‑yes, something along that, i think. you really believe that [ms edmondson] said that to your children?‑‑‑yes. you say the children have told you – again, i don’t know who:
mum says you won’t win us because you don’t love us.
that’s at paragraph 130 of your affidavit – can you remember which child said that to you?‑‑‑don’t know. could be [z], i think, maybe. [z]. well, you didn’t take the trouble to specify that in your affidavit, did you, which child had told you that?‑‑‑well, a lot of them have said it over time. so, a lot of them have said, “mum says you won’t win us because you don’t love us.” is that right?‑‑‑yes, well, it has been said by a couple of them. what, exactly those words?‑‑‑yes, around – around those words. those words or to the extent of. and you believe that ms edmondson said that?‑‑‑yes.
his honour: can i ask you this, [mr samford]. you’ve acknowledged a number of times that there’s a very poor, if not a non-existent coparenting relationship between you and the mother, correct?‑‑‑yes, it’s very toxic. very toxic. okay. from your perspective, is anything likely to improve it, and if so, what?‑‑‑the relationship between [ms edmondson] and myself you mean? yes?‑‑‑no, i don’t think so, i don’t. leaving aside the tragedy of that for you, for each of you and both, would you accept that that’s also a significant tragedy for the children that their parents have such a toxic relationship with each other?‑‑‑yes, it is for sure, it’s sad. so, there’s no way that you can see whatever – of all the stuff that has happened in the past, there’s no sort of possible bridge ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑well, we ‑ ‑ ‑ sorry, no, just let me finish?‑‑‑sorry. there’s no possible bridge, even just to have, you know, just a very simple, civil communication via a parenting app ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes, well ‑ ‑ ‑
his honour: so, you don’t think at any stage any of the children might be saying things that they might think the parent that they’re speaking to might want to hear?‑‑‑well, i don’t think so. i’ve never given them a reason to lie. like, they’ve always ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no. but they might, and could i suggest for lawyers who work in this area, and judges too, it’s not uncommon for kids, even off their own bat, to say things to one parent that they think that that parent wants to hear?‑‑‑okay. i’m just saying that that’s not unheard of?‑‑‑yes. so, there doesn’t have to be necessarily one or either parent encouraging or whispering or coaching and saying, “say this stuff,” whatever it is. some kids just do it. i’m not suggesting that [y] or others would, or do it, but it’s a possibility, that’s all i’m observing?‑‑‑yes, it is a possibility, but i honestly believe what [y] stated. but, again ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑that’s what i ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ because – just try for a moment, put yourself in my position. i’ve got all this evidence from lots and lots and lots of independent sources, the family reports, school reports, etcetera, which all say really positive things, and then there are these weird comments – i will just speak about them in those terms – of the kind that we’re just starting to discuss now, and it’s just sort of like – it just doesn’t fit in so many ways, do you understand?‑‑‑yes. and i’ve got to try to make sense, if that’s possible, of all this evidence, and then there are these other bits that just don’t fit in the equation, so to speak?‑‑‑yes, okay.
his honour: right? no, no, no, just let me finish, right. and you, and to some extent perhaps your sister, persisting in running a case in this court which is completely contrary to what was found in the other court at a much higher standard could potentially place you, and maybe your sister, at some risk of prosecution that i could perhaps, if i found certain things, refer you to the director of public prosecutions for consideration on perjury, contempt, whatever. but there is a procedure under the evidence act, under section 128 of the evidence act, by which i could grant a certificate to you, and perhaps also to your sister, which would protect you from any risk of possible future prosecution arising out of your evidence in these proceedings?‑‑‑okay, yes. do you understand?‑‑‑yes, i’ve actually read a little bit about that somewhere looking through stuff, i think. well, do you accept what i’m telling you?‑‑‑yes, i do. so, in summary, i am concerned if you keep going down this road you could potentially expose yourself to potential prosecution or risk of even me finding you in contempt of court or something along those lines, and therefore what i’m proposing to do, with the agreement of [mr u] and dr behrens, is to provide to you a certificate so you can give – not open slather – but the certificate would protect you from any risk of possible prosecution, do you understand?‑‑‑yes. because, just in case it’s not clear, it’s unbelievably dangerous to go down a road where you’ve got criminal findings, there has been no appeal, whatever you did or didn’t do or decided not to do ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ i can have no regard to any of that, but i’ve got to have regard, especially in light of the findings that i’ve adopted, i’ve got to have regard to what went on and the findings that were made in the criminal proceedings?‑‑‑yes. you understand? and it’s an unbelievably dangerous road effectively to try to run, “no, just ignore that,” or “that’s not true.” i can’t do that, and it’s unbelievably dangerous for you to try to do that?‑‑‑okay. you understand?‑‑‑yes, i wasn’t aware of that at all. no. well, that’s why i’m telling you?‑‑‑yes. okay. so, what i propose doing is issuing a certificate under section 128 of the evidence act in relation to the father’s evidence regarding the evidence that he has started to give and may give, on a very limited basis – because that’s the only basis upon which that i will allow it, it has got to be incredibly limited – in relation to anything that might be taken to challenge the evidence that was given by the father and not accepted in the magistrates court, understand?‑‑‑yes.
and is there anything that you can say to his honour to assist him in knowing that he could trust you in relation to teaching the children respect and being a good role model for them?‑‑‑yes. yes, your honour, i just – i want my kids to do so much better in their lives. i don’t want them to ever be in a relationship, a toxic relationship like – like me and [ms edmondson] have had. i just – yes, i want them to – i want them to excel in life, that’s all. and are there any concrete steps that you are contemplating taking in relation to teaching the children respect and being a good role model for them?‑‑‑it starts with respecting one another. that’s where most people learn respect from, i think, from home. and then for some of their actions and stuff that they’ve done, like, to me, that the – they need counselling really bad. they need, like, ongoing counselling, not just two or three visits. they need some serious counselling and follow-up stuff as well, not just a couple ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: and for what in particular?‑‑‑pardon? for what in particular do they need the counselling?‑‑‑just that they’re – well, i haven’t seen them – only at the centre. but they – they’re still – like, to me, they – they’re still violent with each other. like, just they – they didn’t get out of control both times i seen them, but they were heading that way, just with the timeframe. like, yes, that they can – they can be the most beautiful children, but the next second they’re just nasty, violent. and the violence is, yes, scary when they’re little children. like, they – they shouldn’t, yes, be playing out like that. i think the things that they’ve seen me and their mother go through, too, like, they’ve – they’ve been in the house while all the screaming is going on, they’ve heard it all and ‑ ‑ ‑ indeed?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ like, i don’t – i don’t think they’ve actually had a chance to talk to anyone about how that has affected them. and, you know, to get that off their chest and say do they realise it’s – it’s not their fault, it’s the adults’ fault who has caused it all. and i don’t think they’ve had that opportunity and that’s one of my big driving forces to try and get that, and it has been from day one. like, i’ve been pushing hard to get these – it might not seem much to everyone sitting here compared to what you see all the time, but to me it’s everything. all these little pieces is what comes together to make a complete person in the future life that is balanced and does the right things. no, i understand. thank you. [mr u]: is it fair to say that between you and [ms edmondson] you have shown the children a bad experience of what parenting is about?‑‑‑i would hate to think that our children would grow up to be anything like our relationship. and – and back to the counselling, like, it scares me that that’s what they’re seeing. i don’t want them to be alcoholics. i don’t want them to be on drugs. i don’t want them to think that sort of stuff is normal. i don’t want them thinking partying all night is normal. i don’t want them thinking screaming at each other is normal. i don’t want them thinking hitting each other is normal.
evidence of ms h  samford] (respondent father) in his interview, [mr samford] presented himself as a concerned father who was bitter and frustrated because his many concerns had not been heard or addressed despite other reports and court attendances over the years. [mr samford] commented, "she’s proven over and over again that she has no interest in providing for the children” and was very concerned and distressed about this view. [mr samford] struggled to detail the history of seeing the children after separation three years ago. initially, he was able to telephone the children every night and see them fortnightly for two nights, alternate weekends. by the time of his interview, he had not seen the children for over a year, apart from one recent supervised visit. [mr samford] explained his unsupervised time with the children was suspended when [ms edmondson] discovered a camera in her house. he alleged [w] had placed the camera, and he was charged in relation to this over a year ago. [mr samford] advised he had pleaded not guilty to the charges laid against him. [ms edmondson] (applicant mother) although [ms edmondson] wanted the children to live with her, she indicated she was happy to return to the previous every second weekend arrangement and for [mr samford] and the children to have regular phone calls. [ms edmondson] wanted [mr samford] to stop playing games with the children's minds and said she would be happy for the children to go to him during the holidays if she could "trust him not to fill their heads with crap". [ms edmondson] discussed her wish to move to [city b]. she noted [town c] was a really small town in which it was great for the children to grow up but said she found it difficult to breathe there because of all the allegations made against her. however, she said it was difficult to obtain employment in the small town and anticipated being more able to get work in [city b]. [ms edmondson] said she used to work as a [health care worker] and would like to study to get her [health care] degree. she said all the facilities for this were in [city b]. [ms edmondson] anticipated living independently from her partner, [mr q], because of how many children they have between them. if she was allowed to relocate, [ms edmondson] proposed driving the children to [town c] during the school holidays and for [mr samford] to collect the children from there for the holidays. however, [ms edmondson] did not plan to relocate until [mr samford] had established "proper, stable, and safe,relationships” with the children without supervision. she said she would prefer to relocate at the end of this year so the children could start at a new school next year and said she would not do so if she did not consider the children's relationships with their father were sufficiently established. [ms edmondson] espoused her belief that the children needed their father. allegations about child safety and wellbeing [w] told me that his mother looked after them pretty well. he said that sometimes his mother cooked and also that often they would have takeaway hot chips and gravy. contrary to [mr samford]'s report, [ms edmondson] said dcj staff had called unannounced to her home multiple times. [ms edmondson] acknowledged [mr samford]'s concern that she had failed to get specialist help for [w] when he broke his nose when he was much younger. she said that [mr samford]'s report that she had not obtained specialist help because [w]'s nose was fixed when he ran into a glass door some months later was correct because she did not need to go to the expense of seeing the specialist. [ms edmondson] volunteered [w]'s teeth were terrible and said she was getting treatment for him by the public dental scheme because she could not afford private dental care. allegations about drugs and alcohol [mr samford] said he had battled with [ms edmondson]'s use of ice throughout their relationship, trying to get help for her. he told me she blamed him for her use of this drug. [mr samford] said he tried the drug twice to see what the effects were but said it gave him a headache and he could not think clearly. [mr samford] described himself as an infrequent social drinker. [ms edmondson] said she was due to have a follicle test the following day. she said she last used ice in 2019, noting she probably used the drug every three to four months to numb herself so she could comply with [mr samford]'s demand to engage in a particular sex act. candidly, [ms edmondson] reported drinking a couple of beers every day but said she had never been charged with any drink-driving offences or been negatively affected by her drinking. allegations about family violence although previous reports extensively discussed this issue, neither party drew much attention to this in this limited update report. during their relationship, [ms edmondson] commented that there had been no physical violence but a lot of mental abuse. although [ms edmondson] sought not to come into contact with [mr samford] during the report process, she inadvertently did so in my waiting room, but no problems arose. the parties did not acknowledge each other in front of the children. children and their relationships [w] with poor eye contact, [w] initially appeared somewhat anxious, gradually relaxing as the interview continued. at times, his speech was difficult to understand. when asked why he had to see me, [w] responded, "to explain things and see dad". he then commented that he had forgotten what his mother had told him. [w] said he was not thinking about the future and was "pretty fine" with what was happening now. when asked how he felt about not seeing his father very much, [w] responded, "it's not good. i don't like it." [w] told me that the good things at his mothers were that he got to see his friends, uncles, and family members. when asked if there was anything he did not like at his mother's, [w] responded, "i don't get to see dad much. i don't get to see my other parent". he explained that it was a problem that if he lived with either of his parents, he did not get to see the other. [w] said he could not see both of his parents because of what had happened so far. when asked, [w] said he put the camera in his mother's house but could not remember why before saying he was pretty sure it was to get information about "how much of a bad person mum was". he said he did not know if his father had asked him to place the camera and said, "mum has a bad side. she gets really angry, snappy, yells and puts you in the corner". when asked how often such behaviour occurred, [w] conceded it was if "you're really bad, very rarely". he said he was the only one put in the corner and the other children were not, even if they did something bad. [w] said he did not know what he would wish for if he had three wishes. when asked about his mother’s wish to move to [city b], [w] said he wanted to stay in [town c] because he liked the good little community there. he explained his mother had a new boyfriend in [city b]with three children he liked. [w] said he would prefer "to stay home" in [town c] and that it would be nice if [mr q] came and lived with them. he said he had a lot of friends in [town c]. if the court said he had to go and live with his father, [w] said he would miss his mother, but it would also be nice to see his father. he said it was not surprising that his parents did not like each other because they were going through court. [w] said it would be good if he could stay with both of his parents. he said he got along well with his brothers and sister. [x] [x] related comfortably to me, although i had difficulty following his speech at times. he said he had no idea why he had to see me before saying he wanted to live with both of his parents. [x] said he did not know why he did not see his father very much. when asked what the good things were at his mother's, [x] responded his tablet and his lego, including lego [v]. when asked if there was anything he did not like at his mother's, [x] responded he did not have their cat there. he said there was nothing else he did not like. if he had three wishes, [x] said he would wish to see his cat, [ab], again and would wish for the whole lego [v] set. [x] went on to say he wanted to see his father more and did not know why he did not do so. he said he sometimes got into a little bit of trouble at his mother’s but had forgotten why. in response to my query, [x] said he would probably be pretty sad because of his friends if he had to move to [city b]. [x] said he would like to see both of his parents when asked if he would like to live with his father. when he got into trouble from his mother, [x] said she yelled at him and would use his full name. he said he could not remember his mother ever having hit him. [x] told me he was in year 5 at school and did not play any sport, although he used to go to [sports] training. he said he did not have a good relationship with his brothers and got on the best with [y], his sister. [x] said he shared a bedroom with [w] and [z] and that currently, [y]'s room was occupied by a woman called [ms ac], his mother's friend, and some of her children. [ad], [ms ac’s] son, sometimes slept on a foldout bed in the boys' bedroom. [y] [y]was a chatty, friendly little girl. her speech was hard to follow at times. she said she could not remember why she had to talk to me, although she was pretty sure her mother had told her. [y]went on to say she wanted to live with both of her parents and said she had liked the previous arrangement when she had a week at her mother's and two days at her father's, describing this as "fun". [y] said that now she did not see her father much and that she missed him. [y] said the good things at her mothers were that they were allowed to have friends at their house. when asked what she did not like at her mother's, [y] said it was annoying to have people staying with them. if she had three wishes, [y] said she would wish that her parents could be close in the same town, that some of their friends from [town d] could come and see them and that they all could live in the same town. [y]was not sure if she would like to move to [city b]. she said she had no problems with her mother. [y] said she was in year 2 at school, in the same class as [z]. she was helpful at the end of her interview, suggesting i stay seated, and she went to get [x] because i wanted to talk to him again briefly. [z] [z]’s speech was not always easy to follow. after i explained my role, he asked me what the others had said before saying he guessed he had to talk to me “about mum and dad,” quickly interrupting my explanation to say, “i want to live with them both.” when asked what he liked at his mother's, [z] said it was fun. when asked what he did not like, he said he did not like that it was always raining and muddy, and they had to stay inside. smiling, when asked what he would wish for if he had three wishes, [z] said he would wish for unlimited wishes, for all the toys he wished for, including a tablet, and added he would love to see his father. [z] said it would be better if he saw his father more and volunteered that he had a tablet at his father's. [z] said he did not know why he did not see his father more often. in conclusion, [z] said he would probably like to have a week at his father’s and a week at his mother’s. comments against the terms of reference in preparation of the further updated family report that has been ordered the court expert is asked to specifically address issues as follows: 77.1a the impact on the emotional and psychological wellbeing of each of the children arising from the incident in which a camera was placed within the mother’s home in circumstances in which one or more of the children were involved in the placement of the camera in the mother’s home, 77.1a1 [x] said he had not been concerned about the camera but later was bothered because it meant they could not see their father. he said he was no longer worried about the camera. [y] said she did not want to talk about the video that was taken because it was not there now. she said the video recorded something about her that was not appropriate and said she did not want to talk about it. 77.1a2 when asked about the camera, [z] told a confusing story about their mother finding it stuck in a ball of clay that his father had given [w]. he was hard to follow here. 77.1b the impact on the emotional and psychological wellbeing of the child [w] and on the child’s relationship with the father, arising from having to give evidence in the criminal proceedings brought against the father, 77.1b1 [w] did not display much anxiety when asked about having to give evidence in court, saying only "it was not that good in court" and adding that he had not got into trouble about placing the camera in his mother's house. [w] said he sometimes talked to the school counsellor. 77.1c how each of the children has responded to and coped with the reintroduction of time between the father and the children on a supervised basis, 77.1c1 all the children were pleased to have commenced seeing their father again. the contact report provided described a positive experience between the children and their father. 77.1c2 according to [ms edmondson], [w] had been "slipping a bit" in mood since talking to his father again. when she discussed this with [w], [ms edmondson] said it seemed that the court dispute was playing on [w]'s mind. however, [ms edmondson] said [w] had told her that the first visit he had with his father was the best time he had ever had with him because his father did not ask questions about his mother and did not interrogate them. [w] had commented he was happy that the visit had just involved his father spending time with them. 77.1c3 [ms edmondson] said that before his time with his father was suspended, she would frequently be called to pick [z] up from school because of his behaviour which included throwing things around, swearing and fighting. she said the school noticed this behaviour ceased about six weeks after he stopped seeing his father. however, now that the children had seen their father again, [ms edmondson] reported [z] was saying to her that he hated her, that she hated him and that he loved his father. if [z] got into trouble or she asked him to do routine chores, [ms edmondson] said he would tell her he was going to live with his father. 77.1c4 during her interview, [ms edmondson] several times emphasised the wish for the children to spend time with their father and did not appear to be raising the above concerns to oppose any time. she said she talked to the school counsellor all the time about how to manage [z]’s behaviour and was grateful for the worksheets the counsellor sent to assist. 77.1d the nature of the relationship between each of the children and the father, 77.1d1 in the observation session, it was apparent that the children and their father had a warm, affectionate relationship. all of the children wished to spend more time with their father. 77.1e. the likely impact on the relationship of each of the children with the father should the mother be permitted to relocate with the children to [city b] nsw, 77.1e1 in accordance with the most recent arrangements, the children must undertake a round-trip of about six hours from [town c] to [town ae] and return to spend minimal time with their father. in my opinion, such a brief time once a month on a supervised basis is insufficient and not sustainable or particularly beneficial in the longer term. moving to [city b] will involve the children having an 18-hour round-trip from [city b] to [town d], making school holiday contact the only viable arrangement. 77.1e2 [ms edmondson] proposes delaying a move to [city b] until the children's relationship with their father has been re-established, although it is difficult to know how this will be assessed and by whom. 77.1f. the emotional and psychological impact on the mother of the reintroduction of time between the children and the father, 77.1f1 the reintroduction of time between the children and their father accords with [ms edmondson]'s wishes. she will only be upset by this if the children react negatively and/or if [mr samford] denigrates her to them. 77.1g. the likely psychological and the emotional impact on the mother should she not be permitted to relocate with the children to [city b]. 77.1g1 [ms edmondson] did not express a desperate, urgent desire to move to [city b] and although she is likely to be disappointed, impressed as likely to cope with not being allowed to move. 77.1h. given the father’s criminal conviction in november 2021 and the fact that the mother was called to give evidence at his criminal trial together with the child [w], the capacity of each parent to provide for the needs of the children including their emotional and intellectual needs. 77.1h1 [ms edmondson] did not unduly focus on [mr samford]'s past actions and was appropriately seeking assistance in managing the children's behaviour. [mr samford]'s role in placing the camera in [ms edmondson]'s house must call into question his ability to ever have a cooperative, trusting relationship with her or to put his children's emotional needs before his own wish to obtain negative information. 77.1i. an updated assessment of the risk to, and wellbeing of, the children in the mother’s care, particularly in circumstances where she is permitted to relocate with the children to [city b]. 77.1i1 such a risk assessment is beyond the scope of this limited report. relocating to [city b] might hopefully enhance [ms edmondson]'s financial ability to provide for the children, a task which cannot be easy on government benefits with limited child support. i was not made aware of any recent notifications to dcj, hopefully suggesting [ms edmondson] has addressed the concerns referred to by [dr s]. in preparing the further updated family report the court expert is requested to include an observation of the children spending time with the father, preferably with the father and the children being in the same room (and subject to any relevant covid or other protocols or practical arrangements with the court expert also present in that room, but if that is not possible with the court expert observing by way of video link). in addition, the father seeks that the court expert address the following terms of reference in the updated family report: 81.1 how is the current dispute between the parents impacting on the children? 81.2 are the children at risk of neglect and/or physical, psychological, or other harm or abuse, including exposure to family violence? if so, what is nature of the risk? 81.3 what are the children’s views about where they live and the time they spend with each parent? are there any factors (including parental influence or influence from other people) which are considered relevant to the weight to be given to the children’s views? 81.4 what is the likely impact on the children if the mother is permitted to relocate to [city b]? 81.5 what is the capacity of each party to: recognises and provide for the children’s physical, social, psychological, and emotional needs. encourage the children’s relationship with the other party and any other significant people and to work with them for the benefit of the children (taking into consideration whether, in this case, it is appropriate that they do so), and act protectively in the interests of the children if the other party or any other significant person poses a risk to the children? as far as possible, these further questions have already been addressed in the preceding report. evaluation this assessment concerns the future living and time spending arrangements for [w], [x], [y], and [z]. there are many allegations and counter allegations in this matter and previous expert reports. given that this is an updated report, consideration is given to the parties’ ability to follow the recommendations of previous experts, before making any further recommendations. [ms o] (2019) recommended the parents might be assisted by attending a parenting course, that [w] might benefit from supportive counselling to address his reported anxiety and sleep issues, that "the parents should consider medical attention for [w]'s nose and breathing difficulties" and that [z] and [y] would benefit from their mother seeking referral to a speech therapist. [ms e] (2020) recommended that [ms edmondson] "engage in a parenting/family support program and individual counselling" and that [mr samford] and the children engage in individual counselling. [dr s] (2020 and 2021) thought that perhaps [mr samford] should continue counselling and recommended [ms edmondson] "talk to her gp and consider antidepressant medication or a mood stabiliser". [ms e] (2021) recommended [ms edmondson] continued to engage in counselling and, if available, a local family support program. she also recommended [mr samford] engage with a psychologist. when asked about their compliance with the previous recommendations, [mr samford] advised he had attended an online parenting course and counselling. [ms edmondson] said she attended a parenting course once a week at the children's school and that counselling at [region r] family support service assisted her. it is unfortunate that this dispute continues, given both parents' love for the children and the children's strong wishes to spend time with both of them. given the history of this matter, in my opinion, it is to [ms edmondson]'s credit that the children are still so attached to their father, suggesting she has not denigrated him to them. it was unfortunate that [mr samford] felt so aggrieved and unheard that he went to the lengths of using a surveillance camera. given the illegality of his action, it was difficult to see how this could have resulted in the children having more time with him. [mr samford] genuinely believed in his concerns and the necessity of his campaign for the children to live with him. [mr samford] justified his actions in removing the children from their mother's care at the time of separation. he said if he had not done something, the children would be affected by their mother's behaviour, including her drug use, for the rest of their lives. [mr samford] was frustrated that no attention had been paid to the "grotesque" text messages he had received from [ms edmondson] or to the excessive number of missed calls he had received from her. in these messages and calls, [mr samford] said [ms edmondson] described herself as a monster and said she did not want to hurt the children anymore. while the court will have to substantiate the veracity of [mr samford]'s allegations, dcj has not taken any action to remove the children from their mother's care. attention will also have to be paid to the very disruptive effects of any move to live with their father on the children, particularly their separation from their mother. the children will also be separated from their school and friends, although this might also occur if [ms edmondson] relocates to [city b] later. it was challenging to match [mr samford]'s strong view that [ms edmondson] was not interested in caring for their children with her persistence in pursuing this matter and her stated love and care for them. her demeanour during the interview and observation demonstrated the bond between herself and the children, and to her credit, [ms edmondson] recognised the need for the children to have a relationship with their father. indeed, her commitment to facilitate this was so strong that she proposed deferring any move to [city b] until this was established. as noted already, i am not sure how this will be assessed. it is difficult to make definitive recommendations in this matter, particularly given the court will have to assess the veracity of [mr samford]'s concerns. the current distance and future distance between the parties also make any recommendations problematic. on balance, if the court is confident in the adequacy of [ms edmondson]'s current care, i would suggest the children continue to live with their mother and spend time with their father on a supervised basis once a month for the next three months, moving to unsupervised time for the next three months. after this, whether or not [ms edmondson] and the children relocate to [city b], the children should spend time with their father during school holidays. a particular concern must be [mr samford]'s ability to accept any such recommendations and related orders and to cease denigrating [ms edmondson]. recommendations 93. it is therefore respectfully recommended that [ms edmondson] has sole parental responsibility for the children, and the children live with her that the children spend time with their father on a supervised basis for the next three months that after this, the children spend unsupervised time with their father for three months before commencing holiday time only.
oral evidence of ms h
evidence of ms e
children and their relationships the children appeared comfortable being interviewed individually, and were generally open and thoughtful in their responses. [y] and [w] answered, “i don’t know” and, “i don’t want to say” for some questions, and [x] mentioned that he was unsure about providing some details, due to possible repercussions, though did not indicate what these repercussions could be. [w] (age 12 years, 0 months) [w] reported that he is currently in year 6 at [town c] public school. he reported that he enjoys art and building, and has a number of friends in his class. he reported that he plans to attend [town n] high school in 2022. [w] described his mother as “protective”, and said that he enjoys playing with her and “showing her stuff”. he said that his mother sometimes sends the children to their bedrooms or to stand in the corner, and sometimes smacks them if they are rude, or if they say they want to be with their father instead of with her. he said that he is “not really” scared of his mother, and identified her as someone he would turn to if he was worried or upset. [w] also described his father as “protective”, and said he likes building with him. he said that his father is sometimes angry if the children fight with one another, and said that, at those times, his father sends the children to their rooms, or “tries to hold us”. he said that his father says that his mother is “bad”, adding “both parents do that in a way”. he said that it is confusing when that occurs. [w] said that he would like to spend time with his father, and that, if he could, he would live “one week with each [parent]”. [x] (age 9 years, 5 months) [x] reported that he is currently in year 4 at [town c] public school. he described his teacher as “nice and kind”, and said that he has a number of friends at school. [x] said that he likes watching movies with his mother, and travelling with her, “and she doesn’t get mad”. he said that his mother does get angry sometimes, and that it is “easy to pull her buttons”. he said that all the children try to be careful not to make her angry, “except [z]”. [x] said that, since living with his maternal grandmother, his mother seems less angry, and does not yell or send them to their rooms as frequently. he described a positive relationship with his maternal grandmother. [x] said that he loves his father, and that this father loves him. he described many activities he enjoys with his father, such as playing, going shopping, and talking to his paternal grandmother. [x] said that his mother tells them “not to listen to dad because he is trying to brainwash us”. [x] explained that his father “keeps repeating that mum is the bad guy, mum is the bad guy”. he said “that is brainwashing.... i don’t really know who to trust”. [x] started to describe his father telling him that his mother was violent towards him, but hesitated, saying “i’m not sure if i should say... i don’t want to go on her bad side.... last time she got angry about us saying bad things about her”. [x] said that he would like to see his father, and that he would really like to live with both his parents. he suggested that he could have 3 nights with his father instead of 2, or could live mostly with his father, and spend some weekend time with his mother. he added that he often feels sick during the drive between his parents’ homes, as the journey is “long and turny”. [x]’s wish was for his family “to be together and mum and dad to love each other again”. [y] (age 7 years, 2 months) [y] appeared polite and reserved during her interview. she could be easily understood, despite some minor pronunciation difficulties. [y] reported that she is in year 1 at [town c] public school, and that her favourite part of school is the schoolwork. she described a good friendship network, and likes her teacher. [y] described a number of positive activities with her mother, and with her father, and identified both parents as people she could speak with if she was upset or worried. she did not want to answer any questions about negative elements of her relationships with her parents, or about their discipline practices. she did state that she feels “sad if they say bad things about each other”. [y] said that, if her parents lived closer together, she would want to live “half at mum’s and half at dad’s”, but she understands this is not practical due to the distance between the homes. [z] (age 7 years, 2 months) [z] was interviewed directly after an argument with his mother, which may have impacted his responses. he could be easily understood, despite some minor pronunciation difficulties. [z] reported that he is in year 1 at [town c] public school. he was unable to identify any enjoyable activities at school, and said “mostly no-one plays with me because they think i’m a weird kid”. he said that he is not able to talk with the school counsellor, as “the principal doesn’t let us”. [z] reported no positives in his relationship with his mother, saying “she always been mean to me”. he said that most of the time, his mother is angry with him, because other people blame him for things. he reported that his mother cooks meals that he does not like, smacks him, and says “f-off”. he added that, on one occasion, she dragged him to the car and kicked him into the car. he said that his mother tells them that they are “only allowed to care about her, and not allowed to care about dad”. he then asked, “why does she be naughty if she is trying to win us in court?” he asked whether his mother would read this report, and said, “well, the court will take me if mum is going to smack me”. [z] stated that he misses his father “a lot”, and that they used to do many enjoyable activities together. he said that he has not seen his father since march 2021, and does not speak to him now “because of court”. he said that his father does not smack him, but “holds my neck with his knees”. [z] said that, previously, he was living “two nights at dad’s and a thousand with mum”, and that he would prefer to live “two nights at mum’s and a thousand with dad because he is nice to me”. his wishes for his family were “for mum to die”. when asked whether he would like to provide a message directly to the judge, [z] stated, “please choose dad”. collateral information subpoenaed information from dcj indicates that 14 risk of significant harm reports were received between march and june 2020, alleging that the children were neglected, [ms edmondson] was using illicit substances, and that the mother was verbally and physically abusive towards the children. none of the reports were substantiated, and caseworkers noted that some reports appeared vexatious. evaluation [w], [x], [z] and [y] have been exposed to ongoing volatility and hostility between their parents, and inconsistency in their care arrangements. they are likely to have been exposed to a high level of conflict, and possible family violence, prior to their parents’ separation, and there have been numerous indications that the children have been exposed to information about the dispute and ongoing denigration of each parent by the other. they have experienced significant, sudden, separations from each parent, and are currently having no contact with their father. the mother’s allegation, that the father has given a surveillance device to the children to record the mother’s care of the children, is highly concerning. the previous family report concluded that, “if the court finds that the mother’s allegations about the father’s coercive control and attempts to damage the children’s relationship with her are accurate, it may be necessary for the father’s time with the children to be supervised by a professional to ensure that the children are not exposed to these comments”. additionally, [dr s] considered “the primary risk to the children in the care of the father to be his undermining of the relationship between the children and the mother”. if, following these reports, the father has attempted to further undermine the children’s relationship with their mother through covert, illegal surveillance, it indicates not only a lack of understanding of the negative impact on the children, but also a disregard for the professional advice provided to the court. however, as the father was unwilling to respond to the allegations, due to the ongoing criminal proceedings, his version of these events is unknown. [mr samford]'s perception that the children’s school, dcj, police and, to some extent, the court, are conspiring to side with [ms edmondson], provides further indication of [mr samford]'s scepticism of professionals working with the children. this may make it difficult for him to work with these agencies to support the children into the future. the father has raised ongoing concerns about the mother’s substance abuse, mental health, and neglect of the children’s physical, emotional and educational needs. the mother has submitted to hair follicle tests, and no other sources have indicated substance abuse. [dr s] noted that the mother may have downplayed her substance abuse, and the father believes she is likely to resume her drug and alcohol use once proceedings are finalised. it will be important that ms edmondson remains engaged in counselling over the following 12 months, to ensure ongoing support to manage her emotions and maintain her abstinence form illicit substances. [ms edmondson]'s alcohol use may also contribute to her emotional volatility and depression. she may benefit from support to understand and reduce her alcohol consumption. [dr s] diagnosed [ms edmondson] with major depressive disorder, and noted that she displayed some traits of borderline personality disorder. his primary concern in relation to the children was the neglect of the children in the mother’s care. it appears, from recent information from the children’s school and dcj, that the mother has engaged in appropriate services, and that there are no current concerns about the children’s needs being neglected. however, as the father has raised, there is an ongoing risk that the mother’s engagement in services will deteriorate once court proceedings are finalised. it will be vital that [ms edmondson] maintains her engagement in services for the children and for herself, such as counselling, engagement with the school, and speech therapy if needed. an additional concern raised by the father and the children is [ms edmondson]'s volatility. [ms edmondson] acknowledged that she has a tendency to yell at the children, but views this as part of her personality. the children’s comments about actively avoiding making their mother angry, and their fear that she would react negatively to their comments during interviews, indicates that [ms edmondson]'s anger interferes with her parenting capacity. [ms edmondson] and the children noted that this has improved in recent months, and it may be that her reduced stress levels combined with regular counselling sessions, is helping [ms edmondson] to parent in a less reactive manner. [ms edmondson] may benefit from additional parenting support to develop strategies to parent in a calm and attuned manner, and to see that she can integrate new parenting strategies. [w], [x] and [y] all reported distress about their parents’ denigration of one another. while [z] did not report this directly, his discussion of his parents wanting to “win us in court” indicates exposure to the ongoing court dispute. it appears likely that both parents have spoken negatively about the other parent, and have discouraged the children’s relationship with the other parent. this appears to have impacted the children’s behaviour and mental health, and is likely to have an ongoing negative impact on the children’s relationships with their parents as well as their self-identity. challenges to their emotional wellbeing is also likely to negatively impact on their learning and academic progress. all four children expressed that they miss their father, and that they would like to spend time with him. while [ms edmondson] and the school principal have reported that the children have appeared more settled during this period, it is likely that this separation is confusing and upsetting for the children. additionally, it is likely that the children would not feel comfortable talking with their mother about this distress, and that she would find it difficult to support their emotions, considering her own negative opinion of [mr samford]. it will be important that the children have access to other neutral adults, such as school staff and counsellors, with whom they can discuss their experiences and receive support. while [ms edmondson] believes that the children’s time with the father should be supervised, to protect them from the father’s denigrating comments about her, this would involve significant travel for both parents, and would significantly limit the children’s relationship with their father. given the children’s wish to spend more time with their father, this does not appear warranted. however, it will be vital that the father cease his negative comments about the mother. [mr samford] strongly believes that it is in the children’s best interests to return to his care, once the criminal proceedings are finalised. however, by that time, he will have had a significant period without any contact with the children. a change of residence for the children would involve moving schools, and disconnecting with their current friends and supports. given the children appear to be settled in their current school environment, it seems that, this would not benefit the children. [ms edmondson] has proposed that she be permitted to relocate to [city b], nsw, due to increased opportunities for her and for the children. however, this would limit the opportunities for the children to spend regular time with their father, and would be a significant disruption to the children’s lives. as the children are reported to be gradually settling in their behaviour and mood over the past few months, it appears that additional disruption would not be beneficial. additionally, the current support from the children’s school and maternal grandmother appear to be protective factors for children, which may not be present in [city b]. however, if the court decides that the father will only spend minimal time with the children in the long term, the benefits to [ms edmondson], relating to housing, employment and mental health, may outweigh the costs of the disruption and the children’s relationships with [mr samford]. recommendations unless evidentiary material suggests otherwise, it is respectfully recommended that: the children live with [ms edmondson]. once [mr samford]'s criminal proceedings are finalised, the children spend one weekend with the father each fortnight. [ms edmondson] continue to engage in counselling, and that her counsellor or psychologist have access to this report. 4. [ms edmondson] engage in a local family support program, if available. both parents be prohibited from denigrating the other in the presence of the children. [mr samford] engage with a psychologist, to develop his understanding of the importance of supporting the children’s relationship with their mother, and that the psychologist have access to this report.   samford] (respondent father – aged 43 years) [mr samford] said that he wants the children to thrive and have the tools to be successful in life, but does not believe they are currently learning this. he said that they “explode” when things do not go their way. he said that he wants to teach them a better way to respond. he said that there is a high level of violence between the children and that [z] recently said that he wanted to “stab [w]” and went to get a carving knife from the kitchen. he believes it is vital that the children engage in counselling, and said he has emailed legal aid “100 times” to request this. [mr samford] alleged that [ms edmondson] was very controlling and aggressive during their relationship, frequently kicking and punching him while he slept, and often goaded him to hit her back. he described her controlling the family finances, and would not allow him to speak to his family members, and would check his phone regularly. he said that since the separation, he is aware that she has been showing people “revenge porn” made during the relationship. he said that, based on what the children have told him, [ms edmondson] is becoming more angry and volatile, and he is concerned about this escalation. he alleged that she has said to him “if she doesn’t have the kids, no-one will”, adding “i think they are in danger if she thinks she will lose them”. [mr samford] demonstrated a high degree of frustration about the court processes, noting that his lawyer told him that [ms edmondson] “has the more believable story”, and he does not believe his account of events has been taken seriously. children [w] (age 10 years, 10 months) when [w] was interviewed via teleconference at his mother’s home (without his mother in the room), he answered most questions with “i don’t know”. he stated that he is in year 5 at school and enjoys playing [sports]. [w] said that he would like to have more time with his father, and would like to alternate weeks between the homes during the covid quarantine and during school holidays. he said that he was unsure about what arrangements he would like during regular term time. when interviewed with his father, [w] said that his mother “says mean stuff about dad....every day she swears...i don’t like it there”. he said that his mother “yells and swears” adding “it is not a normal yell – everyone’s shaking and mum doesn’t even care”. he said his father “just talks to us and helps us calm down. and doesn’t swear at us”. he said that his father does not talk about his mother, but does say “mum shouldn’t call him that stuff”. he said that he has had enough of his mother yelling at them, and does not want to see her at all. he was unsure whether he would miss her if he did not spend any time with his mother, adding “the twins don’t miss her at all – they absolutely hate her”. when asked about schooling and friends, he said “you can’t trust any friends in [town c]”. [x] (age 8 years, 3 months) [x] appeared happy to be interviewed individually when at his father’s. he said that his favourite activity with his father was “going shopping” and that with his mother they “don’t do much, we just stay home”. he said that when he and his siblings fight, “dad tells us to stop” and “mum sometimes does nothing, sometimes says stop or you’ll go to your rooms”. he said that if he was sad, his father would give him a cuddle, and but that is was “not that often” that his mother would give him a cuddle. he said that his mother “gets really angry, not normal angry, she smacks us and makes us go to our bed. not like a normal mum”. he said that he feels “upset and sad” when his mother is angry. [z] (age 5 years, 11 months) [z] was unwilling to speak while with his mother, but was happy to be interviewed alone when with his father. unprompted at the beginning of the interview, he said “my mum says f words to me”. he appeared angry when talking about his mother, saying “mum said she’d get toys but she lied” and “in [town c] i didn’t have breakfast because mum never buys food”. he said that he would like it if his parents were together again, but that it was unfair that they have “a lot of sleeps at mum’s and dad gets only two”. he said that it would be better if each parent had the same number. children’s relationships [y] described her mother as “mean” and said “there are no times she is nice”. she described her father as “really nice” and said “his house is clean, he has nice clean bedrooms, he always buys food. we play tag you’re it and kick the ball”. she said that she “always” misses her father when she is with her mother, but never misses her mother when she is with her father. evaluation the priorities for [w], [x], [z] and [y], based on their developmental levels are to have a safe, clean, living environment with a warm, attuned relationship with their primary caregiver, quality time with other family members, and a stable child-focused routine providing adequate nutrition, support to engage with their education, and opportunities for play and connection with peers. both parents have acknowledged that the family home prior to their separation was volatile and violent, though each parent blames the other for the violence. the children have had a very unsettled twelve months, including a sudden move interstate with their father for one month, during which they had no contact with their mother, and then a sudden move back to their mother’s home. both parents allege that the other parent frequently denigrates them, and while both parents deny this, it is very likely that the children have been exposed to negative talk about one or both of their parents, as well as extended family members, over the past twelve months. the parents’ reports of their children’s behaviour as unsettled, non-compliant and violent towards one another are likely indications of the impact of the children’s past and current experiences of conflict and violence, and ongoing dynamic between the parents. [ms edmondson]'s perception is that [mr samford]'s influence over the children prevents her from connecting with the children or providing any behaviour guidance for them. she presented as overwhelmed by the children’s behaviours, and believes she has little influence within her household. this perception is likely to be damaging for the children, as it is important for children to understand that there is a calm and capable adult available to care for them and provide appropriate boundaries. the children reported that their mother tends to yell and swear at them in order to guide their behaviour, and while their views may have been influenced by the father, it is likely that [ms edmondson] resorts to shouting or swearing if she does not feel she can utilise other appropriate strategies. [ms edmondson] believes that reducing [mr samford]'s negative influence would improve her parenting skills. however, it will also be important for [ms edmondson] to increase her parenting capacity through individual or family counselling, parenting programs and/or a family support worker. [mr samford] has raised serious concerns that the children’s physical, emotional and educational needs are neglected by [ms edmondson], and described [ms edmondson] as physically and verbally abusive towards the children, lacking in affection, and failing to provide a clean, safe environment or adequate nutrition for the children. [ms edmondson] has denied all these allegations, noting that that despite many allegations being reported the nsw dcj (she believes by [mr samford]), dcj have raised no concerns about her care of the children or the state of her home. file information at the time of the assessment indicates that there has limited appraisal or intervention relating to [ms edmondson]'s care of the children. however, the parents noted that there is a new investigation underway, and it will be important for the findings of that investigation to be considered along with this report. the children echoed [mr samford]'s concerns when they were interviewed while in his care. however, their phrasing and descriptions of their mother, family and friends in [town c] indicate that it is very likely that their views have been influenced by an adult. it is unusual for a five year old to talk about a mother being “born bad” for example, and statements such as “you can’t trust any friends in [town c]” and that the maternal grandmother “is a liar too” appear at odds with the children’s developmental stages. when interviewed at their father’s, they each immediately spoke about their mother’s swearing, unprompted, and were unable to note any positive traits or experiences with their mother. unfortunately, the high likelihood of this influence means that it is impossible to get a sense of the true nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents, or their wishes around the care arrangements. it is vital that the children have opportunities to access other safe, impartial adults (such as teachers, caseworkers, and counsellors) with whom they can discuss their concerns and wishes, and who can advocate for them over the coming years. both parents have acknowledged illicit substance use during the relationship, though each describe the other’s use as more frequent and having greater impact than they described their own. both parents reported that they have not used illicit substances since the separation, and there are no current indications that their parenting is impacted by substance use. each parent described the other as controlling, coercive and violent during the relationship, and both described ongoing fear of the other. [mr samford] described [ms edmondson] as erratic and volatile during the relationship, and alleged that she has threatened to harm the children if they are removed from her care. [ms edmondson] described [mr samford] as consistently acting to cause her suffering, and alleged that [mr samford] has threatened her life, followed her, and she believes he may harm the children if the court does not place the children with him. unfortunately, police and mental health records were not available at the time of the assessment, though neither parent reported a history of past violent convictions or significant mental health involvement. it may be useful for both parents to be assessed by a psychiatrist to help establish the safety risks to the children, particularly once the court matter is finalised. additionally, [mr samford] raised concerns that [ms edmondson] may punish the children for their comments about her as part of this report. these concerns may warrant consideration to when this report is released. it appears that the parents are currently unable to support or facilitate the children’s relationship with the other parent or extended family members, and are unable to communicate about decision-making for the children. each parent believes the children should live with them, and have limited, supervised contact with the other parent. it is likely that if the current dynamic between the parents continues, any shared care arrangement will be difficult due to lack of communication between the parents, hostility at handovers, and the likelihood that the children polarise their views to align with whichever parent they are with, which will significantly impact their relationships with both parents. while both parents have raised significant allegations about the children’s safety with the other parent, there is currently little to corroborate either parent’s statements about the risks posed. if the court finds that the mother’s allegations about the father’s coercive control and attempts to damage the children’s relationship with her are accurate, it may be necessary for the father’s time with the children to be supervised by a professional to ensure that the children are not exposed to these comments. if the court finds that the father’s allegations about the mother’s volatility and neglect of the children are accurate, it may be necessary for the mother’s time with the children to be supervised by a professional to ensure that the children are not harmed. recommendations it is recommended that: the court consider whether the parents would be capable of sharing parental responsibility, with decisions made in a mediated environment, or whether sole parental responsibility be granted to the primary caregiver. the court consider additional information from dcj, subpoenaed information, and information from the children’s counsellors (if possible) prior to decisions about the children’s long-term living arrangements. [ms edmondson] engage in a parenting/family support program and individual counselling, particularly focusing on positive behaviour support as well as building skills to better manage the dynamic with [mr samford]. [mr samford] engage in individual counselling, particularly focusing on building the skills to better manage the dynamic with [ms edmondson]. the children engage in individual counselling to help them process past experiences, learn strategies for managing strong emotions, and help to understand the complex dynamic between family members. the court consider whether psychiatric evaluations are needed to assess the risks posed by each of the parents once the court process is finalised.
oral evidence of ms e
evidence of professor dr s
conclusion with opinion the scope of this report was set by justice neville "to identify any mental health issues suffered by either of them which would either: (a) impact upon their capacity to appropriately care for the children, or (b) cause them to present a risk to the children, and to make any recommendations for the treatment of either or both of them." there was nothing in the affidavit material to change my opinion that both parents were unreliable in the accounts given to me. both parents appear to have a volatile and emotionally reactive relationship. there is no goodwill in the relationship and they have almost no capacity for cooperative parenting. the only slight change in my opinion is that i'm even more certain that the children have suffered neglect in the care of the mother. the affidavit of [ms g] added to my concerns in this regard. this adds to a picture of neglect drawn from numerous sources including cyps services... i did not change my opinion in relation to what i saw as risk to the children. the greatest risk is a continuation of neglect in the care of the mother. there are no changes to my recommendations made in my earlier report, which i repeat now: if the court decides that the children should remain in her primary care i would recommend (a) [ms edmondson] be assessed for antidepressant medication to help stabilise her moods. (b) [ms edmondson] have random drug tests including hair follicle tests. i considered the primary risk to the children in the care of the father to be his undermining of the relationship between the children and the mother. i think he will continue to denigrate her and perhaps make contact difficult if not impossible. in the past he removed the children fom her without her permission and did not allow her to see them for a period of at least one month until the court intervened. i am not sure how involved he will be in parenting if they are in his care, the mother has concerns in this regard. [ms edmondson] said about when he had responsibility for their care in 20 i 8, "he would sit on the veranda, smoking bongs." in the past i consider it probable that the children were exposed to a volatile and possibly a violent relationship between the parents. this was agreed by both parents. i am not sure it was overtly violent since both qualified the level of violence, [ms edmondson] said he was not violent "but vicious with words" and [mr samford] said, "not the fist, slaps and scratches." however, since the parents have separated this appears to be less of a risk unless either gets a new partner who is violent or emotionally abusive. i am not sure what to recommend in terms of treatment for the parents. the father seems to find periodic counselling helpful and perhaps this should continue. however, it is unlikely he will admit to any personal problems on which he is willing to work. the mother is also willing to have counselling and this might be useful since she admits to some difficulties. i also recommend that she talk to her gp and consider antidepressant medication or a mood stabiliser. i advise the court to consider random drug tests for both parents.
conclusion with opinion the scope of this report was set by justice neville “to identify any mental health issues suffered by either of them which would either: (a) impact upon their capacity to appropriately care for the children, or (b) cause them to present a risk to the children, and to make any recommendations for the treatment of either or both of them.” i have carried out a clinical assessment of the parents and this includes psychological testing. i found both parents unreliable in their reporting to me, but i will do my best to give an opinion on the above criteria. since much of what i will say now is opinion i think it is important for me to distinguish my level of confidence. in terms of strength i will indicate a level of opinion that is (a) possible, (b) probable and (c) almost certain. i will try to be transparent in my reasoning on important issues such as risk to the children. also note that i did not interview the children or any other parties. i did not see the parents interact with their children. i did not do a home visit with either parent. however, i did read records in relation to this family. both parents attempted to portray themselves as powerless and somewhat innocent victims of the other parent. [mr samford] said, for example, “i wasn’t allowed to do anything.” [ms edmondson] gave the rationale for her use of the drug ice as complying with [mr samford]'s sexual demands. i think it is far more likely that both parents have a volatile and emotionally reactive relationship. there is no goodwill in the relationship and they have almost no capacity for cooperative parenting. just one example is both want to insist on supervised contact between the other parent in the children when there are no grounds for such a restriction. i am almost certain that the children have suffered neglect. the indicators that i have taken into consideration include: school absences (especially unexplained absences), speech difficulties with the two younger children [y] and [z] (i have found this highly correlated with neglect), educational delays and a general lack of flourishing. there was a police report that the mother’s house was “uninhabitable” and mandatory reports of poor hygiene in relation to the children. such a variety of reports adds to my concern. it is also a serious concern that there are extensive records by family and community services in relation to this family (please note the records were a total of 1156 pages, of which i read about 300 pages). while i accept that many of the reports were made by the father (because of redactions it is hard to tell who was making the reports), it is clear that he did not make all the reports (some concerns were expressed about him) and some were mandatory reports by professionals involved with the family. there have also been disclosures by the children of not having food to eat, while some of this may have been coached by the father i still think it is an indicator of neglect. please note: the mother has been the primary caretaker of the children over the years (she estimated a 98% contribution, the father said he was responsible for only about nine months as the primary caretaker but his level of involvement is disputed) and i believe that the mother must be held responsible for this lack of care. i will consider symptoms relating to the psychological wellbeing of the parents. [ms edmondson] was more open than [mr samford] in discussing psychological symptoms. i am almost certain that she has suffered a major depressive episode for an extended period (about two years after the birth of her twins) and possibly has had a vulnerability to depression throughout her adult life. i made a diagnosis of 296.22 major depressive disorder single episode with anxious distress, moderate. she reported symptoms of anxiety and trauma but i think both relate to her reactivity in her relationship with the father of her children. i did not make an additional diagnosis but noted her report of symptoms. she has problems with her emotional regulation, which may have led to her abuse of alcohol and drugs in the past. i think it is probable that she has traits of a personality disorder (traits of but possibly not meeting the full criteria for borderline personality disorder). there is also some support from the pai scales including the subscale persecution t92, borderline scale t71, and depression scale t68. it was my impression that [ms edmondson] was selective in her reporting and downplayed her use of drugs. she maintained that she used ice on an episodic basis and has not used it at all in the last two years. this seems highly unlikely. [mr samford] maintained that she was a regular user of the drug and i think that this is the most likely picture of her drug use including possible dependency on a highly addictive drug. i have come to these conclusions based on the clinical interview, including her psychological history and the clinical scales of the pai test. she did not admit to prior alcohol and drug abuse on the pai test alcohol t52 and drug t58 (which i think indicates selective reporting, because there should have been elevations even on the basis of what she admitted in her clinical history). [ms edmondson] has some strengths such as a stable family of origin, she has gained the hsc and two certificates. she has worked for four years part-time a local [business], but has not had extended periods of employment. her maternal grandfather had a problem with alcohol and her previous significant relationship with a violent alcoholic. early in her relationship with [mr samford] she said they were partying on weekends which seems to indicate some alcohol abuse in the past, though not necessarily in the present. [mr samford] argued that [ms edmondson] was violent to him in the relationship, “she used to hit me all the time.” he also alleged she was violent to the children. however, i did not get a clear picture or any other indications of violence. she admitted “i was explosive.” there are some positive indications including her completing a four-day parenting course and having counselling which she thought was of benefit to her. essentially [mr samford] admitted almost no psychological difficulties. he said that he had sleep difficulties and some guilt, “i felt i was failing my family.” he has seen counsellors on number of occasions, but justified this as having to deal with irrational behaviour from the mother of his children. he came from a stable family of origin which he described as happy. he admitted to some cannabis use “a gram on a bad day” but denied any regular use of ice. he maintained he has not used any recreational drugs since the separation (the last two years). i cannot make a psychological diagnosis of [mr samford]. he did not admit to having psychological symptoms. i am almost certain that he has significantly underreported any psychological difficulties is had in the past and this is supported by the invalid pai test due to positive impression. the positive impression on the paulhus was elevated as well. [ms edmondson] gave a vivid picture of what she saw as his psychological difficulties but i could not give this much weight. what she described could be symptoms related to mania and depression in a bipolar disorder. however, i think this is unlikely given that she was very unclear on any episodes of elevated mood which is essential to the disorder and [mr samford] had a 20 year history of regular employment with [employer af] being promoted to the responsible position of a [supervisor]. if he had bipolar disorder it would been disruptive in terms of his work history and being promoted. i think this also counts against him having significant problems with ice, but he may have been able to achieve this with a regular use of cannabis. i would conclude that [mr samford] is a difficult personality, reactive in his relationship with [ms edmondson] and perhaps controlling and manipulative, but i cannot conclude that he has either a personality or psychological disorder. the strength of this opinion is that he probably does not have a disorder making him dysfunctional on a psychological basis. i should add a reservation. this opinion is largely based on 20 year work history but i would add that he has not worked last two years and it is possible that his cannabis use might have increased in this period. i did not find his explanation for ending work very convincing, “i was worried about the kids.” i will now consider risk to the children. the greatest risk is a continuation of neglect in the care of the mother. she maintained that she is doing things differently, cooperating with the school, et cetera. however, i am not sure that the pattern of neglect has been addressed or is being reversed in her care. [mr samford] said, “the kids do nothing. no sport, no community, an 11-year-old boy has never played sport (until recently). and what she is teaching them: yell, scream to get what you want. diet is terrible, hot chips and meat balls, no greens. children come to me with worms. their (lack of) development, seeing her party. locked them in the bedroom so she can have friends there to party. the kids always tell me how hungry they are, no breakfast or lunch. their education is not a priority. she wants them to be dumb and to shut up.” a similar picture emerged from a variety of sources (see above) including [w] saying that his mother “often had loud parties.” if the court decides that the children should remain in her primary care i would recommend (a) [ms edmondson] be assessed for antidepressant medication to help stabilise her moods. (b) [ms edmondson] have random drug tests including hair follicle tests. i considered the primary risk to the children in the care of the father to be his undermining of the relationship between the children and the mother. i think he will denigrate her and perhaps make contact difficult if not impossible. in the past he removed the children from her without her permission and did not allow her to see them for a period of at least one month until the court intervened. i am not sure how involved he will be in parenting if they are in his care, the mother has concerns in this regard. [ms edmondson] said about when he had responsibility for their care in 2018, “he would sit on the veranda, smoking bongs.” n the past i consider it probable that the children were exposed to a volatile and possibly a violent relationship between the parents. this was agreed by both parents. i am not sure it was overtly violent since both qualified the level of violence, [ms edmondson] said he was not violent “but vicious with words” and [mr samford] said, “not the fist, slaps and scratches.” however, since the parents have separated this appears to be less of a risk unless either gets a new partner who is violent or emotionally abusive. i am not sure what to recommend in terms of treatment for the parents. the father seems to find periodic counselling helpful and perhaps this should continue. however, it is unlikely he will admit to any personal problems on which he is willing to work. the mother is also willing to have counselling and this might be useful since she admits to some difficulties. i also recommend that she talk to her gp and consider antidepressant medication or a mood stabiliser. i advise the court to consider random drug tests for both parents. i have included some references to research on themes such as parental competence and the high conflict family (see appendix 2).
tendered documents
exhibit
description
tendered by
a
updated family report by ms h dated 16 july 2022
court
b1
updated family report by ms e 8 september 2021
b2
family report by ms e dated 3 june 2020
c1
mental health assessment by professor dr s dated 13 april 2021
c2
mental health assessment by professor dr s 18 november 2020
d
cic memo by ms o dated 1 july 2019 – provisionally
kc1
annexure c of mother's affidavit filed 28 may 2019
mother
kc2
mother's tender bundle pages 10-15, 68-199, 202-213, 319-320
kc3
mother's second hair sample dated 1 august 2022
icl1
absence reports from children at town c public school
icl
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
background these long-running proceedings concern the parenting arrangements for [w] (13), [x] (10) and twins [y] and [z] (8) (“the children”). the mother seeks that she be permitted to relocate with the children from [town c] (nsw) to [city b] (nsw), and that the children spend time with their father - after completing a period of supervised time - where he lives in [town d] (victoria) for half school holidays and at other times when he can travel to [city b]. she is willing to drive them from [city b] to [town c] each school holidays for that purpose. the distances between the various places are - [town c] to [town d], about 2 hours’ drive, [town c] to [city b], about 7.25 hours’ drive, [town d] to [city b], about 8 hours 40 minutes’ drive. also relevant to any time the children continue to spend professionally supervised is the distance to [town ae] (where supervision currently occurs), it is about one hours’ drive from [town d] but three hours’ drive from [town c]. the parents separated first in 2014 for approximately four months, and then again for more than two years in 2016 (“the second separation”). there is a dispute about when the second separation commenced and ended, but under cross-examination the father admitted that the separation had occurred in 2016 (transcript “t”, top p. 141) and the mother says it was before the twins turned two. at the second separation, the mother moved with the children from brisbane to [town c]. the mother says the father told her to leave “with the kids and to take the two dogs and the clothes on my back” (t, p. 31, l. 28). the father denied he said that but admitted that he took no steps to secure their return and gave various explanations, including that he did not have the funds to secure legal representation (but admits he was earning $200,000 a year), and his belief that the legal system was biased against men and so he would not be successful (t p. 134, l. 15-45). the father remained in brisbane, and then moved to sydney, but admitted under cross-examination that he did not spend any regular time with the children until he moved to [town c] in august 2018 (that is, for more than two years)- “it’s still a fair drive from sydney to [town c]”- (t, p.141, 1.12 and l.20). having returned to live with the family in august 2018, in may 2019 he took the children from the family home in [town c], nsw to [town d], victoria (some two hours’ drive away). he has remained living there ever since. the mother commenced these proceedings on 28 may 2019, and orders were made shortly thereafter for the return of the children to her care in [town c]. this matter was first listed for final hearing in 2020. hearing dates were vacated to allow for various steps to take place. the matter was then listed for final hearing in november 2021. hearing dates were vacated to allow the father’s criminal proceedings to conclude. the children have lived with the mother all their lives, and it is submitted that the court -having heard the evidence - would not be contemplating changing that arrangement as the father seeks. nor would the court order other than that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children. the “live” issues for the court would be whether it allows the relocation (and when), and what orders (if any) are made for the children’s time with the father during school terms. the mother has a right to freedom of movement. it is a right which the father has exercised in first remaining in brisbane then moving to sydney, then in moving to [town c] and then moving to [town d] and choosing to remain in [town d] throughout these proceedings. he himself in explaining his decision not to move back to [town c] described it as “there’s nothing there...work-wise- just, yes, there’s not much in that town” (t, p. 141, l.32-35) and agreed that there’s not much work there and “it’s a small town” (t, p. 163, l.26-27) and, when asked if he would move to [town c] said “everywhere that’s decent is like an hour and a half to two hours away” (t, p. 207, l.20). he indicated that he may want to move to melbourne “because there’s a lot happening down there” (t, p. 162, l.47). it is axiomatic that the children’s best interests are the paramount, but not the sole consideration for the court, and that a parent proposing to relocate does not have to have compelling (or indeed any) reasons to do so. in franklyn and franklyn [2019] famcafc 256 at [28], the full court re-emphasised that: “parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children.... only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests.” the court will be readily satisfied the children’s welfare will not be adversely affected by a relocation in circumstances where the mother seeks to give them the greater opportunities that a bigger city provides (both for her and the children), and where the court would not, in any case, order that there be any significant time with the father in [town d] during school terms. when asked by the court about how important the opportunities for the children a larger place offers is in her decision to ask to relocate the mother said “the main driving force. it’s the main reason why i left as a child at high school because there was nothing there for me” (t, p. 106, l. 36-7). both parents agree that [w] has expressed a wish to be a vet (for the mother, t, p. 37, l. 8, for the father, t, p.164, l.15), and the court will readily infer that his ability to achieve this will depend on his education and is likely to be enhanced by a move to a city from a small country town. [ms h] did not recommend against relocation, and for [ms e] if limited time during the school term was ordered, there may be no benefit in not allowing it. credibility of the parties the credibility of the father is overshadowed by him continuing to maintain an account of the events that led to the camera being taken by [w] to the mother’s home in march 2021- notwithstanding that magistrate [ag] in the criminal proceedings found his evidence about that not to be truthful and that the father was protected by a certificate under s.128 of the evidence act. this court adopted the findings of magistrate [ag] that: [w] did not lie in the criminal proceedings, the father and his sister engaged in a joint enterprise to coerce the child into doing the recording of [ms edmondson], and [w] did not take the camera and all of its accessories in his pencil case without the knowledge of the accused or the paternal aunt [ms g]. the father’s lack of credibility in relation to the camera incident inevitably taints his credibility more generally. it is submitted that more significant than his lack of credibility, however, is his lack of insight demonstrated through both his own evidence, his case and the questions which he chose to ask the experts in the matter. the mother, on the other hand, made concessions against interest, the court will have confidence in her evidence which was given in a very straightforward way. as examples, she admitted that she had said things along the lines of “take them off my hands. they’ve been little shits” and “take them off my fucking hands because i’ve had enough” in circumstances where there was no corroborating evidence of her use of that language (t, pp. 37-38). she conceded that the father had never been physically abusive (t, p. 40, line 22), although some of what she described would be regarded as physical abuse. she conceded that methamphetamines are incredibly addictive (t, p. 51, l. 15), she admitted saying “daddy is leaving us” and “he’s leaving all of us” (t, p. 59, lines 12-15,) she admitted that she made negative comments about their father to the children (t, p.62, line 43 and t, p. 63, line 2), she admitted she could have handled [w]'s nose injury better (t, p. 77, l. 33). she was willing to recognise her faults as a mother- “i could do everything a hell of a lot better” (t, p. 97, l. 17). she readily acknowledges that the children love their father and enjoy spending time with him (t, p. 82, l.43). the court would find her to be a witness of credit and would prefer her account where her evidence differs from the father. family violence, neglect and abuse (s.60cc(2)(b) and (3)(j) and (k)) the court’s task in assessing the evidence about family violence is less difficult in this case than in others by reason of the conviction in november 2021 of the father for the offence of “intimidate with intention to cause physical or mental harm.” this is not just family violence against the mother, given the finding (adopted by this court) that “the father and his sister engaged in a joint enterprise to coerce the child into doing the recording of [ms edmondson]” it is also family violence against at least [w]. there is also the evidence of the transcript of a recording made of the father in the early hours of the morning in october 2018 while the children were in the house ( 2 at p.310-313). this recording shows him engaging in repeated derogatory taunts of the mother. he sought to excuse his language (t, p. 172 and following), there is no excuse. other matters of the father’s conduct were raised by the mother and the court would accept her evidence over the father’s. in particular, the mother’s account that the father manipulated her at separation in a way designed to advance his interests in any parenting dispute was believable. the mother seeks to address issues of risk by a period of continuing supervision (as [ms h] recommends). she says that she hopes then things will have settled down and the risk will have drifted away- “hopefully. i’m praying” (t, p. 103, l. 22). the father’s case rested almost entirely on allegations of neglect of the children by the mother. these were thoroughly investigated by the department of communities and justice ( 2 at p. 68-150) and new south wales police ( 2 at p.177-199). the father simply found it impossible to put these allegations behind him, and continued to persist right until the end of the trial that the children were at risk of neglect with the mother (the court is reminded of his questions to [ms h] about chips and gravy). the evidence about the father’s involvement with [w] in contacting the kids helpline was particularly troubling. the father obfuscated. the court will conclude that he wrote lists for [w] to share with the kids helpline with a view to assisting the father’s case to have the children live with him. (t, p.187 and the records which are at 2, pp. 10-15). in the face of the father continuing to raise it as an issue, the mother has firmly established that she has not used illicit drugs since separation. her latest hair follicle test (2, p. 319-320 and 3) covers the period of the six months prior to the hearing and is clear for illicit drug use. the test records excessive - but reducing - use of alcohol (3 which covers the last 3 months shows a lower level of alcohol use than the previous 3 months). the mother gave evidence of daily alcohol use, but not in such a pattern (for example, drinking before 5 on a weekday or binge drinking), which would cause concern (t, p. 93-94). the mother gave evidence that she would cut back on her drinking and contact support services (t, p. 105). the court would readily infer that it will be easier for her to do that once these long-running and difficult proceedings have concluded. meaningful relationships (s.60cc(2)(a)) the children’s relationships with their father seem to have survived the approximately 16 months during which he did not spend time with or communicate with them. [ms h] gives the mother some considerable credit for that: “it is to [ms edmondson]’s credit that the children are still so attached to their father, suggesting she has not denigrated him to them” (fr, para 88). the mother in answer to ms davis explained in a plausible way: “i’ve done a lot of work with those kids, to make them feel comfortable to go back to him again, with everything that has happened. and as much as i wanted to scream and call him every name under the sun, i bit my tongue and i’ve sucked it up because those kids do need their dad. so i would say i’m positive in that” (t, p. 84, l.44) given what the court would find is the father’s distorted view of the mother, the children’s relationships with their mother would certainly be at risk in the father’s care- and must be at risk the more time that they spend with their father. his views also go to the extent to which the children would benefit from fortnightly school term time with him and to his capacity to meet the children’s emotional needs (s.60cc(3)(c)) - discussed further below. the father’s evidence was that he still believes the following (taken from his trial affidavit) and notwithstanding he has read the fr: “[ms edmondson] has never had close bond with any of the children since birth. she has always shown very little warmth, love and affection towards the children.” “she has always provided little, if any, supervision for the children as she was too caught up in her own life to provide this.” “the children have always behaved poorly for her as she is incapable of providing consistent boundaries for the children to understand and follow.” “throughout the relationship the only times i saw [ms edmondson] showing the children any affection was when she herself was upset or sad and used the children’s love for her to comfort and console herself.” “[ms edmondson] has always been extremely jealous of the children if they were provided with anything that she could not have when she was a child or when they received attention but not her.” “[ms edmondson] has never been able to console or control the children, her parenting style of fear-based control is not conducive to this.” “the children have always been terrified or her because of her abuse to them.” “once [ms edmondson] believes she has complete control over the situation again the children will be severely punished for their actions.” “[ms edmondson] has no understanding of the effects of her actions have on the children developing their potential and creating successful lives into the future.” the father confirmed that he believed that the mother could be a “monster” (t, p. 133). he agreed that his view is that anything that is stated positively about the mother’s and the children’s relationships set out in any reports he does not accept as other than a response because of the children’s fear of the mother (t, p.152) these views are extraordinary in themselves- even more given the father has not been present for a significant proportion of the children’s lives and has chosen to leave the children in the mother’s care for at least two years while he absented himself. [ms h] confirmed in oral evidence that it was of concern that the father continued to hold these views- which did not accord with her observations. she observed a strong bond between the children and the mother, and the mother setting appropriate boundaries and being committed to the children. she opined “it was challenging to match [mr samford]’s strong view that [ms edmondson] was not interested in caring for their children with her persistence in pursuing this matter and her stated love and care for them” (fr, para 91). all of this - combined with his maintained attitude that he has been unfairly treated in these proceedings and is a victim of bias in the family law system (this evidence, where the father complains in relation to the system- t, p. 134, the icl- t, pp. 136, 192, 193, the experts- t, p. 4, 137, 138, the police- t, p. 190- and the department of communities and justice) - do not augur well for the father’s ability to “move on” and meet the children’s emotional needs so far as their relationship with their mother is concerned. the father himself gave evidence that he could not see anything that was likely to improve the relationship between him and the mother (t, p. 181). the mother, on the other hand, gave evidence that the parents “should be able to be two adults that can just have a conversation, and the kids can talk to him and see him whenever he wants. just- it’s not that way, and we need to fix it”(t, p. 103, l. 43). certainly, the children’s relationship with their mother would be at significant jeopardy if the orders sought by the father were made- and that is one of the reasons why the court would not be contemplating them. the children’s views (s.60cc(3)(a)) notwithstanding all that has occurred, the children have continued to express love for their father and a wish to spend time with him. the father could accept these views, and views which were consistent with his position ([w] and [x] not wanting to move to [city b], and [x] not liking the mother’s new partner), but not the views which demonstrated the close relationships with the children and the parental capacity of the mother. as in many cases, the children wish for things that are simply not possible- in part because of the choice made by the father to live two hours’ away from where they live. it is not surprising that- having lived all their schooling lives in [town c] and now approaching or at early adolescence- the boys are reluctant to leave. that would not determine the matter particularly in circumstances where the court would not make orders for significant term time with the father anyway. change (s.60cc(3)(d) the children have only ever known living with their mother. it is uncontested that, except for a brief period prior to separation, she has always been their primary (and for a significant period of time, their sole carer). the court would not contemplate a complete reversal of that situation as the father proposes. a move to [city b]will clearly involve some significant change for the children- including seeing their grandmother less often. unlike many relocations, it will not be attended by a reduction in the time the children spend with their father- but rather by the reintroduction of unsupervised time for the children with their father. there is no evidence that the children would not cope with the changes involved in the relocation- which will have direct and indirect benefits for them. exercise of parenting responsibilities (s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (i) the father chose between 2016 and 2018 effectively not to parent his children. between march 2021 and april 2022 he chose to defend his position in the criminal proceedings over continuing to have time with and communicate with the children. ultimately in those criminal proceedings he was found guilty. notwithstanding his evidence that he has capacity to earn at least $200,000 a year, since separation the father has chosen to remain in [town d] and engage in employment from which he earns little more than the minimum wage. he pays to support his four children the sum of $17.59 a fortnight (t, p. 159, l.15) yet chooses to criticise the mother (who is dependent on centrelink but would like to get back into the paid workforce and says she would be assisted in that by relocating to [city b]) for what he says is a lack of engagement with services and extra-curricular activities for the children and inadequate provision of food. the father’s position reveals, with respect, a significant degree of hypocrisy and lack of insight. the father could not even recall when the twins’ birthdays were (t, p. 145). capacity to meet the children’s needs (s.60cc(3)(f) the mother does not claim to be a perfect mother- nor does her mother claim that for her. she has had to parent them in very difficult circumstances- including as a single parent (from 2016-2018), in a dysfunctional relationship (august 2018-may 2019), in the face of these proceedings, with very limited financial resources, and in a small country town. the children are doing well at school, and [z]’s behaviour has considerably settled (the children’s reports are at 2, pp. 202-203 and 209-276, the negative behaviour reports for [z] - which stopped for 12 months while he was not seeing his father - are at 2, pp. 280-296, the report of [z]’s school counsellor indicating an improvement in [z]’s behaviour from june 2021 when he stopped seeing his father is at 2, p. 204). the mother’s capacity to meet the children’s needs can only improve with the end of the criminal proceedings, these proceedings, and a fresh start in [city b]. apart from a few months between august 2018 and may 2019, the father is untested as a carer for the children. the father’s ability to meet the children’s emotional needs is called into question by his conduct leading to the criminal charges and his conduct in the criminal proceedings. it says a great deal about his parenting capacity that he was prepared to coerce [w] into recording his mother. even more perhaps that he was prepared to require [w] to testify against him in the criminal proceedings, gave false evidence in the criminal proceedings that [w] had stolen the camera and lied about it, and did not resile from (indeed repeated) that evidence in these proceedings. his parenting capacity is also called into question by his inability to contemplate that the children may say things to him that are not in fact true (ironic, considering he accused [w] of lying to police and to the court about the camera incident). a series of things which he gave evidence the children said of the mother were put to him and he said that he accepted they were truthful. this included that he believed the mother had said to [y], “you’re ugly and dad does not love you.” the father’s use of family violence and extremely disrespectful language to their mother also calls into question his capacity to meet the children’s needs- including by role modelling appropriate and respectful behaviour to them. other matters various possibilities in relation to the timing of the relocation were explored with the mother in oral evidence (t, p. 106), and she has consistently in oral evidence and to the fr writer indicated a willingness to delay the relocation – even for 12 months - to ensure that the children’s time with their father is re-established. there are, however, potential issues with a significant delay- including the risk of changing circumstances and re-litigation- which would be a disaster for this family noting the proceedings have been on foot now for more than three years. the court would consider the benefit that an order which takes effect at the commencement of the 2023 school year is the order least likely to lead to further proceedings (s.60cc(2)(l)). parental responsibility in the face of what are clear findings of family violence, the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility (s.61da) does not apply. in any case, the court would be readily satisfied that an order for equal shared parental responsibility would not be in the children’s best interests. the father’s extraordinary evidence of what can only be described as a distorted view of the mother and her relationships with the children, speaks most strongly against an order for equal shared parental responsibility. neither parent seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility and [ms h] recommended an order for the mother to have sole parental responsibility. time [ms h]’s recommended that the children should spend time with the father only during school holidays. while the travel time between [town c] and [town d] was the most significant factor, she agreed that the impact on the children’s extra-curricular and social activities of being away from their hometown every second weekend was also a difficulty with time every other weekend. when it was put to her that the travel time was in fact four hours’ return, not six, she indicated that she was less concerned, but still did not recommend time every other weekend. the mother gave evidence to ms davis that the reason she wanted holiday time only was “because it takes them so long to get adjusted every second weekends, so if he only has them on the holidays, then it’s going to be a lot easier for me to resettle them over the rest of the holidays” (t p. 89, l. 36) and to the icl that the children are “happy when they get to see their dad in the holidays, but when it comes to school, they have been at school all day, then they’ve got to have a long drive, and then they have got to come back- and go back to school again. i think they would enjoy it more in the school holidays” (t, p. 102, l.26). the court would also consider the greater impact of the father’s distorted views and attitudes on the children if they are exposed to them every other weekend. in short, there is likely to be benefit to the children from limiting the father’s time with them in accordance with the mother’s revised proposal for school holiday time only. if the mother is allowed to relocate to [city b], time could presumably occur there over a long weekend at least once a term. otherwise, the children will continue to have benefit from their relationship with their father during school holidays.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
the father’s response to all of [ms edmondson]’s written submission from number 1 to 51 submitted on the 06 october 2022. background agree with this statement the father seeks full custody of the children. that the children be permitted to relocate from [town c] (nsw) currently under the mothers primary care to [town d] (vic) and to be under the fathers primary care. the father will drive the children to [town c] (nsw) for half school holidays with [ms edmondson] then returning the children to [town d] (vic) at completion of access. agree with this statement the father disagrees with this statement. [ms edmondson] removed the children from both separations without the consent of the father. during these separations the father still believed that with expert assistance the relationship could be saved. the father still believes the court system is biased as the evidence indicates. the father transferred to sydney as soon as it was possible to be closer to the children while maintaining his professional career. due to the fathers company car and fuel card, he was able to regularly visit the children in [town c]. [ms edmondson] had return orders made with false statements which were continued throughout all affidavits with [ms edmondson] finally admitting on the witness stand that numerous sworn statements were false. agree with this statement. the father disagrees with all this statement. the children have expressed where they want to live and it is submitted that the court – having heard the evidence – would not be contemplating the orders that [ms edmondson] seeks for the ongoing safety of the children. while there is limited work opportunities for the father in [town c]. the opportunities [ms edmondson] seeks are readily available in the area as [town c] has a muti purpose service facility and [town n] has a hospital /mps facility as well. the multi-purpose service (mps) providing integrated acute health, nursing homes, hostels, community health and aged care services for the community. the children’s best interest needs to be the sole consideration for the court and their views taken into account. the experts do not support [ms edmondson] relocating the children to [city b]. [dr s] report states “the biggest risk to the children is the ongoing neglect of the children by the mother”. this combined with the results from the only alcohol test undertaken during the 3 years and the severity of [ms edmondson]'s alcohol abuse needs to weigh heavily on any decisions made about the ongoing care of the children. [ms edmondson]'s own response regarding her alcohol abuse following a quick word with her barrister outside the court room on the day show her total disregard and understanding of how her actions impact the children now and into their future lives. [ms edmondson] said when she returned to the stand on the day - “well, i would cut down if it was posing a problem, and – yes”.(t,p.105,l.15) and “ well, just cut back on the amount that i’m drinking, i suppose”.(t, p. 105, l.25). and “i could maybe go to some sort of- what are the program things that you can learn thing about?”. (t, p. 105, l.26). these responses give very little confidence in [ms edmondson] grasping the extent of her alcohol abuse and the effects that are being ingrained on the children in her care. one question before the court is does [ms edmondson]'s need to relocate to [city b] to where her boyfriend who had been kept secret from report writers and the court for her own private reasons outweigh the children’s best interest. in franklyn and franklyn [2019] fam cafc 256 at [28], only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests.” the court will be readily satisfied by [ms edmondson]'s testimony and evidence submitted both days of final hearing that the children’s welfare will be adversely effected by a relocation to [city b] with [ms edmondson]. the public school system in [town c] and [town n] provides the same opportunities and education that any public school does. once the children have completed their high school education they are in a position to continue onto higher education just as all children from small country towns across australia do. [ms h] did not recommend relocation or have access to the evidence provided at the final hearing concerning [ms edmondson]'s physical violence towards the children and her excessive alcohol consumption for the entire test period. credibility of the parties [ms edmondson] has admitted to re-educating (t, p. 63, l.40.) the children and using physical punishment (t,p.105, l.10) to influence the children throughout the proceedings. [ms edmondson] has continued to mislead the court throughout proceedings contradicting her own sworn return order and affidavits on the stand. [ms edmondson]'s own testimony provides evidence of her filing a false police report and submitting false affidavits and as such needs to be referred to the dpp. the father’s statements from the beginning of proceedings to now have remained the same with [ms edmondson]'s own testimony supporting many of his claims. the evidence provided to the courts referring to alcohol abuse, physical violence towards the children and telephone communication between the children and himself in affidavits have clearly shown [ms edmondson]'s lack of credibility. [ms edmondson]'s distorted memory as she reported to dr s is clearly demonstrated. [ms edmondson] only made concessions against interest once the truth had been exposed on the stand. [ms edmondson] has submitted numerous affidavits throughout proceedings never once taking the opportunity to be credible. the fathers statements have remained consistent throughout proceedings with [ms edmondson]'s own admittance on the stand supporting his claims and that of the children. family violence, neglect, and abuse (s.60cc(2)(b) and (3)(j) and (k)) this conviction was made based on the statements of a child who has reported through these proceeding that he would do anything to keep his mother happy. [ms edmondson] has stated that she has re-educated the children and it is the fathers view that [ms edmondson] has coerced [w] to benefit her case. the father was goaded by [ms edmondson] into this secrete recording in nsw without his knowledge which is a criminal offence. the recording clearly shows [ms edmondson] instigated the situation and has only provided a portion of the entire conversation that benefits her case. throughout proceedings [ms edmondson] has stated that the father recorded her but the evidence shows it was in fact [ms edmondson] that was recording conversations in preparation for future legal proceedings. this once again is evidence of her distorted memory and lack of credibility. if [ms edmondson]'s claims were credible that the father had manipulated her through phone calls to admit to being a monster there would be evidence provided to support her claims. as [ms edmondson] and her legal team are aware i have full records of phone calls and text messages and is the reason why this was never mentioned in any affidavits or relied upon until cross examination. these outlandish claims are nothing more than underhanded tactic to better their case. the father seeks to address the issues of risk to the children by [ms edmondson] as reported by the experts. the report from the contact centre showed no concerns between the father and children during the time spent at the contact centre. once again [ms edmondson]'s accusations against the father have purely been to benefit her case and her claims have not been substantiated. it is not only the fathers concerns of neglect but [dr s] stated that this ongoing neglect is the biggest risk to the children. [ms edmondson] also admitted on the stand of physically disciplining the children 2 weeks prior to final hearing. this is despite her continued claims of not physically discipline the children. [ms edmondson]'s refusal to supply the icl with evidence of her shopping habits and the most resent drug and alcohol test stating excessive alcohol consumption for the entire 6 month test period. as originally stated by the father in ( 4 at p. 70 , # 163) he only helped w with his spelling and a copy of the list ( 4 at p. 129 to 133) has been provided. while [ms edmondson] has returned clear drug testing results throughout proceedings her claim of her very limited if any alcohol abuse during this period is very concerning for the children’s welfare. the true level of mother’s alcohol abuse is evident in the only alcohol test undertaken during proceedings. despite being aware of an upcoming alcohol test [ms edmondson] was unable to self-regulate her alcohol consumption. the excessive alcohol consumption results were for a full six month period with the limited reduction from 185pg/mg to 158pg/mg. this reduction of 27pg/mg is not even a reduction of 30pg/mg which is the level for excessive alcohol abuse. to achieve a result of 30pg/mg 2 to 4 alcoholic drinks must be consumed daily. to reach a level of 150pg/mg the mother would need to consumption 24 to 36 alcoholic drink every day for a 6 month period. this frightening result is a clear indication of [ms edmondson]'s long term addiction issues with drugs. these results support the fathers claim of ongoing addiction throughout the relationship by [ms edmondson] and the children's concerns about her alcoholism. these results clearly demonstrate why [ms edmondson] was not forthcoming with her banking information as requested by the icl as her claims of regular grocery shopping habits are none existent and her true spending habits are centred around her alcoholism. at [store ah] in [town m] a box of 24 beers cost $53.00. [ms edmondson] is spending over $742.00 per fortnight on her addition. meaningful relationships (s.60cc(2)(a)) while [ms h] gave [ms edmondson] credit for the close relationship the children and their father have had this relationship from the children’s birth and is a credit to the father and clearly demonstrates the bond the children have always had with their father. [ms edmondson] stated that she has been re-educating the children about the fathers lies regarding of all things her excessive alcoholism. these statements by [ms edmondson] indicates that she has being influencing the relationship between the children and their father. the children have never stated in any report that they did not want time with their father but quite the opposite. it is only [ms edmondson] who claims that the children were not comfortable to go back to see the father again. the fathers view of [ms edmondson] and many claims that he and the children have been making throughout proceedings have been confirmed by [ms edmondson]'s own testimony despite paradoxically submitting numerous sworn affidavits to the contrary. the extent of [ms edmondson]'s re-education and influence involving physical abuse of the children needs careful consideration before any orders are made. the father stands by all the statements he made in sworn affidavits and under oath on the stand. (23 i) - this statement is clearly demonstrated by [ms edmondson]'s alcoholism that has been raised by the children. [ms edmondson] has decided to re-educate the children regarding their concerns rather than excepting that she has ongoing problems with addiction. [ms edmondson] is setting the children up to have addiction problems throughout their own lives the evidence clearly shows [ms edmondson] herself proclaimed she is a monster and the father does agree with this statement. the children themselves have stated many times throughout these proceedings that they will do anything to keep their mother happy. [ms edmondson]'s re-education programme forces the children to align with her own distorted views. it was [ms edmondson] who removed the children from brisbane qld to [town c] nsw without consent of the father. the father moved closer to the children as soon as his work would accommodate such drastic relocation. it was the father who left a long term professional career to be able to protect the children. [ms h]’s recommendations were all made with no knowledge of the resent alcohol test results, re-education of the children by [ms edmondson], physical violence of the children by [ms edmondson] and [ms edmondson]'s lack of credibility throughout her affidavits. the cic report 01/07/2019 was fraudulently complete and meets all criteria for a dpp investigation. this report was then used by all future report writers as evidence to produce the court with their own reports. if the cic report was completed as it had falsely claimed to be, [ms edmondson]'s lack of credibility would have been proven 3 years earlier with evidence. [ms edmondson] has continued to breech court orders and then went on to perjure herself on the stand with no action being taken warrants the fathers concerns. the court was prepared to submit the father to the dpp for perjury but not the mother nor the report writer. while [ms edmondson] has continued her claims about her being able to maintain a relationship between the children and their father her actions show the opposite. simple telephone calls have been misconstrued by [ms edmondson] to better her case with evidence showing she has committed perjury in a sworn affidavit. the children cannot talk freely with their father with [ms edmondson] continually ordering each child that time is up and handling the phone to the next child before goodbyes can be exchanged. [ms edmondson] terminates every phone call after 30 minutes precisely with no regard for the child talking or the children’s relationship with the father. the continued claims by [ms edmondson] regarding her maintaining a meaningful relationship between the children and their father are not supported by the evidence coincidentally many claims she has made throughout proceedings do not align with her testimony. certainly, the children’s relationship with the father are in significant jeopardy if [ms edmondson]'s orders are granted. [ms edmondson] has clearly demonstrated on the stand that her honesty in sworn affidavits are distorted purely to better her case. the children’s view (s.60cc(3)(a)) the father still accepts the views of the children regarding their love for him and there need to spend much more time with him. the views of the children and the reported closeness with the mother are reported by children who have stated that they will do anything to keep the mother happy, they have suffered 3 years of [ms edmondson]'s re-education program that she has admitted to undertaking on the stand. the children have continued to report throughout proceedings that they are subject to their mother’s anger when they have reported their concerns with [ms edmondson]'s parenting capacities. this has been allowed by all concerned. despite [ms edmondson]'s ongoing attempts to destroy the bond the children and the father share to further her case the children’s desire for a stable environment in the fathers care is clearly demonstrated. the father merely relocated with the children 2 hours away while [ms edmondson] when removing the children with no agreement by the father chose to relocate 8 hours away with the children for the first separation and 16 hours the second separation from the family home to ensure she could disrupt the children’s and fathers relationship as much as possible the children have not spent all their school lives at [town c] attending school in [city aj], brisbane and the two oldest boys already attending [town d] primary school for a short period. the twins were unable to attend preschool at [town d] as they have never been registered with births, deaths, and marriages unknown to father. no report writer or the icl has fully supported [ms edmondson] moving with the children to [city b]. [ms edmondson] herself has stated that she was in a relationship with [mr q] who lives in [city b] prior to [ms e]'s last report being conducted. [ms edmondson] made her decision to hide this fact from [ms e] in an attempt to deceive the court once again. the reasons behind this deception needs to be taken into account in view of [dr s]’s report. change (s.60cc(3)(d) [ms edmondson] was the primary carer of the children while the father was at work but passed this responsibility to the father upon his return home. [ms edmondson] used this opportunity to regularly spend time with her friends and partying. a move to [city b] for the children will remove all people in a position to support them and with [ms edmondson]'s issues with addiction allowing so puts not just their welfare but more concerning their lives at risk. [dr s]’s report states the biggest risk to the children is the ongoing neglect of the children in the mothers care. to allow [ms edmondson] to re-locate the children to [city b] from all support in place for them and their mother is a dangerous proposition. any claimed benefits for the children and [ms edmondson] are all available in the local area but have not been considered or sought by [ms edmondson]. exercise of parenting responsibilities (s.60cc(3)(c), (ca), (i) it was [ms edmondson] who sought to stop all access with the child and the father believes his actions were child focused. the fathers criminal record prevents him from returning to his former position. while the fathers income is reduced considerably compared to past employment he is in long term employment. [ms edmondson]'s addiction issues have made long-term employment impossible for [ms edmondson] as noted by [dr s]. the children’s claims of usually eating chips and gravy are explained by [ms edmondson]'s results in her 6 month alcohol test. as a self-represented litigant running his own case the fact that a birthdate cannot be recalled on the spot should not be used to indicate what is in the best interest of the children. capacity to meet the children’s needs (s.60cc(3)(f) [ms edmondson] has had 3 years to follow the advice of the experts who have reported for these proceedings. [ms edmondson] receives what the australian government determines acceptable for a single parent and to use the government , the father, or her location as the reason [ms edmondson] has failed to seek help for herself and the children this day and age is a clear indication of her lack of commitment to follow through with her claims. [ms edmondson]'s actions are a clear indication of what the future holds for the children in her care. as the father was stopped by the court issuing subpoenas to obtain evidence these are just a continuation of claims by [ms edmondson] with no evidence. [ms edmondson]'s own testimony clearly demonstrates that even while proceedings are underfoot that she has no interest in following recommendations or orders to improve her parenting skills or involve the children in extra support service or activities. the father finds it disturbing that this has been excepted during proceedings. to now claim that removing the children from the limited supports in place and their friends that the mother’s limited parenting skills will improve in spite of her past actions are absurd. the fact that [ms edmondson] stated during her testimony that she would leave the children in my care while she went out speaks for itself. the fathers statements throughout proceedings have been consistent without committing perjury. the father still believes that the children do not lie to him. statements made by the children to others are not the same as direct communication between the children and their father as suggested. the extent of [ms edmondson]'s re-education of the children needs to be taken into account. the fact that [ms edmondson] goaded the father into that conversation and failed to supply to the court the full recording clearly demonstrates the tactics [ms edmondson] had been using prior to proceeding commencing in her preparation of future legal actions. the children themselves have continually reported during the proceedings that [ms edmondson] has continually used physical violence and extremely disrespectful language to them. these actions by [ms edmondson] have never been address by the court. there are no reports by the children of this inexcusable behaviour by the father. other matters the reasons behind the mother concealing from the court and from [ms e]'s last report 10/09/2021 that she was in a relationship needs to be taken in to account before making the orders that [ms edmondson] seeks. [dr s] was concerned about the mothers future relationships impacting the children and she only made the court aware of her relationship prior to [ms h]’s report. the extent of [ms edmondson] re-education of the children considering [x]’s fear after realising that his feelings and concerns about [ms edmondson]'s partner did not align with that of his mother’s needs serious consideration. [ms edmondson] throughout proceedings has been far from consistent deliberately misleading the court to better her case. further litigation if [ms edmondson] is allowed to move the children are an unfortunate probability. parental responsibility the father agrees that shared parental responsibility is not in the best interest of the children. the distance between [town d] and [town c] was the reasoning behind [ms h]’s recommendations. no evidence was submitted to support [ms edmondson]'s claims of the children being more settled since access was stopped by her. the claims of [ms edmondson] on the stand and in evidence given demonstrates the lack of understanding and involvement [ms edmondson] has in the children’s lives. throughout proceedings [ms edmondson] and the school have blamed the children's behaviour particularly [z]’s behaviour on their access with their father. both parties have until recently failed to notice how advanced [z] is for his age and the extra attention he needs as such. [town c] primary school also failed to notice [w] and [x] were both over two years behind in their schooling when proceedings begin. by [mr t’s] own admission to [ms e], he allowed [w] to enter high school one year behind in his learning academically. this is a clear indication of the mother’s lack of parenting skills and interest in the children’s education. [ms edmondson]'s re-education of the children (t ,p. 63 ,l.40) and their fear of upsetting her needs to be taken into account with any decisions that are made. the children themselves reported to [ms e] that they got into trouble by their mother after raising their concerns about her in [ms e]'s first report. the evidence shows the tactics and influence [ms edmondson] has continued to use over the children to improve her case. [ms edmondson]'s own oral evidence supports many claims made by the children and the father despite the statements made by her in sworn affidavits. [ms edmondson]'s history of not following court orders, distorting telephone conversations, and making them difficult if not impossible to conduct. the phone calls during proceedings have been dominated by [ms edmondson] who continually intimidates the children forcing them to end their conversations at her choosing. despite [ms edmondson]'s claims of supporting a relationship between the children and their father, [ms edmondson]'s actions hold more merit then her continued distorted claims. [ms edmondson]'s actions are a clear indication of her lack of understanding or commitment to the children's need and their right to have a meaningful relationship with their father. the father is not in a position to travel to [city b] for long weekends and school holidays visit will be difficult if not outright impossible. if [ms edmondson] is allowed to relocate to [city b] the actions of [ms edmondson] throughout proceedings will continue resulting in re-litigation. end of fathers response to [ms edmondson]’s written submissions summary: the children’s welfare is the decision before the court. [ms edmondson] has clearly demonstrated her lack of parenting capabilities during these proceedings. while her continued claims look positive on sworn affidavits and state what everyone wants to hear the lack of actual evidence to support her claims and by own testimony on the stand it is very evident what the reality is. [ms edmondson] has failed to ensure [w] entered his high school education at a level appropriate for his age. this simple to achieve basic step in a child's life is going to impact the whole of his life. [x] is still behind in his schooling and is fast approaching high school age in exactly the same position. it has taken three years for the school and the mother to realise [z] is very advanced for his age. this failure to recognise his ability has conveniently been used against the father as evidence of him disrupting the children’s schooling and behaviour. while the children were attending school in [town d] the census of the teachers were that [w] and [x] were both very advanced for their age despite being over two years behind in their basic learning. unfortunately, the return order resulted in this never being fully assessed. while [ms edmondson] has failed to notice this the father despite his limited contact knew immediately when questioned about who was gifted by responding that it was [z]. to except the orders that [ms edmondson] seeks is excepting that court orders do not need to be followed and more concerning that breaches of court orders are allowed and rewarded. that you can make false statements on sworn affidavits without repercussions. it would deem re-education of children to align with the views of one parent as an acceptable tactic during proceedings in family law. excepting [ms edmondson]'s orders demonstrates that a mother with no long term employment history, who struggles with addiction and has limited self-control and parenting skills is better able to raise children than a father with an exceptional employment history, maintains a stable home and does not suffer from addiction.
independent children’s lawyer’s written submissions
background submissions filed on behalf of the mother on 6 october 2022 (“msubs”) set out the background to this matter in detail. the icl accepts those submissions as fairly setting out the matters traversed, subject to the following additional or clarifying submissions which the icl makes. in particular, the following submissions made at paragraph 7 of msubs are adopted by the icl:
2.1 the children have lived with the mother all of their lives such that a change of residence as sought by the father would not be contemplated, and 2.2 the court would not allocate parental responsibility other than solely to the mother.
credibility of the parties the icl submits that paragraphs 12 & 13 of msubs fairly address issues of credibility. the icl particularly agrees with and adopts the submission that the more significant issue regarding the father is his lack of insight demonstrated in his evidence, his case and his questions of the experts. the icl adds to that list that lack of insight is further demonstrated (and indeed emphasised) by the content of the written submissions of the father filed on 27 october 2022 (“fsubs”) the icl adopts the submission that the mother should be accepted as a witness of credit, whose evidence should be preferred over that of the father. the icl submits that the mother is likely to have downplayed the significance of her new relationship with [mr q], who resides in [city b], in respect of her wish to relocate to [city b]. that the relevance of the relationship may have been downplayed by the mother does not however cause concern to the icl about the overall credibility of the mother’s evidence. in light of the attitude demonstrated by the father towards the mother, it is entirely understandable that the mother would seek to keep private any new relationship as a means of protecting the children from the father’s likely criticism of the mother having a new relationship. family violence, abuse and neglect (s.60cc(2)(b) & (3(j) and (k)) there is ample evidence of family violence perpetrated by the father, including the findings made in the criminal prosecution and the conviction of the father. the father’s involvement of the child [w] reflects poorly on the father’s parenting and insight. the father’s allegations of neglect by the mother were not made out by the evidence. the absence of involvement by the nsw welfare authorities indicates that the allegations of neglect are not based on substance. the father’s allegations of drug use by the mother were appropriately addressed by the mother with drug testing. there is nothing to suggest that the past drug use of the mother presents a current or ongoing risk to the children. it is noted that the drug use occurred during the relationship, with no evidence of it continuing after final separation. the icl submits that the court will be concerned about the mother’s use of alcohol as shown by the drug testing results. the mother’s evidence regarding her alcohol use will also be of concern, as minimising the issue in an entirely inappropriate manner. there is no evidence to indicate that the mother’s use of alcohol has caused harm to the children, although the extent of that use raises a concern that there is a risk of harm. whilst the mother gave evidence that she would reduce her alcohol consumption and contact support services, her history of seeking assistance is poor, in the context that she has been living in a small town where support services are effectively unavailable. alcohol use is a concern about which the mother needs to take personal responsibility. the icl does not see that having orders made on this issue is likely to be effective or appropriate. the icl notes that the children will be in contact with mandated persons (particularly through their schools) that must bring any concerns that the children are at risk to the welfare authorities. that may be the best external element that is available if the mother fails to address the issue of her excessive alcohol consumption. in many cases to be determined by the court an exercise in balancing risks must be undertaken. the mother’s use of alcohol is excessive and inappropriate. against this issue, the court has extensive evidence regarding the attitudes, behaviour and lack of insight of the father. these deficiencies are addressed later in these submissions. at this point the icl expresses the view that the risk associated with the mother’s excessive alcohol use is overwhelmed by the risk to the emotional and developmental well being of the children associated with deficiencies of the father. meaningful relationships (s.60cc(2)(a)) the court will accept that the evidence supports a finding that the children have a meaningful relationship with the mother. the icl adopts the mother’s submission at paragraph 30 that the relationship between the mother and the children would be jeopardised were the children in the care of the father. at paragraphs 22 to 29 of msubs, there is helpful analysis of the very great concerns that arise from the evidence about the father’s relationship with the children, and of his attitude towards the mother. there is nothing in the evidence to indicate that the father has any capacity to support the relationship between the mother and the children. indeed, the evidence indicates that the father sees no value in that relationship and would not support it. it borders on miraculous that the relationship between the children and the father has survived the significant periods of no contact, living at distance from each other, cross-border covid restrictions and the other disruptive and potentially (or actually) traumatic events that the children have experienced. this supports the conclusion that these are resilient children. the icl also notes that there is evidence that the children fare better when there are settled periods without time being spent between the children and the father. the icl submits that the court will be concerned that in light of the many negative elements the father has brought to the circumstances of the children, the father blames the mother for any difficulty with progress at school and the like. the mother gives evidence that she has acted to support the children in their relationship with the father (even when she frankly admits that her inclination was not to do so). it must be the case that the mother has supported the children in that relationship, as it is inconceivable that the relationship could otherwise have survived. the children’s views (s.60cc(3)(a)) the icl adopts the submissions of the mother at paragraphs 31 to 33 of msubs. change (s.60cc(3)(d)) the icl adopts the submissions of the mother at paragraphs 34 to 36 of msubs exercise of parental responsibilities (s.60cc(3)(c), (ca) & (i) the mother has demonstrated an adequate, and in many instances a better than merely adequate capacity to fulfil her parenting obligations, and notably in supporting the children’s relationship with the father. the father has demonstrated significant deficiencies in exercising parental responsibility, including by choosing to live at distance from the children during the first period of separation and then again after the final separation when the parties were both living in [town c]. the father has provided minimal financial and practical support to the children since separation. the father’s conduct and attitudes towards the mother and especially the conduct that led to the father’s conviction all demonstrate a failure to exercise appropriate parental responsibility by the father. capacity to meet the children’s needs (s.60cc(3)(f)) the icl submits that the evidence supports the finding that the mother has capacity to adequately meet both the physical and emotional needs of the children. the mother has had the sole role of meeting those needs for significant periods of the children’s lives. the evidence suggests that there are steps the mother might have taken (or taken at earlier opportunities) to more fully meet the children’s needs, particularly in relation to educational and developmental needs. however, the mother’s ability to better meet the children’s needs has also been limited by the lack of accessible services where the mother and children live. the mother points to having more accessible services as one reason for her wish to relocate. the father has had limited opportunity to demonstrate how able he is to meet the children’s needs, particularly their physical needs, as he has not lived with the children for significant periods of time. the ability of the father to meet the emotional needs of the children is compromised by the father’s demonstrate adversarial approach to any co-parenting relationship with the mother, demonstrated by his frequent, high level and ongoing criticism of the mother and his inability to admit any error in his view of the mother. the conduct leading to the father’s conviction is a stark example of his inability to consider the emotional needs of the children (ahead of the father’s own agenda of proving his case regarding the mother) and of the father’s inability to have insight into the emotional needs of the children vis a vis their relationship with the mother, who is their long term primary (and substantially sole) carer. in the icl’s case outline filed for the final hearing, there is reference to the decision (at paragraphs 53 and 54) of the court being between ‘least worse’ options. the hearing has in the submission of the icl clarified the options. whilst there are deficiencies in some aspects of the mother’s parenting (as discussed above) and specifically the risk arising from the mother’s alcohol use, the evidence of the father, the manner in which he conducted his case, and the content of his final submissions all point to a ‘much worse’ option. the father has by these means demonstrated that he is not suitable as a residence parent or primary carer for the children. it is submitted that the recommended limitations on the father’s time with the children are entirely appropriate and warranted to protect the children from unnecessary and extended and frequent exposure to the father’s views and his attitude towards the mother, and towards authority figures including the children’s school, teachers and principal. other matters to the extent that section 60cc(2)(l) issues are addressed at paragraph 46 of msubs, the icl submits that it is impossible to expect that the father will readily accept any outcome ordered by the court, in which circumstance it is difficult to foresee with any confidence that any particular orders are less likely to result in a further application by the father. parental responsibility the icl agrees with and adopts the submissions at paragraph 46 of msubs regarding parental responsibility. the court would not contemplate an arrangement where the mother had to seek the co-operation of or encourage the involvement of the father in significant or even day to day decisions about the children’s welfare and education etc. time & relocation by the mother with the children to [city b] nsw in a matter where a party is seeking to relocate, the outcome on the relocation issue would usually be highly relevant to the outcome regarding orders for time for the non-residence parent. unusually in this matter, the most recent expert recommendations (being those by [ms h]) do not change irrespective of whether the mother and the children remain in [town c] or relocate to [city b], despite the very significant increase in distance from the father’s home in [town d]. [ms h] emphasises the disruptive element that arises form travel between [town c] and [town d]. the evidence further suggests that a significant further element is the disruption and unsettling of the children that arises from having the father and children spending time together. the recommendation that time occur only during school holidays seeks to address those concerns. such a limitation of time will doubtless also limit the nature and depth of the relationship between the children and the father. generally the best interests of children are served by having a more expansive relationship with the non-residence parent, however, the conduct of the father and his relentlessly negative attitude towards the mother negates the children having that more expansive relationship. this is because the relationship experience the father is likely to offer the children will be shaped by the father’s attitude towards the mother and therefore will not be in the children’s best interests. the icl accepts that the children wish to have a relationship with the father. however, the children also need to be protected from the harm that will arise from the children being exposed to the father’s negativity towards the mother. therefore the icl submits that the limited time recommended by [ms h] is the most appropriate basis for orders. if that outcome is seen by the court as being appropriate, then it makes no significant difference where the children are living. the relocation will involve change for the children, however it is also likely to give the children the advantages of living in a larger community. a further advantage is likely to be that their primary carer (their mother) will be happier with her personal circumstances and therefore better able to focus on parenting the children. the icl notes that the mother is somewhat generous in her proposal regarding the facilitation of time over the great distance between [city b] and [town d]. the icl does not see that permitting the relocation is adverse to the best interests of the children vis a vis time with the father. taking all of these matters into account, the icl supports the mother’s application to be permitted to reside with the children in [city b]. the father’s written submissions the father has apparently prepared his written submissions without having the assistance of a legal practitioner. there are several places in fsubs where the father makes statements about matters that are not in evidence and in fsubs there are places where he expresses opinions. the court cannot have regard to matters where no evidence has been given and on which the parties have not been cross examined. in relation to expressions of opinion by the father and the overall tone and content of fsubs, the court will be concerned that the father deeply holds his very negative views of the mother. the content of fsubs itself reveals why a limited relationship between the children and the father is necessary. the children are entitled to experience their world, in which the mother plays a central role, free from the entirely negative view that the father holds of the mother. the description of the attitude of one parent to the other in family law litigation as being “toxic” is frequently an overstatement. sadly in this matter, it is entirely apt to describe the father’s attitude towards the mother as toxic. the content of fsubs also exemplifies and emphasises the father’s complete lack of insight into the harm that his toxic attitude towards the mother can have on the children. it is not surprising that the content of fsubs shows a lack of objectivity. it is concerning that the content demonstrates much more troubling attitudes of the father, putting the exclamation [mr q] to the concerns that the icl submits arose from the father’s evidence at the hearing. orders that are appropriate in the submission of the icl the icl supports an order for the mother having sole parental responsibility for the children, and for the children to live with the mother. the icl supports an order permitting the mother to live with the children in [city b]. the icl supports orders that after the period of reintroduction of time contemplated by the mother’s proposed orders, the time between the father and the children be limited to school holiday time only. notwithstanding the concerns about the father’s attitude towards the mother, the icl submits that the continuation of telephone calls between the father and the children will assist the children in remaining connected with the father. the current orders provide for telephone calls on a weekly basis for 30 minutes. the father complains that this is inadequate. the mother no doubt finds the calls disruptive and somewhat restrictive, however the icl submits that the calls should nevertheless continue on the same limited basis as currently take place. as the children get older they may wish to initiate additional calls, but that is not an issue about which orders need to be made. the current order permitting the father to have access to information from the children’s schools and about medical matters should also continue to keep the father informed, but so as not to place an obligation on the mother to provide such information.
outline of principle
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
in most cases about parenting orders under the family law act there is no conceptual difficulty in the court applying the principle that the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration. however, that is not so when deciding upon orders in what have become known as “relocation cases”. that is because, when in relocation cases regard is also had to another consideration, namely the right to freedom of movement of a parent, a delicate interplay of concepts arises. that is on the most favourable view of it. on another view, that to which i incline, the result is an imbroglio of principles.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.
... [a] primary judge [is] obliged to give sufficient reasons to explain the overall result: not to explain every forensic step in reaching that result.
... it has to be remembered that no two cases which involve the possibility of children being moved from their established residence and from one of their parents will ever present in an exactly identical way to the judge or federal magistrate who has to determine such cases. in every such case, issues peculiar to that case will arise. moreover, no two judicial officers will necessarily see the issues arising in any particular case as capable of treatment (for example within the framework of the provisions of s 65daa) in exactly the same way.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
a) in the absence of legislative direction, no single factor is dispositive of decisions governing residence of a child in a context of the proposed relocation of the parent with whom the child resides. (ams v aif, kirby j, [143], cf. powell v ptolemy, [48]). b) the over-arching issue is to ensure that any parenting order is in the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [80],[159] hayne j, [171], bolitho v cohen, [71], powell v ptolemy, [40]). this is also to say that if there is a conflict between the welfare or best interests of the child, on the one hand, and the legitimate interests and desires of the parents, on the other, priority must be given to the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], hayne j, [217-219], cf. goode v goode, [72]). c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[160] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
b) the over-arching issue is to ensure that any parenting order is in the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [80],[159] hayne j, [171], bolitho v cohen, [71], powell v ptolemy, [40]). this is also to say that if there is a conflict between the welfare or best interests of the child, on the one hand, and the legitimate interests and desires of the parents, on the other, priority must be given to the best interests of the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [144], hayne j, [217-219], cf. goode v goode, [72]). c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[160] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
c) freedom of movement of parents is a significant priority. that freedom is linked with the object of family law legislation to facilitate parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, including the possibility of forming a new relationship “free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court.” (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]. on “freedom of movement” generally, see ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [40-45], gaudron j, [96], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [89], cf. powell v ptolemy, [36]. inhibition of movement may impinge upon the happiness of the custodial parent, which may in turn be transmitted to the child. (ams v aif, kirby j, [145]).[160] freedom of movement, however, takes second place to the paramount interests of the child. d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
d) there is no presumption in favour of a custodial parent to reside wherever he or she wishes. (ams v aif, kirby j, [146]). e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
e) the applicant who seeks to relocate need not establish “compelling reasons” for such a move. (ams v aif, gleeson cj, mchugh & gummow jj, [47], gaudron j, [92], kirby j, [191] & [195], hayne j, [209], u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [82]). nor does either party bear an onus to establish whether relocation is, or is not, in a child’s best interests. f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
f) transport and modern means of telecommunication may be relevant factors in making proper arrangements (“new and different facilities of access and contact ... with the other parent”) as between a child and his or her non-resident parent, especially in relation to relocation within australia. ams v aif, kirby j, [147], [148 & 192], paskandy v paskandy, [57], cf. m v s and “virtual visitation” [93]. g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
g) in determining a relocation case that involves changed parenting arrangements, a court must evaluate each of the proposals advanced by the parties, without necessarily being bound by them. (u v u, gummow & callinan jj, [70 & 89], hayne j, [171] & [172], bolitho v cohen, [83-85]). put another way, without embarking upon “some roving inquiry”, and subject to the evidence led – and affording procedural fairness to all – a court will not necessarily be constrained solely by the proposals of the parties in determining what is in the best interests of the child. (u v u, hayne j, [172], bolitho v cohen, [84], powell v ptolemy, [40]). h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
h) this summary of principle must, of course, be understood in the context of the ‘prescribed legislative pathway’ or scaffold in part vii of the act, to which i have already referred. thus, as stated by bryant cj and finn j, who constituted the majority in taylor v barker, at [53] (internal citations omitted):
we agree that when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible.
in sealey & archer [2008] famcafc 142 the full court (bryant cj, finn and thackray jj) said at paragraph 63:
while it has been recognised that the act does not provide any express direction or guidance as to the overall order in which the provisions of part vii must be applied (taylor & barker [2007] fam ca 1236, (2007) flc 93-345 at [62]), the legislation does require in s 61da that when a court makes a parenting order, it must apply the presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child (unless there are circumstances in which the presumption does not apply, or in which it would be inappropriate to apply it, or it is rebutted), and it further requires in s 65daa that if there is to be equal shared parental responsibility for the child, consideration must be given to the child spending equal time (or if not, substantial and significant time) with each parent.
and at paragraphs 66 and 67:
again as was recognised in taylor & barker (supra, see in particular paragraphs 58 and 77-83), in a case which involves a proposal that there be a significant change in the place where a child lives, it is appropriate for a court in its application of s 65daa, and particularly s 65daa(5), to canvass the advantages and disadvantages of a proposal “to re-locate” the child. we would also expect that the court would have addressed the matters arising under s 65daa(5) in the context of its consideration of relevant s 60cc matters.
in making the latter observation, we should say that we do not see anything said in taylor & barker as suggesting that a trial judge would ignore the relocation proposal when making the necessary s 60cc findings...
... the apportionment of weight or importance to evidence is a matter for the exercise in relation to such asserted errors in the exercise of discretion is high (see gronow v gronow [1979] hca 63, (1979) 144 clr 513).  ] there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children’s ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207-208, 210) ... [28] while the children’s interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 (“u v u”) at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232 ... only when the children’s welfare would be adversely affected must a parent’s right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children’s best interests (see u v u at 262).
as the full court said in malcolm and munro [2011] famcafc 16, (2011) flc 93-460 at [83]:
we emphasise that it is not the law that a parent wishing to relocate must establish compelling reasons for this to be permissible: see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, 179, and u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, 259-260. equally, there is no onus on a parent who may be “left behind” to demonstrate reasons as to why the other parent should not relocate. but it is properly part of a court’s inquiry to consider what each parent proposes and to determine the context of those plans and reasons for them in determining what is in the best interests of a child.
we agree with counsel for the mother that it was necessary for the primary judge to consider the totality of the evidence concerning family violence and reflect on the reality of how these parents could give effect to an order for equal shared parental responsibility before an order of that type could be made. to isolate the relevance of evidence of family violence merely to the application of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility was wrong. it was plainly relevant to the broader question of the allocation of parental responsibility once that issue was at large.
consideration and disposition  the father has provided minimal financial or other material and financial assistance for the care of the children since separation, and notably since his move to country victoria. he has a highly jaundiced view of the mother, her parenting capacities, and general insight and care of the children. the evidence generally says otherwise. he was consistently and highly critical of the education of the children, but late in the trial accepted that the school reports of the children were “great”, which rather undercut his carping criticism of the mother, at least on this front, and indicated that the mother, essentially single-handedly, has managed the care (materially and otherwise) of the children for a significant time in the absence of the father and with little or no financial and other support, (b) as already noted, the father’s conduct in getting w to place a surveillance device in the mother’s home, was as astonishing as it was appalling. it showed extremely poor judgment and insight on every level, (c) the mother accepted a number of her own failings and indicated her attempts – current and in the future – to address them. the father showed few such insights into either his short-comings as a parent, or in relation to any remedial action he might undertake. positively, he acknowledged his relatively poor mental state in relation to taking on responsibility on a building site, as he had done during the relationship, (d) the mother’s proposal to move to city b where there are greater services and opportunities (albeit broadly defined) suggests that such extra capacity to access services and the like for the children, which are not readily available in a small, town, will be advantageous to the children as well as the mother.   as already noted, the father’s conduct in getting w to place a surveillance device in the mother’s home, was as astonishing as it was appalling. it showed extremely poor judgment and insight on every level, (c) the mother accepted a number of her own failings and indicated her attempts – current and in the future – to address them. the father showed few such insights into either his short-comings as a parent, or in relation to any remedial action he might undertake. positively, he acknowledged his relatively poor mental state in relation to taking on responsibility on a building site, as he had done during the relationship, (d) the mother’s proposal to move to city b where there are greater services and opportunities (albeit broadly defined) suggests that such extra capacity to access services and the like for the children, which are not readily available in a small, town, will be advantageous to the children as well as the mother.   the mother accepted a number of her own failings and indicated her attempts – current and in the future – to address them. the father showed few such insights into either his short-comings as a parent, or in relation to any remedial action he might undertake. positively, he acknowledged his relatively poor mental state in relation to taking on responsibility on a building site, as he had done during the relationship, (d) the mother’s proposal to move to city b where there are greater services and opportunities (albeit broadly defined) suggests that such extra capacity to access services and the like for the children, which are not readily available in a small, town, will be advantageous to the children as well as the mother.   the mother’s proposal to move to city b where there are greater services and opportunities (albeit broadly defined) suggests that such extra capacity to access services and the like for the children, which are not readily available in a small, town, will be advantageous to the children as well as the mother.
conclusion
as the full court said in malcolm and munro [2011] famcafc 16, (2011) flc 93-460 at [83]: we emphasise that it is not the law that a parent wishing to relocate must establish compelling reasons for this to be permissible: see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160, 179, and u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238, 259-260. equally, there is no onus on a parent who may be “left behind” to demonstrate reasons as to why the other parent should not relocate. but it is properly part of a court’s inquiry to consider what each parent proposes and to determine the context of those plans and reasons for them in determining what is in the best interests of a child.
associate: dated: 22 february 2023
dated: 22 february 2023
[1] see transcript (“t”) 13.[2] see, for example, t 209 & 210.[3] t 26.[4] t 27 – 28.[5] t 30. [6] t 30. [7] t 31.[8] t 33 – 34.[9] t 34.[10] t 35 – 36.[11] t 34 – 36.[12] t 37 – 38. [13] t 37. [14] t 38 – 40.[15] t 40.[16] t 40 – 41.[17] among other places, see also the earlier, related remarks recorded in ms o’s child inclusive memo, dated 3rd july 2019 at pars.14 – 34. this memo became exhibit d.[18] t 42 – 49.[19] t 49.[20] t 45.[21] t 46.[22] t 47.[23] t 49 – 50.[24] t 49.[25] t 50.[26] see the general discussion at t 50 – 51.[27] t 53. [28] t 105.[29] t 53.[30] t 55.[31] t 57 – 58.[32] t 54.[33] t 55.[34] t 57 & 58.[35] t 59.[36] see, for example, the extended discussion at t 59 – 62.[37] t 59 – 61.[38] t 63 – 64. [39] t 64 – 66. [40] generally, see t 67 – 68.[41] t 67 – 72.[42] t 71. the information here related to speech therapy for some of the children.[43] t 72. [44] t 73 – 74. [45] t 74 – 75.[46] t 77.[47] t 77.[48] t 78.[49] t 79.[50] t 81.[51] t 82 – 84. this discussion included comments regarding the children expressing the wish to spend time with their father, to which the mother simply said that he is “the fun parent” and that she is not.[52] t 81 – 82. at t 86 – 88, there is recorded the extended discussion with the mother regarding her “orders sought”. i need not traverse this other than to note its existence, other than to note something of a summary of the mother’s position (at t 88) (a) if she is permitted to move to city b, and (b) if she is not.[53] t 89.[54] t 93 – 94. [55] t 96.[56] t 97 – 98.[57] t 97 – 100.[58] t 105 – 106.[59] t 105.[60] t 119.[61] t 120.[62] t 122. [63] t 124. [64] t 124 – 125. [65] t 126.[66] t 127.[67] t 130.[68] t 130 – 133. [69] t 133. [70] t 134.[71] t 134 – 135.[72] t 135.[73] t 135.[74] t 135 – 136.[75] t 136 – 138.[76] t 138 – 139.[77] it should also be noted here that no expert recommended a change in the residence of the children from the mother to the father. the father acknowledged this: see t 140.[78] t 138.[79] t 138 - 140[80] t 139.[81] t 141. town d is a two hour drive from town c, the town of the mother’s residence.[82] t 142.[83] t 142.[84] t 146.[85] t 146.[86] t 146 – 147. see also t 148.[87] t 148 - 149[88] t 148.[89] t 153.[90] t 150.[91] t 158 – 159.[92] t 151.[93] t 152 – 153. the father similarly refused to accept positive comments about the mother and her care for/of the children from the department of family services. see t 153 – 156.[94] see, for example, the discussion at t 158.[95] t 158.[96] t 159.[97] t 159 – 160. the father said that there was not much work in town d.[98] t 160. the father confirmed that working in the construction industry in melbourne was “an option.”[99] t 163. this discussion about the limitations on the family (e.g. to go on holidays, for further education for the children etc) because of very limited finances for the mother continued at t 164 – 166. nevertheless, and in the same place, the father continued to blame the mother regarding the children’s modest school reports. he maintained that they could do “a lot better.” there is no need to comment on such impoverished statements. fortunately, at the end of his evidence in court, after having a chance to look at the children’s most recent school reports, he said that they were “great reports.” see t 212.[100] t 164 – 165.[101] t 166.[102] t 168.[103] t 172.[104] see 173 – 174.[105] among various places, see t 175 – 176.[106] t 178. sometimes, there was an interchange between references to w and z. occasional confusion in name/identity does not really affect the discussion regarding the behaviour of one child or another in the general circumstances where conduct and parenting were the subject of both general and specific scrutiny.[107] t 179 – 183.[108] t 179 & 180.[109] t 181 – 182.[110] t 181. some very alarming comments by the father, taken from his trial affidavit, were put to him at t 182 – 183, referring to remarks attributed to z about statements by the mother. i need not extract, or comment on, them.[111] t 183 – 184.[112] t 184 – 186 & 189.[113] t 187. shortly after this there was a discussion with the father regarding his very hostile comments about the mother’s brothers and what they had allegedly “taught” w”. the allegations were, at least, very unseemly, and included again insulting comments by the father towards the mother. see t 188.[114] t 190 – 194.[115] t 190.[116] t 197.[117] t 197.[118] t 198. [119] t 198 – 203.[120] t 199 – 201. further historical explanation of the purchase of surveillance equipment is found at t 202 – 203.[121] t 204.[122] t 203. [123] t 205.[124] t 207.[125] t 208.[126] t 208 – 209.[127] t 209.[128] t 209 – 210. [129] t 211. [130] t 209 & 210.[131] t 211. [132] t 212.[133] t 212 – 216.[134] ms h’s relatively brief oral evidence was at t 226 – 252. the issue of the time and labour of travel was discussed a number of times, including at t 231.[135] see, for example, the discussion at t 227 – 228.[136] t 230 – 232.[137] t 235 – 237.[138] t 237 – 238.[139] t 242.[140] t 243 – 244.[141] t 250 – 251.[142] ms e’s brief oral evidence was at t 253 – 260. in my view, it is unnecessary to note comments by ms o from her s.11f memorandum, dated 1st july 2019. in almost every respect, the comments in this memo were superseded by the multiple, later reports recorded in these reasons.[143] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[144] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[145] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[146] b & b [2006] famca 1207 at [1]. warnick j was sitting as the full court, pursuant to s.94aaa of the act.[147] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[148] franklyn & franklyn (2021) flc 94-031.[149] wiley & wiley [2008] famcafc 153 at [70].[150] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238 at p.283 [164]. his honour also said, in the same place: “it is also highly desirable that courts, such as this court and the family court of australia, should consider such [relocation] cases in accordance with principles that are consistent, conformable to like legislation and attentive to the paramount consideration of the best interests of the child, viewed in the long term and not just the short term.”[151] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[152] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. the full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[153] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[154] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[155] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[156] sigley & evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[157] f v f [2007] fmcafam 831; (2008) 38 fam lr 52 at pp.56-58 [7]. a more abbreviated summary is provided by ryan j in sheldon & weir (no.3) [2010] famca 1138 at [244] & [245].[158] it will be seen that, in the light of full court authority which confirmed that the earlier decision of a and a [2000] famca 751; (2000) flc 93-035 no longer reflects the principles to be applied in relocation cases and, therefore, should not now be followed, all references to that case have been omitted. see hepburn & noble (2010) flc 93-348 at [100], and cales & cales [2010] famcafc 237; (2010) 44 fam lr 376 at [139].[159] it should be noted that in u v u, gleeson cj agreed with the judgment of gummow & callinan jj, as well as with the comments of hayne j. see (2002) 211 clr at p.240 [1].[160] cf. payne v payne [2001] ewca civ 166; [2001] fam 473, where thorpe lj, summarised, at [26], the two governing propositions under uk legislation and judicial authority over 30 years in relocation cases as (a) the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration and (b) refusing the primary carer’s reasonable proposals for relocation of her family life is likely to impact detrimentally on the welfare of her dependent children. see also the reasons of dame butler-sloss p [85], as well as the comments of bryant cj and finn j in taylor & barker [2007] fam ca 1236; (2007) 37 fam lr 461 at [84] – [113].[161] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483. see also the full court’s discussion in starr & duggan [2009] famcafc 115 at [38] & [39], and by ryan j in sheldon & weir (no.3) at [242] – [243].[162] blanding v blanding [2016] famcafc 21; (2017) 55 fam lr 218.[163] franklyn & franklyn [2019] famcafc 256.[164] hendy & penningh [2018] famcafc 257; (2018) flc 93-879.[165] t 13.[166] hendy & penningh [2018] famcafc 257; (2018) flc 93-879.