last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bergman & bergman (no 3) [2023] fedcfamc2f 198
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
“nowhere in subs (2a) or elsewhere in s 117, is there any prescription that more than one factor must be present before an order for costs is made nor of comparative weight of the factors set out in subs (2a). as a consequence, there is nothing to prevent any factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs.” it is not necessary for the wife to establish extraordinary or exceptional circumstances before a costs order can be justified (stoian & fiening (costs) [2014] famca 944 at [19]).
... in robinson & higginbotham (1991) flc 92-209 at 78,417, nygh j described the purpose of s117(2a)(f) in the following terms:
“... when one looks at paragraph (f) it is quite clear that the purpose of that provision is to ensure that offers to settle, if made seriously, are considered seriously, to ensure that the cost of litigation is avoided, the workload of this court is lightened. “
... as was said by the full court in browne & green [2002] famca 79, (2002) flc 93-115 at [57], it is important for a court to give proper consideration to offers of settlement, being something to which very significant weight ought normally be given.
your client has neglected to provide to our office, or the court, any indication or supporting documents in respect of the unitholder profit entitlement provided for in the unit & share sale agreement dated 31 march 2021. noting that same is to be articulated in writing pursuant to clause 5.8, please urgently provide all such writing exchanged by your client (and/or her agent) and [mr c] (and/or his agent), and for the avoidance of any doubt including their respective entities.
... over the adjourned period, between may and september of 2022, the parties reached agreement as to the value of the parties' horses and no further evidence or document from the two valuers about the horses' value was provided. taxation matters were largely, but not entirely, agreed. i am grateful for the hard work of the solicitors involved in reaching agreement about the value of the horses and the agreement of that fact was of considerable assistance to me in the efficient conduct of the case. ... under cross-examination, the wife was responsive to the questioning most of the time. on occasion, the wife's demeanour when cross-examined caused me to conclude that the wife was guarded in regard to evidence where she perceived that the answer to the question asked may contend against her. on occasion, the question needed to be repeated to ensure that the wife answered the question asked. when the question was so repeated, the wife would usually provide a responsive answer. further, there is a chain of events regarding the disclosure of the wife's position concerning the further payment from the firm, where she previously held an interest, which causes me, together with her demeanour as a witness, to conclude that the wife is not more reliable in her evidence in regards to disputed events than the husband. ... there are two aspects to reliability, one is truthfulness and the other is accuracy of recollection. together they combine to make reliability. in my determination about the comparative reliability of the party's evidence i do not take into account the wife's move of position in regard to her horses, said by her to be valued at about $34,000 at the time of the may hearing (and based on the opinion of a jointly retained single expert) to the agreed figure that was provided in an exhibit to me of a joint asset statement being w8 and refined to w10 on the last day of the hearing before me in september 2022. that is a significant movement of position and a significant movement of position in an asset pool of non-superannuation assets of $1.7 or $1.8million. i do not take that into account in regard to reflecting on the wife's credit because she was not cross-examined about that matter and the agreed position was arrived at by negotiations, as i understand it, between the parties' solicitors. i do not intend to go behind those negotiations and agreement that the parties' solicitors reached. i will not speculate about the various matters that were contained within that ultimate compromise. ... in or about late february or early march 2021, the husband became aware of an advertisement by the firm seeking a full-time [finance professional]. on 11 march 2021 he caused his solicitors to write to the wife's solicitors enquiring whether the advertised role reflected an expansion of the firm or whether the wife was reducing her work hours. on 22 march 2021, 11 days later, the wife's solicitors advised that the wife had reached an in principle agreement for the sale of her interest in the firm. that advice outlined that the sale price was to be $850,000 and that that sum was to be disbursed by way of about $609,000 to discharge the borrowings obtained to purchase the interest (back in 2016) and about $241,000 was to be paid to the wife over four years under a vendor finance arrangement at 4% interest. further, there would be about $58,750 tax payable as a result of the profit on that sale. that sale came to pass when the necessary documents were executed on 31 march 2021. the 22 march letter (annexure 6 to the husband's 24 november 2021 affidavit) described the intended sale, but made no mention of any further payment or entitlement of the wife from the firm. on 22 april 2021 (annexure 7 to the husband's 24 november 2021 affidavit) the wife's solicitors provided a summary of the effect of the sale which was that the wife would receive $4,791 per month plus interest over the next 48 months, in repayment of the loan of the unpaid purchase price. the voluminous, detailed unit and share of sale agreement, deed of loan and security of agreement was provided by the wife to the husband. but no mention was made in the letter disclosing the arrangement and enclosing the documents of any further payment or entitlement of the wife from the firm. at this time, the wife's solicitors were complaining of the husband's alleged failure to provide full and frank disclosure. ... for the purpose of the final hearing, then listed on 28 june 2021, the wife filed a trial affidavit on 31 may 2021 that, at paragraphs 14 to 22, dealt in apparently careful detail with the consequences of the sale of her interest in the firm. the unit and share sale agreement, including clause 5.8 was annexed to that affidavit. however, no reference whatsoever was made to any sum that was, or may be, due to the wife as a consequence of her accumulated share of profits, or what is described as the upe. further, the wife being the vendor and[a finance professional], made no reference whatsoever to what she asserted or had calculated such entitlement would be or should be. ... the husband did not accept that the wife had made full and frank disclosure of her interests, arising from the sale in the firm. ... the husband pressed for the details of the wife’s calculations and communications relating to the upe at clause 5.8. as described in the wife's second trial affidavit filed 3 december 2021, at [26] to [38], over the period 28 july 2021 to 17 november 2021, letters from the wife's solicitors refuted any suggestion of her failing to provide all the relevant documents and also recited that on 1 september 2021 the firm had indicated that, in fact, the wife (by the [an] family trust) had been overpaid her upe in the sum of $22,465. hence rather than there being a sum due to her, the firm was alleging, she said, that she owed them. on or about 8 december 2021, for a second time, the matter was listed for final hearing. the wife filed a further affidavit for the purpose of that trial. no further calculation of the upe was given. on 24 may 2022, the wife filed an outline of case and in that document referred to the 1 september 2022 issue or possibility of the $22,465 being due back to the firm. the long and the short of it is that when the matter came before me for two days in may, it proceeded on the basis that it was possible that some money may have to go back to the firm. however, the wife's commercial solicitors had on 18 march 2022 proposed to the firm that she be paid an additional $179,000 for the upe. i so infer from the terms of the 19 september 2022 letter annexed to the husband's affidavit of 28 september 2022. it is common ground that the letter of 18 march 2022 was not disclosed. it is not contested that the first notice the husband had of that letter or proposal was on 26 september 2022, days before the resumption of the hearing and after the husband had made further inquiries to the wife and sought the issue of the subpoena. the long and the short of it is that it was then disclosed that the firm was proposing that the wife be paid a further $139,609, and the wife proposed for the purpose of these proceedings that be treated as an asset and otherwise added or included in the assets of the joint balance sheet. these events, together with the wife’s demeanour as a witness, cause me to question the reliability of the wife’s evidence and to not regard the wife’s evidence as more reliable than the husband’s. the other development between may and september 2022 was that there was a negotiated agreement that the horses would be regarded as $225,000, not the $34,000 as the jointly retained single expert had opined and the wife had accepted. [emphasis added]
the discretion to be exercised in making an order for costs is a wide one. i refer to the decision of the high court in penfold & penfold [1981] 44 clr 311. the court may depart from the usual that each party pay his or her own costs if it is satisfied there are circumstances that would justify doing so. in considering whether there are any such circumstances, the court has regard to the factors in section 117 (2a).
... the weight to be given to each factor in section 117(2a) was explored by bennett j in krach & krach (no. 2) [2009] famca 886 at [15]:
the weight to be attached to any of the considerations in section 117(2a) is wholly discretionary. whilst no single factor out-ranks any other, there is nothing to prevent one or other of them from being the sole foundation for a costs order. the weight to be given to a particular consideration under section 117(2a) is a matter for judicial discretion, however they "all must be taken into account and all balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs" in pencious v pencious (no 2) [2012] famca 212 court (considering costs following an application to restrain a solicitor from acting) justice cronin stated: [6] the considerations in s 117(2a) of the act include the financial position of each of the parties, their conduct of the procedural aspects of the litigation, their rights to legal aid, the question of whether any of them has been wholly unsuccessful and finally any other matter that the court considers relevant. [7] no one factor in that list is prescribed as being more important than any other (fitzgerald (as child representative for af (legal aid commission of tasmania)) v fish and anor [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123) ... [ellipses in original] [9] an order for costs is made to compensate a party against expense incurred in a proceeding, it is not intended to be punitive in nature (latoudis v casey (1991) 70 clr 534 at 543).
applicable law
117 costs (1) subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant. [notations omitted]   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings
legal aid
the conduct of the parties to the proceedings
whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure to comply with an order of the court
whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings
whether any party has made an offer in writing to settle the proceedings
other matters relevant
associate: dated: 24 february 2023
dated: 24 february 2023