last updated: 1 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
misic & misic [2023] fedcfamc2f 267
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
lives with
spends time  for a period of six (6) months, commencing the first saturday of the school term and each fortnight thereafter on a saturday from 2pm until 4pm at the b contact centre, c street, suburb d, nsw, or if that time is not available to the contact service then at a time available to the contact service and the mother. (b) at the expiration of six (6) months of order 4(a), the fortnightly supervised time may occur in a public place for six (6) months for a period of three (3) hours on one (1) occasion a fortnight on a saturday from 1pm until 4pm or if that time is not available to the contact service then at a time available to the contact service and the mother, such time can be supervised by b contact centre or another professional contact service nominated by the mother. (c) on christmas eve from 1pm until 4pm or at another time available to the contact service in a public place if the contact service is able to provide such supervision.   at the expiration of six (6) months of order 4(a), the fortnightly supervised time may occur in a public place for six (6) months for a period of three (3) hours on one (1) occasion a fortnight on a saturday from 1pm until 4pm or if that time is not available to the contact service then at a time available to the contact service and the mother, such time can be supervised by b contact centre or another professional contact service nominated by the mother. (c) on christmas eve from 1pm until 4pm or at another time available to the contact service in a public place if the contact service is able to provide such supervision.   on christmas eve from 1pm until 4pm or at another time available to the contact service in a public place if the contact service is able to provide such supervision.   commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2024, for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on father’s day for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 1pm until 4pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.
5a. commencing in 2025 and subject to order 6, the father is at liberty to spend unsupervised time with the children as follows: (a) commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2025, for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2025, for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on father’s day for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on christmas eve for a period of five (5) hours from 1pm until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.
5b. commencing in 2027 and subject to order 6, the father is at liberty to spend unsupervised time with the children as follows: (a) commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2027, for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of seven (7) hours form 11am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2027, for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of seven (7) hours form 11am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on father’s day for a period of seven (7) hours form 11am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on christmas eve for a period of seven (7) hours from 11am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.
5c. commencing in 2028 and subject to order 6, the father is at liberty to spend unsupervised time with the children as follows: (a) commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2028, for a period of nine (9) hours from 9am until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of nine (9) hours form 9am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 9am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   commencing the first saturday of term 1 in 2028, for a period of nine (9) hours from 9am until 6pm on a saturday and each alternate weekend, (b) on father’s day for a period of nine (9) hours form 9am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 9am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on father’s day for a period of nine (9) hours form 9am until 6pm, (c) on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 9am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   on christmas eve for a period of three (3) hours from 9am until 6pm, (d) on each of the children’s birthdays for a period of two (2) hours from 3.30pm until 5.30pm if it falls on a day that the father is not already spending time with the children.   the time the father spends with the children is to be supervised by b contact centre supervised contact service or at another supervised contact service nominated by the mother and all costs of such supervision is to be paid equally by the mother and father. (b) the mother and father will contact b contact centre within seven (7) days of the orders and provide a copy of these orders to the service and make a referral for supervised contact. (c) upon a place becoming available at b contact centre, the time in order 4(a) will commence with the father and the children. (d) the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow all reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at a supervised contact service and the parents shall continue to pay half of all the costs associated with the supervision service. (e) the mother is at liberty to obtain all the reports of the contact visits between the father and the children and the father is to pay half the costs associated with any of the reports requested by the mother. (f) in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.   the mother and father will contact b contact centre within seven (7) days of the orders and provide a copy of these orders to the service and make a referral for supervised contact. (c) upon a place becoming available at b contact centre, the time in order 4(a) will commence with the father and the children. (d) the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow all reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at a supervised contact service and the parents shall continue to pay half of all the costs associated with the supervision service. (e) the mother is at liberty to obtain all the reports of the contact visits between the father and the children and the father is to pay half the costs associated with any of the reports requested by the mother. (f) in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.   upon a place becoming available at b contact centre, the time in order 4(a) will commence with the father and the children. (d) the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow all reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at a supervised contact service and the parents shall continue to pay half of all the costs associated with the supervision service. (e) the mother is at liberty to obtain all the reports of the contact visits between the father and the children and the father is to pay half the costs associated with any of the reports requested by the mother. (f) in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.   the mother and father shall comply with all intake procedures and policies and follow all reasonable directions of the supervised contact services whilst ever the children spend time with the father at a supervised contact service and the parents shall continue to pay half of all the costs associated with the supervision service. (e) the mother is at liberty to obtain all the reports of the contact visits between the father and the children and the father is to pay half the costs associated with any of the reports requested by the mother. (f) in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.   the mother is at liberty to obtain all the reports of the contact visits between the father and the children and the father is to pay half the costs associated with any of the reports requested by the mother. (f) in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.   in the event that the father does not pay his share of the contact centre fees for the intake procedures, reports, contact visits, changeovers or any other associated costs required by b contact centre or any other professional supervised contact services, then his time referred to in order 4 is suspended.
changeovers
supervised time
conditions to move to unsupervised time  undertake a hair strand test for illicit substances and alcohol for a period of six (6) months usage with company e at city f or city g nsw and such test must show a negative result for all illicit substances and a result for alcohol showing a moderate consumption use (or less), (b) this order provides authority for company e to provide, directly to the mother, a copy of the results of the hair strand test referred to in order 11a, to the mother’s email address at ...com or another email address as provided to company e by the mother. (c) the father is to provide a report from his treating psychiatrist that provides for his current diagnosis, current list of medications, compliance with medications, treatment regime and whether his mental health is currently stable and has been for a period of twelve (12) months, (d) the time referred to in order 4 that provides for supervised time between the father and the children has not been suspended on more than four (4) occasions by the father, (e) the father has had no involvement with the nsw police in respect of complaints made against him for violence, sexual violence, illicit or illegal drug possession, being affected by illicit or illegal drugs, illicit or illegal drug supply or being intoxicated, (f) the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.   this order provides authority for company e to provide, directly to the mother, a copy of the results of the hair strand test referred to in order 11a, to the mother’s email address at ...com or another email address as provided to company e by the mother. (c) the father is to provide a report from his treating psychiatrist that provides for his current diagnosis, current list of medications, compliance with medications, treatment regime and whether his mental health is currently stable and has been for a period of twelve (12) months, (d) the time referred to in order 4 that provides for supervised time between the father and the children has not been suspended on more than four (4) occasions by the father, (e) the father has had no involvement with the nsw police in respect of complaints made against him for violence, sexual violence, illicit or illegal drug possession, being affected by illicit or illegal drugs, illicit or illegal drug supply or being intoxicated, (f) the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.   the father is to provide a report from his treating psychiatrist that provides for his current diagnosis, current list of medications, compliance with medications, treatment regime and whether his mental health is currently stable and has been for a period of twelve (12) months, (d) the time referred to in order 4 that provides for supervised time between the father and the children has not been suspended on more than four (4) occasions by the father, (e) the father has had no involvement with the nsw police in respect of complaints made against him for violence, sexual violence, illicit or illegal drug possession, being affected by illicit or illegal drugs, illicit or illegal drug supply or being intoxicated, (f) the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.   the time referred to in order 4 that provides for supervised time between the father and the children has not been suspended on more than four (4) occasions by the father, (e) the father has had no involvement with the nsw police in respect of complaints made against him for violence, sexual violence, illicit or illegal drug possession, being affected by illicit or illegal drugs, illicit or illegal drug supply or being intoxicated, (f) the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.   the father has had no involvement with the nsw police in respect of complaints made against him for violence, sexual violence, illicit or illegal drug possession, being affected by illicit or illegal drugs, illicit or illegal drug supply or being intoxicated, (f) the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.   the father has not been charged with any criminal offences.
communication  the communication is in relation to the children as a result of any issue that has arisen during the time he is spending with them, and (b) such communication is to be by sms message only unless in an emergency in which case it can occur by telephone call.   such communication is to be by sms message only unless in an emergency in which case it can occur by telephone call.
contact details
health
education and extra-curricular activities  upon the commencement of unsupervised time, attend the events the parents are usually invited to attend and to approach the children and have contact with the children with permission of the school principal. (b) attend parent teacher interviews providing that the father attend a separate parent teacher interview to the mother. (c) at the commencement of unsupervised time, end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders.   attend parent teacher interviews providing that the father attend a separate parent teacher interview to the mother. (c) at the commencement of unsupervised time, end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders.   at the commencement of unsupervised time, end of year assemblies/concerts and have contact with the children at these events. (d) only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders.   only collect the children and remove the children from the school as provided for in these orders.
hair strand test
international travel and passports
h program
restraints  approaching, attending or remaining within 100 metres of the children’s schools, or place of residence (subject to order 18), (b) from approaching or attending the maternal grandparents residence where the children may attend from time to time, (c) approaching or remaining within 100 meters of the residence or place of employment of the mother, (d) from removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided by these orders, (e) from spending time or communicating with the children unless otherwise provided by these orders, (f) from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from approaching or attending the maternal grandparents residence where the children may attend from time to time, (c) approaching or remaining within 100 meters of the residence or place of employment of the mother, (d) from removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided by these orders, (e) from spending time or communicating with the children unless otherwise provided by these orders, (f) from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   approaching or remaining within 100 meters of the residence or place of employment of the mother, (d) from removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided by these orders, (e) from spending time or communicating with the children unless otherwise provided by these orders, (f) from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from removing the children from the mother’s care or from the care of any other person or organisation with whom she has placed them, except for the purpose of spending time with the children as provided by these orders, (e) from spending time or communicating with the children unless otherwise provided by these orders, (f) from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from spending time or communicating with the children unless otherwise provided by these orders, (f) from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from attending any of the children’s school except as provided by these orders, (g) from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from discussing the court proceedings or in any other court proceedings and any evidence or information about any of the court proceedings or tribunal proceedings that either the father or mother may have been involved in, (h) from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from taking any form of alcohol or illicit substance twelve (12) hours prior to spending time with the children, (i) from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from behaving violently to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children or from knowingly exposing the children to “family violence” as defined in section 4ab of the family law act 1975, a copy of which section is attached to these orders, (j) from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from denigrating the mother, being critical, or negative of the mother or the mother’s family to the children or either child or in the presence or hearing of the children or either child. (k) from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from approaching the mother at changeover of the children to facilitate the spend time orders, (l) from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   from communicating with the mother unless otherwise provided by these orders.   dial: ... (b) enter conference id: ...#   enter conference id: ...#
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction:
the hearing:  case outline document filed 5 december 2022, which annexed his initial draft minute of order, (b) his trial affidavit filed 3 november 2022, and (c) a further affidavit filed 1 december 2022, which he was granted leave to read and file.   his trial affidavit filed 3 november 2022, and (c) a further affidavit filed 1 december 2022, which he was granted leave to read and file.   a further affidavit filed 1 december 2022, which he was granted leave to read and file.   case outline document filed 5 december 2022, (b) her amended response filed 1 november 2022, (c) her trial affidavit filed 1 november 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her father mr k (the maternal grandfather) filed 1 november 2022.   her amended response filed 1 november 2022, (c) her trial affidavit filed 1 november 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her father mr k (the maternal grandfather) filed 1 november 2022.   her trial affidavit filed 1 november 2022, and (d) the affidavit of her father mr k (the maternal grandfather) filed 1 november 2022.   the affidavit of her father mr k (the maternal grandfather) filed 1 november 2022.   case outline document filed 5 december 2022, (b) the family report, which was marked as exhibit 1.   the family report, which was marked as exhibit 1.
the fundamental issue:
some brief witness observations:
chronology of events:
i think this man's risks of reoffending, as noted earlier, are negligible to non-existent but he would certainly benefit from some ongoing support and assistance not only from his gp but from a psychologist.
that is to say, dr n clearly thought that the father was at no real risk of re-offending. it will become apparent that, with all due respect to him, dr n was quite wrong.   misic] presents with symptoms of anxiety and stress triggered by a criminal charge that he is facing after a fight outside a nightclub when two men were injured after they reportedly attacked him and he defended himself. this event occurred very soon after [mr misic] had discovered that the man he had always believed to be his biological father was, in fact, his stepfather.
this is simply incorrect and a great minimisation of what, in fact, happened.
supportive counselling with a focus on coping with the impact of his current situation and the perceived injustices in addition to processing the impact of his recent discovery.
he continue treatment with a psychologist for as long as required and continue to take medication as prescribed.
dear [mr misic], (1) i can change my mind at any time (2) no relationships (3) no dating (4) physical interaction only. no personal intimacy (5) not the same person on multiple occasions (6) safety, ie, no stds or pregnancies (7) doesn't interfere with family time, eg not coming home, staying overnight, missing events, away for many hours. we are still your top priority, (8) no one that can be connected (9) don't tell anyone about anything (10) doesn't affect our relationship or our sex life (11) no sex tapes or photos (12) no gifts (13) no holidays (14) no texting, etcetera, all the time at home (15) don't stop loving me (16) anything else i might want to add later. love always and forever your loving wife.
i went outside to see what was happening. the person i had seen on the footpath outside the [business] was about 10 to 12 metres down the road standing near a person crouching beside a car. when i approached the person crouching beside the car whom i assumed was the person who needed help, another person whom i believe was the person standing on the footpath outside the [business] hit me in the head from behind. he did not make solid contact. a third person appeared and one of them grabbed hold of me around the waist. i stood up and defended myself. i recognised the person who had hit me as the person whom i had refused to have on the [program]. i ran away through the department of housing flats opposite away from the [business]. after a while i circled back around, returned to the [business] and called the police. a female witness gave police a statement which supported what i had told them happened. i was charged, with among other charges, assaulting one of the three people referred to above. i defended the assault charge referred to above on the basis i was defending myself, but following a hearing in may of 2017 i was convicted of the offences of intimidate, intending to cause fear of physical or mental harm and assault occasioning actual bodily harm. i was ordered to perform 140 hours of community service and to enter into a 24 month good behaviour bond. i fulfilled the community service order mowing lawns at the [location p] in [suburb q] and i complied with the bond.
while speaking with police the accused (the father) walked towards the gloves on the ground and dropped a black jumper on top of them.
in the witness box the father said that he was “packing stuff away as he was about to go home” and he was not hiding the gloves. i reject that evidence.
do you currently use or do you have a history of using illicit drugs?
the answer recorded was:
yes, cocaine and mdma.   misic] alleges i have used illicit substances, including cocaine and mdma, i deny that is, or was, the case during our relationship or at other times. i deny telling [ms misic] i used cocaine, mdma or other illicit substances. i was present, with [ms misic], in a consultation with [ms s], a counsellor [ms misic] had arranged for she and i to see, when [ms misic] told [ms s] i used cocaine and mdma. at no time did i tell [ms s] i used those substances.
i reject that evidence unequivocally.
i was convicted of an assault on a man who tried to rob me. i have already faced the [health professional] board and they took no action on my registration.
unless and until the father receives ongoing and regular treatment to address his anger management issues we share [dr n]'s opinion that it is unknown what risk the father might pose if confronted by an aggressive or demanding patient.
nonetheless real and material.
i will stop all drug and alcohol use.
hi [ms z]. i was shocked to hear you made that complaint against me. i have always liked you and been very kind. you may no recall [sic – should be “not” recall] how i would speak to you to try to grow you, enhance your career and self-esteem or the time the guy went creepy on you on the date at [location ab] and i was in my car to come and protect you before you even asked me to. i am in an awful position at the moment. i have lost all my [businesses] and my ex-wife has taken my children from me and i have not seen them in 8 months. this complain [sic – should be “complaint”] has more serious ramifications than you expected on me. i believe my ex-wife is involved in this in some capacity.   i record here that the mother absolutely was not)
you requested in many of our messages that i be dominant. i never had any intention of hurting you and if i did you know it was not purposeful, but, regardless, i apologise. the allegations you made will stop me from ever being a [health professional] again and my ex-wife will use this to portray i am violent which you know i am not and i will never see my kids again. the last year my brother died and i lost my will to live without my kids. i hope you can find it in your heart to retract your complaint. i can't go on if i can't see my kids.
ms z blocked the father and did not respond.
the attending nurses have found that the victim has now been far more reserved as she was a once active 89 year old now found to be hiding or restricted to her bedroom.
he is quite a solid build and shows a lot of aggression and standover tactics. he becomes irate when the victim has a fall and he is not helpful in any way.
which is to be believed to be witnessed by some of the nursing staff. notably, police recorded in that particular subpoenaed note that:
the father had been charged with violent offences in the past and that he runs a [health care business] and has a significant amount of intelligence reports for drug supply.
the next day i received a threatening email from [mr misic] stating i had been cruel for sneaking [ms ae] out of the house. following this every time i tried to call her home phone it would either state the number had been disconnected or divert to a separate phone number so i was unable to contact her. [ms ae] did not use a mobile phone so this was her only method of communication. often i would speak to her neighbours to check how she was and they said they would pass on messages to her. i also sent letters and christmas gifts for her to their address which they stated they would pass on to her. i am not sure if she received these. a few of her friends also raised concerns with me that they also could not get in contact with her by phone. and if they did go and visit her at the house they were made to feel uncomfortable by [mr misic]. during the time when there were communication difficulties the children repeatedly asked when they could see “nana” and expressed to me how much they missed her.
the mother had genital herpes and diabetes. both of these conditions can cause neurodegeneration. i believe [ms misic] has a level of mental impairment. no person of sane mind would remove children from their father without just cause for 15 months.
report unprofessional and illegal behaviour by a non-practicing [health care professional].
obviously, [mr misic] is trying to destroy [ms misic's] professional career. she was advised to see a solicitor regarding the defamatory comments as they amount to action in the civil arena. no further police action required other than the situation be recorded.
i only want to suck your cock.
the law:
appropriate for the welfare of the child.
section 60cc – how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
best interests:
weighing up the competing proposals:
conclusion & proposed orders:
associate: dated: 24 february 2023
dated: 24 february 2023