last updated: 24 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kazemi & demian [2023] fedcfamc2f 217
orders
the court orders that:  commencing on 10 march 2023 from the conclusion of school (or 3:00 pm whichever is the later) friday to the commencement of school (or 9:00 am whichever is earlier) the following monday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (b) from 3:00pm friday (or the conclusion of school whichever is the later) to 9:00am monday (or the commencement of school whichever is the earlier) on the weekend that father’s day falls, (a) in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 9:00am until 1:00pm, (b) in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm, (c) on 21 march each year, being country b new year, from 9:00am 21 march to 9:00am 22 march, and (d) such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   from 3:00pm friday (or the conclusion of school whichever is the later) to 9:00am monday (or the commencement of school whichever is the earlier) on the weekend that father’s day falls, (a) in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 9:00am until 1:00pm, (b) in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm, (c) on 21 march each year, being country b new year, from 9:00am 21 march to 9:00am 22 march, and (d) such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 9:00am until 1:00pm, (b) in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm, (c) on 21 march each year, being country b new year, from 9:00am 21 march to 9:00am 22 march, and (d) such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm, (c) on 21 march each year, being country b new year, from 9:00am 21 march to 9:00am 22 march, and (d) such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   on 21 march each year, being country b new year, from 9:00am 21 march to 9:00am 22 march, and (d) such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   such further and/or other times as the parties may agree in writing.   from 3:00pm friday (or the conclusion of school whichever is the later) to 9:00am monday (or the commencement of school whichever is the earlier) on the weekend that mother’s day falls, (b) in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 9:00am until 1:00pm, (c) in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm.   in even numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 9:00am until 1:00pm, (c) in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm.   in odd numbered years on the last day of ramadan from 1:00pm until 5:00pm.
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
with the consent of all parties the appointment of the independent children’s lawyer was discharged on the first day of the hearing with the court’s appreciation.
brief background
the parties
x
the family report
the law  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the children, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
...protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child.
the primary considerations
meaningful relationship
family violence   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.
such behaviour must still meet the definition as contained within s 4ab(1).
123. coerce is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as
1. to restrain or constrain by force, law or authority, force or compel, as to do something. 2. to compel by forcible action
124. control is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as:
1. to exercise restraint or direction over, dominate, command
125. the phrase “coerces or controls” is expressed disjunctively. however it may be seen that the two concepts are closely related. together they form an expanded concept of the exercise of power, to restrain another or to cause another to act, by force, domination or command...
generally, coercive control is understood as a course of conduct aimed at dominating and controlling another person, including a family member.
the assessment of whether conduct that falls within one of the provided examples constitutes family violence as defined in s 4ab(1) of the act necessarily requires that conduct to be considered in the context in which it occurred.
events of 2006 and 2007
made admissions to attending the [school t] to talk to the victim. the accused also made admissions to threatening to follow the victim in order to find out where she lived. he also made admissions that he was aware the victim did not wish to have any contact with him but he continually initiated contact with her in the hope the victim would talk to him and tell him where she lived.
2 november 2020 incident
ms otrebski: and you recall an incident where the manager said [x] is cute. father: yes. ms otrebski: and you asked her – “me or the child” – and you winked and smiled. father: it’s a normal reaction. ms otrebski: do you think you could have made the worker feel uncomfortable? father: yes. ms otrebski: do you think it’s inappropriate to do that and ask the question you did in front of [x]? father: there’s nothing wrong with it.
physical assaults and verbal abuse
controlling behaviour
undermining of the mother
repeated allegations against the maternal family
police attended the address and obtained a statement from the witness [being the mother] and the recording she had taken. the footage covers the whole incident and does not show any adverse confrontation between parties. police are of the belief that the injury to the victims back may be self-inflicted given the shape and direction of the red mark. police released the poi without charge and uploaded the aforementioned evidence.
the father denied that he had inflicted any injuries upon himself in order to make an allegation of violence as against mr ab.
police further questioned the vic to which he states he had two videos that show the poi assault him. police viewed the footage sighting no physical assaults and just a lot of back and forth arguing from both the vic and the poi. the vic further enquired about an avo to be taken out against the poi to which police informed him that no avo will be taken out... due to the conflicting nature of the vic’s version of events and constantly wanting an avo against the poi, police are of the belief that the vic is making vexatious reports and wanting police to apply for an avo with no grounds for an application.
refusal to grant an islamic divorce
other risk issues
the relationship between the parties and nature of communication
there appears to be little trust between the parties, ongoing communication difficulties, and each parent presented as having little motivation to make accommodations and changes to improve the co-parenting relationship. it is, however, noted that [mr demian] having perpetrated family violence against [ms kazemi] is likely to be a mitigating factor in her apparent reluctance to communicate, and co-parent, with him.
the additional considerations
any views expressed by x
the nature of x’s relationship with the parents and other significant persons
the capacity of each parent to provide for x’s needs, including emotional and intellectual needs and the attitude to x and responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents
parental conflict that directly relates to a child is known to be associated with increased incidence of adverse outcomes, including poor mental health outcomes, for a child exposed to such conflict.[9]
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain x
the likely effect of any changes
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with the father
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background including lifestyle, culture and traditions of x and the parties
mr givney: is there a reason as to why you wouldn’t want [x] to see his father on father’s day? mother: no. mr givney: would you like to see your son on mother’s day? mother: of course i would love to. mr givney: you would be significantly distressed if that didn’t happen, wouldn’t you? mother: it will be. mr givney: it would be very hurtful for you? mother: it did hurt me before. mr givney: and you wouldn’t want to go through that hurt again would you. mother: yes. mr givney: is there any reason why you shouldn’t share the festival of eid at the end of ramadan? mother: no – i don’t have any answer to this.
any other relevant fact or circumstance
it is, therefore, likely that [ms kazemi] having ongoing contact with [mr demian] regarding [x], including a changeovers, for the purposes of exercising shared parental responsibility, or jointly attending events/appointments relating to [x], would have a detrimental impact on [ms kazemi’s] psychological well-being, including increasing the risk of exacerbating trauma symptoms..... any decrease in [ms kazemi’s] psychological functioning poses a risk that there will be a consequent detrimental impact on her capacity to identify and meet [their] [x]’s needs, including basic needs.... this can have detrimental impacts on a child’s development and wellbeing and can result in a child forming a view of the world is unsafe and people in it is unreliable.[10]
discussion and determination
exposure to family violence, including witnessing and – or hearing incidents of family violence or being cared for by a victim – parent whose parent is impaired as a consequence of the perpetrators choices and actions, is known to have a detrimental impact on children. exposure to family violence can be experienced as traumatic by children, irrespective of the age at which the exposure occurs, which can contribute to arrange a psycho social and mashed relational difficulties, including adding increased risk of emotional and behavioural disturbance for a child or a child engaging in interpersonal relationships that feature family violence.
there are particular risks to a child associated with ongoing contact with a perpetrator of coercive and controlling family violence, in addition to the ongoing risk that [x] will be exposed to family violence perpetrated against the other parent or a perpetrator’s future partner. these risks can continue post separation and include the risk of the perpetrating parent undermining other parent’s role as a parent and their relationship with [x]... increased risk of psychological abuse and manipulation of [x] by the perpetrating parent, and parenting deficits for a perpetrating parent.[11]
if there is veracity to [ms kazemi’s] account that [mr demian] holds misogynistic and oppressive views regarding gender roles, significant concerns would be raised regarding his capacity to co- parent......, specifically that [x] will be exposed to such views and that this will contribute to a morale developing similar skewed schemas regarding social relationships. this is highly likely to have a detrimental impact on [x]’s own relationships....[12]
conclusion
associate: dated: 6 march 2023
dated: 6 march 2023
[1] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 219-222. [2] father’s affidavit, paragraph 13. [3] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 272-279. [4] mazorski v albright (2007) 37 fam lr 518; [2007] famca 520. [5] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405, 83,476 at [118]-[119]; [2009] famcafc 92[6] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 194. [7] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 321-328. [8] family report, paragraph 40. [9] family report, paragraph 72. [10] family report, paragraph 78. [11] family report, paragraph 75. [12] family report, paragraph 76.