last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
appleby & winchester [2023] fedcfamc2f 347
orders
the court orders that:
the court further orders:  any affidavit on which he seeks to rely, and (b) any written submissions in response.   any written submissions in response.
the court notes:
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge young
section 90sn   the value of the property has increased since 2018, or alternatively, (b) the unapproved structures do not diminish the value of the property.   the unapproved structures do not diminish the value of the property.
it should also be noted that the parties have expressly stated to me that the only basis on which they seek to vary — not set aside — the consent orders is on a compensatory basis for the loss, if any, of the wife. they do not seek to reopen the whole settlement and, given the position of the parties, i am satisfied that that is the correct approach.
background
our client has been approached by the council in relation to the noncompliance of the decking at the [d street] property. could you please therefore, in particular given [mr c] [a reference to the parties’ youngest child] is living in this residence, provide to us all information in relation to that issue in addition to any safety concerns that may be in existence.
the husband replied on the same day, and said, in effect, that he designed and built the balcony but had been unable to complete it because of the parties’ separation. no other matter was raised by him. in other words, he did not disclose at that time any further information.
i am writing in regards to an existing backyard permanent structure that was illegally built prior to me purchasing the property. i had planned to pull down this existing structure whilst i was the owner of the [d street] property, as the structure was illegally built on the boundary line, and possess [sic] a potential risk from fire or structural collapse and may cause potential personal injury to my son (who still resides at the residence) or the neighbours. i have now shown my duty of care in this matter, and as i am no longer the resisted [sic] owner of the [d street] property, take no responsibility in any non-compliant structural failure, and all liability is now with the council and new owner of the property.
my name is [mr appleby]. i have been in contact with you on many occasions in the past concerning the construction of the balcony at [d street], [suburb e]. the reason for our conversations were in regards to the development permit expires [sic] and due to me being ousted from the [d street] property, i was unable to finish the balcony build, i discussed with you on a few occasions that the property matter was going through court and pending the outcome would determine the result.
the letter goes on with another sentence that is not relevant. i note that there is no mention by the husband in his letter to mr g of having discussed any non-compliance issue other than the balcony.
it has come to council’s attention that a breach of the building act (1975) has occurred in relation to the covered balcony and rear covered entertainment structure on your premises. in particular, the following matters have been identified.
i will not read those matters as they are not relevant for present purposes but they simply make clear that the council is aware that the matters it refers to, which i am satisfied are the patio and the entertainment area, are non-compliant structures. the letter went on to say:
you are encouraged to obtain a retrospective building development approval, or to remove the building/structure to rectify this matter. council is not commencing immediate compliance action at this stage. however, council’s property records will be updated to reflect that there is unlawful development on the premises which will be identified in any property search by a prospective purchaser.
i will omit the following sentence, and the quote continues:
please note that council may take compliance action for the unlawful development at any time, and this advisory letter does not preclude further action, particularly if additional complaints are received.
credibility  before the purchase, the wife’s father had flown up from new south wales and inspected the property. the husband asserted that the wife’s father had some qualifications, which were unspecified, to recognise non-compliance. however, there was no specific evidence from the husband about what the wife’s father may have said and to whom. i am not satisfied that the wife’s father was either qualified, or in fact, that he said anything useful to the parties about the non-compliant structures. (d) the husband said that on numerous occasions the city f council visited the property, and the council was aware of the patio and the entertainment area non-compliance. those matters had been discussed with the council officers and the wife was present. however, that evidence is inconsistent with the correspondence that i have referred to. it was not a date in early 2019, that is, after the consent orders, that the city f council sent a letter where it said that it had come to “council’s attention” that there were non‑compliant structures and that, letter of course, followed close on the heels of the husband’s letter of mid-2018 to the council where he said:   the husband said that on numerous occasions the city f council visited the property, and the council was aware of the patio and the entertainment area non-compliance. those matters had been discussed with the council officers and the wife was present. however, that evidence is inconsistent with the correspondence that i have referred to. it was not a date in early 2019, that is, after the consent orders, that the city f council sent a letter where it said that it had come to “council’s attention” that there were non‑compliant structures and that, letter of course, followed close on the heels of the husband’s letter of mid-2018 to the council where he said:
i have been in contact with you on many occasions in the past concerning the construction of the balcony at [d street], [suburb e]. i would have expected, if there had been any prior discussion between the husband and the council about the other non-compliant structures, council would not use the language it used in early 2019 that it had “come to council’s attention”. nor would the husband have said that he had been in contact on many occasions in the past concerning the construction of the balcony. it was conceded by the husband that there was no evidence in the subpoena material returned from the city f council prior to this point that the council had recorded any knowledge of the non-compliant structures on the property, that is, before the husband’s own letter in mid-2018. i am satisfied that the husband’s evidence that the city f council was aware of the non-compliance before his email of mid-2018 is deliberately false and his intention in giving that evidence was to convey the false impression that the wife was aware of the non-compliant structures through the council visits to the property.   the husband also said that on many occasions prior to settlement he had discussed the non-compliant structures with the wife. given my finding that his evidence about the wife’s awareness through visits from the city f council was deliberate and calculated untruthful evidence, i find that he is not a witness of truth. i am also satisfied that the city f council was not aware at any point prior to the husband’s letter of mid-2018 of the non-compliant structures of the patio or the entertainment area. i am satisfied the husband’s untruthfulness was motivated by his recognition that the wife did not know about the non-compliant structures. i accept her evidence about her lack of knowledge as truthful. it follows that i am satisfied there was suppression of relevant evidence by the husband by failure to disclose relevant information.
loss  there is no loss because the property has appreciated in value since 2018. (a) any loss should be limited to the diminution in value of the property according to the valuation evidence, from $660,000 to $620,000.   any loss should be limited to the diminution in value of the property according to the valuation evidence, from $660,000 to $620,000.
it is true that the property has appreciated but this is simply one factor. it would have appreciated more in value if, as is clear from the valuation evidence which i will refer to in a moment, the non-compliant structures were not present. limiting the loss to the diminution in value does not protect the wife from the consequences of enforcement actions by the council which would appear to potentially involve the council making good the defective structures or removing them and charging the cost to the wife or against the property. prosecution would also appear to be a possibility. she could potentially avoid those consequences by selling the property at a diminished value but that would involve additional unspecified expense, including sale, and perhaps purchase of another property with significant attendant incidental expenses such as agent’s commission.
the expert evidence
associate: dated: 9 march 2023
dated: 9 march 2023