last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ramsden & darnell [2023] fedcfamc2f 455
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  the child’s long-term care, welfare and development, (b) the child’s education (both current and future), (c) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (d) the child’s health, (e) the child’s name, and (f) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s education (both current and future), (c) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (d) the child’s health, (e) the child’s name, and (f) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, (d) the child’s health, (e) the child’s name, and (f) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, (e) the child’s name, and (f) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (f) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   at b school, or (b) any school for which x may be zoned from time-to-time, or (c) otherwise subject to a proper exercise of equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to order 1 herein.   any school for which x may be zoned from time-to-time, or (c) otherwise subject to a proper exercise of equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to order 1 herein.   otherwise subject to a proper exercise of equal shared parental responsibility pursuant to order 1 herein.
live with and spend time with orders
term time  during school terms as exercised by x’s school, on the weekend following the first week of schooling in each school term, and continuing each alternate weekend thereafter, from friday at 6.00pm until sunday at 5.00pm,
school holidays  during school holidays as exercised by x’s school: (i) until x turns 12 years of age – during every autumn and spring school holidays for 10 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 6:00pm on the last day x is required to attend school until 5:00pm on the second monday following commencement of the mother’s time, during every winter school holidays for seven (7) days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 6:00pm on the last day x is required to attend school until 5:00pm on the immediately following friday, during the summer school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, for 21 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 5 january at 6.00pm until 26 january at 5.00pm or 5.00pm on the day before x is due to commence term 1, during the summer school holidays in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, for 21 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 5.00pm on the last day that x is required to attend school until 5.00pm on the 22nd day thereafter, (ii) once x turns 12 years of age: for the autumn, winter, spring and summer school holidays commencing 2029 and each alternate year thereafter, for the first half to be agreed in writing by the parties but, failing agreement, from the first saturday after the last day of the preceding term at 2.00pm until the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm, for those commencing in 2030 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half to be agreed in writing by the parties, but, failing agreement, from the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm until the final sunday before the commencement of the following school term at 2.00pm.   until x turns 12 years of age – during every autumn and spring school holidays for 10 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 6:00pm on the last day x is required to attend school until 5:00pm on the second monday following commencement of the mother’s time, during every winter school holidays for seven (7) days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 6:00pm on the last day x is required to attend school until 5:00pm on the immediately following friday, during the summer school holidays in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, for 21 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 5 january at 6.00pm until 26 january at 5.00pm or 5.00pm on the day before x is due to commence term 1, during the summer school holidays in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, for 21 days to be agreed in writing between the parties but, failing such agreement, from 5.00pm on the last day that x is required to attend school until 5.00pm on the 22nd day thereafter, (ii) once x turns 12 years of age: for the autumn, winter, spring and summer school holidays commencing 2029 and each alternate year thereafter, for the first half to be agreed in writing by the parties but, failing agreement, from the first saturday after the last day of the preceding term at 2.00pm until the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm, for those commencing in 2030 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half to be agreed in writing by the parties, but, failing agreement, from the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm until the final sunday before the commencement of the following school term at 2.00pm.  ) once x turns 12 years of age: for the autumn, winter, spring and summer school holidays commencing 2029 and each alternate year thereafter, for the first half to be agreed in writing by the parties but, failing agreement, from the first saturday after the last day of the preceding term at 2.00pm until the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm, for those commencing in 2030 and each alternate year thereafter, for the second half to be agreed in writing by the parties, but, failing agreement, from the middle sunday of the school holiday period at 2.00pm until the final sunday before the commencement of the following school term at 2.00pm.   with the father: (i) on the father’s day weekend in each year from saturday at 6.00pm until sunday at 6.00pm, (ii) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm, (b) with the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend in each year from saturday at 6.00pm until sunday at 6.00pm, (ii) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, (iii) on the mother’s birthday: if her birthday falls on a school day then on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, if her birthday falls on a non-school day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm. (c) on x’s birthday if such day falls on a school day then with the mother on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, (d) on x’s birthday if such day falls on a non-school day then with the party that she would not otherwise see that day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm,   on the father’s day weekend in each year from saturday at 6.00pm until sunday at 6.00pm, (ii) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm,  ) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm,   with the mother: (i) on the mother’s day weekend in each year from saturday at 6.00pm until sunday at 6.00pm, (ii) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, (iii) on the mother’s birthday: if her birthday falls on a school day then on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, if her birthday falls on a non-school day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm. (c) on x’s birthday if such day falls on a school day then with the mother on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, (d) on x’s birthday if such day falls on a non-school day then with the party that she would not otherwise see that day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm,   on the mother’s day weekend in each year from saturday at 6.00pm until sunday at 6.00pm, (ii) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, (iii) on the mother’s birthday: if her birthday falls on a school day then on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, if her birthday falls on a non-school day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm.  ) at christmas: in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas day at 1.00pm until boxing day at 3.00pm, in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, from christmas eve at 3.00pm until christmas day at 1.00pm, (iii) on the mother’s birthday: if her birthday falls on a school day then on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, if her birthday falls on a non-school day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm.  i) on the mother’s birthday: if her birthday falls on a school day then on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, if her birthday falls on a non-school day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm.   on x’s birthday if such day falls on a school day then with the mother on the immediately following saturday from 11.00am until 3.00pm, (d) on x’s birthday if such day falls on a non-school day then with the party that she would not otherwise see that day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm,   on x’s birthday if such day falls on a non-school day then with the party that she would not otherwise see that day, from 11.00am until 3.00pm,
implementation  the father or his nominee will deliver x to the mother or her nominee at the corner of c street and d street, suburb e in the state of new south wales at the commencement of x spending time with the mother, (b) the mother or her nominee will return x to the father or his nominee at the corner of c street and d street, suburb e in the state of new south wales at the conclusion of x spending time with the mother.   the mother or her nominee will return x to the father or his nominee at the corner of c street and d street, suburb e in the state of new south wales at the conclusion of x spending time with the mother.
telephone and electronic communication  communication will be implemented by the party who is not caring for x at that time by them telephoning a number or otherwise initiating electronic communication with a source to be provided by the other party, such telephone number or source to be provided to the first-mentioned party in writing by 4.00pm monday 20 march 2023, (b) the other party will make x available for such telephone or other electronic communication and will afford x privacy for the duration of any such telephone call or other electronic communication.   the other party will make x available for such telephone or other electronic communication and will afford x privacy for the duration of any such telephone call or other electronic communication.   each of the parties will not prevent x from communicating with the other party pursuant to this order should x wish to do so, (b) each of the parties will afford x privacy for the duration of any such communication.   each of the parties will afford x privacy for the duration of any such communication.
injunctive relief  denigrating the other party, their family or their friends to or in the presence or hearing of x and further will: (i) use their best endeavours to ensure that no one else does so, (ii) immediately remove x from any environment in which such denigration is occurring, (b) discussing these proceedings with x or in her presence, or showing her copies of any documents produced for the purposes of these proceedings, (c) publishing any of the following on social media: (i) negative or derogatory comments about the other party, (ii) any information relating to or arising from these proceedings, (d) enrolling x in an extra-curricular activity that would or is likely to occur during periods where x is living or spending time with the other party without first obtaining the consent of the other party.   use their best endeavours to ensure that no one else does so, (ii) immediately remove x from any environment in which such denigration is occurring,  ) immediately remove x from any environment in which such denigration is occurring,   discussing these proceedings with x or in her presence, or showing her copies of any documents produced for the purposes of these proceedings, (c) publishing any of the following on social media: (i) negative or derogatory comments about the other party, (ii) any information relating to or arising from these proceedings, (d) enrolling x in an extra-curricular activity that would or is likely to occur during periods where x is living or spending time with the other party without first obtaining the consent of the other party.   publishing any of the following on social media: (i) negative or derogatory comments about the other party, (ii) any information relating to or arising from these proceedings, (d) enrolling x in an extra-curricular activity that would or is likely to occur during periods where x is living or spending time with the other party without first obtaining the consent of the other party.   negative or derogatory comments about the other party, (ii) any information relating to or arising from these proceedings,  ) any information relating to or arising from these proceedings,   enrolling x in an extra-curricular activity that would or is likely to occur during periods where x is living or spending time with the other party without first obtaining the consent of the other party.   intentionally or knowingly bringing x into contact with, or in the presence of mr f born in 1990, and/or (b) otherwise intentionally or knowingly permitting x to remain in contact with, or in the presence of mr f born in 1990.   otherwise intentionally or knowingly permitting x to remain in contact with, or in the presence of mr f born in 1990.
professionals information and authority order  each of the parties will immediately notify the other of the names and contact details of the relevant education, health, welfare or other professional and advise the other party in writing of any changes to those details within seven (7) days of such a change, (b) within seven (7) days from a written request by one party, the other party will do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be reasonably necessary from time to time to allow the first-named party to exercise their entitlements under this order.   within seven (7) days from a written request by one party, the other party will do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be reasonably necessary from time to time to allow the first-named party to exercise their entitlements under this order.
liberty to attend
notification order  any serious medical problems or serious illnesses suffered by x whilst in their care, (b) x being hospitalised, (c) x being: (i) prescribed medication which is to be taken during x’s time with the other party, including the name of the medication and the dosage, (ii) given medication within 24 hours prior to x moving into the other party’s care, (d) any social, school or religious functions to which x is to attend or which otherwise relate to x, (e) x being involved in an accident.   x being hospitalised, (c) x being: (i) prescribed medication which is to be taken during x’s time with the other party, including the name of the medication and the dosage, (ii) given medication within 24 hours prior to x moving into the other party’s care, (d) any social, school or religious functions to which x is to attend or which otherwise relate to x, (e) x being involved in an accident.   x being: (i) prescribed medication which is to be taken during x’s time with the other party, including the name of the medication and the dosage, (ii) given medication within 24 hours prior to x moving into the other party’s care, (d) any social, school or religious functions to which x is to attend or which otherwise relate to x, (e) x being involved in an accident.   prescribed medication which is to be taken during x’s time with the other party, including the name of the medication and the dosage, (ii) given medication within 24 hours prior to x moving into the other party’s care,  ) given medication within 24 hours prior to x moving into the other party’s care,   any social, school or religious functions to which x is to attend or which otherwise relate to x, (e) x being involved in an accident.   x being involved in an accident.
change of details order
liberty to communicate with the other party  the implementation of these orders, (b) x’s welfare.   x’s welfare.
other orders
it is further ordered that:
it is noted that:
reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction
precis  x will live with the father, (b) the parents will have equal shared parental responsibility, (c) x will spend less than substantial and significant time with the mother each alternate friday to sunday and during school holidays, (d) the mother and the father will be the subject of various injunctive restraints, (e) the mother will be restrained from allowing x to come into contact with her partner, and (f) the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.   the parents will have equal shared parental responsibility, (c) x will spend less than substantial and significant time with the mother each alternate friday to sunday and during school holidays, (d) the mother and the father will be the subject of various injunctive restraints, (e) the mother will be restrained from allowing x to come into contact with her partner, and (f) the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.   x will spend less than substantial and significant time with the mother each alternate friday to sunday and during school holidays, (d) the mother and the father will be the subject of various injunctive restraints, (e) the mother will be restrained from allowing x to come into contact with her partner, and (f) the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.   the mother and the father will be the subject of various injunctive restraints, (e) the mother will be restrained from allowing x to come into contact with her partner, and (f) the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.   the mother will be restrained from allowing x to come into contact with her partner, and (f) the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.   the father will pay the icl’s costs of about $4,700 by way of fortnightly instalments of $100.
the applicable law – parenting proceedings  assess whether that risk is an acceptable risk or an unacceptable risk, (2) if it is assessed that it is an unacceptable risk, assess whether or not the risk can be mitigated by appropriate orders, and (3) decide what orders are proper in all the circumstances in the best interests of the child.   unacceptable risk does not necessarily just arise solely in respect of allegations of physical and sexual abuse, (b) the test of unacceptable risk also requires assessments of risk of future physical and emotional harm – see a v a [1998] famca 25, [1998] flc 92-800 at 84,996 and m & m [1988] 166 clr 69 at 77, (c) an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and wellbeing of a child and examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved – see director-general, department of family and community services (new south wales) v the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at 146 to 148.   the test of unacceptable risk also requires assessments of risk of future physical and emotional harm – see a v a [1998] famca 25, [1998] flc 92-800 at 84,996 and m & m [1988] 166 clr 69 at 77, (c) an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and wellbeing of a child and examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved – see director-general, department of family and community services (new south wales) v the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at 146 to 148.   an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the safety, welfare and wellbeing of a child and examined in light of an accumulation of factors proved – see director-general, department of family and community services (new south wales) v the colt children [2013] nswchc 5 at 146 to 148.
... violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member) or causes the family member to be fearful.   whether it is advisable and reasonably practicable for a child to live equally with each of their parents or, alternatively, (b) to live with one parent and spend “substantial and significant time” with the other.   to live with one parent and spend “substantial and significant time” with the other.   is it in the best interests of a child to spend equal or substantial and significant time with each parent pursuant to s 60cc and, secondly, (b) whether it is reasonably practicable for the child to spend equal (or substantial and significant) time with each parent pursuant to s 65daa(5).   whether it is reasonably practicable for the child to spend equal (or substantial and significant) time with each parent pursuant to s 65daa(5).
...... the reality of the situation of parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that there be equal time spent by the child with each parent. the presumption in section 61da(1) is not determinative of the questions arising under section 65daa(1). section 65daa(1)(b) requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is feasible.
the evidence  seeking to attribute blame to the father for her inability to get x to school or medical appointments and, (b) seeking to minimise her relationship with mr f and/or the family violence risk that mr f posed.   seeking to minimise her relationship with mr f and/or the family violence risk that mr f posed.
the parties’ proposals
chronology  is 4 years old and has no developmental issues apart from concerns in regards to some speech issues. a speech assessment is planned to occur soon for her in order to assess whether she needs extra support...
.... defended (mr f)’s actions, stating that she caused this in a way as she bit him. the mother described the incident as “a heavy disagreement” (and then explained) that the avo was applied for by police, which they (the two of them had then) applied to vary in july 2022 to allow contact as they decided to resume their relationship.
the mother reported that [x] experiences some speech and language delay, which has been identified by the school. the mother reported that she had sought the father’s assistance with engaging [x] in speech and language therapy, due to her limited capacity in meeting the daily needs for all three children. ....
... the father denied having made any attempts to ensure this need was met, explaining that he did not realise he could make appointments for [x] as she is not in his primary care.
it appears that the mother struggles to meet the competing demands of caring for three children, two of which have been diagnosed with developmental disorders. the mother reported to disconnect and “neglect” the children’s basic emotional and physical needs during times of mental health crisis, which was apparent in the subpoena records of [o contact centre].
the parents’ co-parenting relationship (has) improved in recent times, however there is concern that the father may continue to attempt to communicate with the mother...... (attempts to communicate with the mother will be constrained by the advo).  ra-phrasing)
in the event that this information indicates –
and “information” i mean educational information:
in the event that this information indicates considerable absenteeism and any other concerns related to the mother’s parenting capacity, it is recommended that [x] spend more time in the care of the father to improve her educational outcomes. maintenance of the siblings’ relationships in the care of the mother is an important factor to be considered, and weight should be placed upon this in consideration of the time spent in the care of the mother.
and the court child expert said that priority had to be given to safety for x. so, yes, my memory is now that it was all about the family violence more than anything else.
in 2020, i started (to) become closer with a good friend of mine named [mr f]. and just for the record, this was, i think, the third time that the mother had been in some sort of romantic relationship with [mr f] over the duration of her life: in 2020, we started unofficially dating and by [mid 2020] we had realised that due to (the father’s) reactions, we were not going to remain in a relationship. we are currently friends only.   firstly, she is doing her best, but needs the father to “step up” and help her ensure x gets to school and attends appointments with medical and allied health treators, because she, as in the mother, cannot drive and, right now, she is struggling to manage her own appointments, g’s appointments and then, on top of that, the appointments – i heard that the appointments required for the other younger children plus getting x to school - even walking to school for g was unsafe for all three children because of his flighty nature and the busy arterial road that they have to walk along. (b) secondly, x’s poor attendance at school in semester 1, 2022, had not been replicated in semester 2, 2022, nor in semester 1, 2023 to date, which was recorded as three whole days’ absence and one partial. i cannot accept that this “improvement” demonstrates a renewed capacity for the mother to ensure x goes to school, because i think we are probably half way through the semester and x has already missed three days. in addition, although x’s report cards do not on their face demonstrate an adverse effect from her absences, i have had serious regard to the other consequences of irregular or inconsistent attendances, as opined by the court child expert, such as poor outcomes for her social development. (c) thirdly, the reason why there was a blow-up between the mother and mr f in december 2021 was generated, at least in part, by what the mother said was the father “putting something into mr f’s head” and in submissions, i heard from her counsel that “binge drinking” was involved in what was described a “mutual incident” between the mother and mr f. (d) fourthly, the mother smokes marijuana at night, after the children are in bed and in a separate area to the house, about four or five times a fortnight to manage symptoms of anxiety and her mental health diagnosis. (e) fifthly, almost invariably, the mother sought to attribute blame on the father for her inability to have x’s needs met, saying things like, “i am the overloaded parent,” or, “the father is not able to step up.” (f) finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   secondly, x’s poor attendance at school in semester 1, 2022, had not been replicated in semester 2, 2022, nor in semester 1, 2023 to date, which was recorded as three whole days’ absence and one partial. i cannot accept that this “improvement” demonstrates a renewed capacity for the mother to ensure x goes to school, because i think we are probably half way through the semester and x has already missed three days. in addition, although x’s report cards do not on their face demonstrate an adverse effect from her absences, i have had serious regard to the other consequences of irregular or inconsistent attendances, as opined by the court child expert, such as poor outcomes for her social development. (c) thirdly, the reason why there was a blow-up between the mother and mr f in december 2021 was generated, at least in part, by what the mother said was the father “putting something into mr f’s head” and in submissions, i heard from her counsel that “binge drinking” was involved in what was described a “mutual incident” between the mother and mr f. (d) fourthly, the mother smokes marijuana at night, after the children are in bed and in a separate area to the house, about four or five times a fortnight to manage symptoms of anxiety and her mental health diagnosis. (e) fifthly, almost invariably, the mother sought to attribute blame on the father for her inability to have x’s needs met, saying things like, “i am the overloaded parent,” or, “the father is not able to step up.” (f) finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   thirdly, the reason why there was a blow-up between the mother and mr f in december 2021 was generated, at least in part, by what the mother said was the father “putting something into mr f’s head” and in submissions, i heard from her counsel that “binge drinking” was involved in what was described a “mutual incident” between the mother and mr f. (d) fourthly, the mother smokes marijuana at night, after the children are in bed and in a separate area to the house, about four or five times a fortnight to manage symptoms of anxiety and her mental health diagnosis. (e) fifthly, almost invariably, the mother sought to attribute blame on the father for her inability to have x’s needs met, saying things like, “i am the overloaded parent,” or, “the father is not able to step up.” (f) finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   fourthly, the mother smokes marijuana at night, after the children are in bed and in a separate area to the house, about four or five times a fortnight to manage symptoms of anxiety and her mental health diagnosis. (e) fifthly, almost invariably, the mother sought to attribute blame on the father for her inability to have x’s needs met, saying things like, “i am the overloaded parent,” or, “the father is not able to step up.” (f) finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   fifthly, almost invariably, the mother sought to attribute blame on the father for her inability to have x’s needs met, saying things like, “i am the overloaded parent,” or, “the father is not able to step up.” (f) finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   finally, other than the father stepping up, the mother had no plan about how she would ensure x attended the audiologist and speech pathology appointments that she had received a referral for over two months earlier.   mr f perpetrated family violence upon the mother (and exposed the children to such violence) in december 2021, (b) mr f is or was a listed person of interest in two advos, one protecting the mother and one protecting his former partner, ms r, and he is also the victim on a third advo, (c) mr f has breached the advo protecting him and the mother by either allowing the mother to come within 100 metres of his house and/or him coming within 200 metres of the mother’s house, (where x and her half-brothers live), (d) mr f did attempt self-harm through overdosing on sleeping pills in 2020, (e) mr f has been less than frank with the mother about his antecedents.   mr f is or was a listed person of interest in two advos, one protecting the mother and one protecting his former partner, ms r, and he is also the victim on a third advo, (c) mr f has breached the advo protecting him and the mother by either allowing the mother to come within 100 metres of his house and/or him coming within 200 metres of the mother’s house, (where x and her half-brothers live), (d) mr f did attempt self-harm through overdosing on sleeping pills in 2020, (e) mr f has been less than frank with the mother about his antecedents.   mr f has breached the advo protecting him and the mother by either allowing the mother to come within 100 metres of his house and/or him coming within 200 metres of the mother’s house, (where x and her half-brothers live), (d) mr f did attempt self-harm through overdosing on sleeping pills in 2020, (e) mr f has been less than frank with the mother about his antecedents.   mr f did attempt self-harm through overdosing on sleeping pills in 2020, (e) mr f has been less than frank with the mother about his antecedents.   mr f has been less than frank with the mother about his antecedents.
analysis – parenting proceedings
the primary considerations  there was no evidence that the father’s drug use impairs his capacity, but certainly, it is very poor role modelling and should be stopped as soon as possible, (b) the family violence perpetrated by the father was confined to a limited period of time in the same year as the parents separated or thereabouts, (c) the father is managing his mental health in line with the advice of his doctor, except for his consumption of marijuana. with that said, there is no evidence that his parenting capacity has been impaired, (d) the father has felt constrained in liaising with the mother about issues to do with x because he naively thought that he had no say, given x lived with the mother and/or he was acting cautiously given the mother’s previous reporting to police about his communication with her breaching the advo which has since expired.   the family violence perpetrated by the father was confined to a limited period of time in the same year as the parents separated or thereabouts, (c) the father is managing his mental health in line with the advice of his doctor, except for his consumption of marijuana. with that said, there is no evidence that his parenting capacity has been impaired, (d) the father has felt constrained in liaising with the mother about issues to do with x because he naively thought that he had no say, given x lived with the mother and/or he was acting cautiously given the mother’s previous reporting to police about his communication with her breaching the advo which has since expired.   the father is managing his mental health in line with the advice of his doctor, except for his consumption of marijuana. with that said, there is no evidence that his parenting capacity has been impaired, (d) the father has felt constrained in liaising with the mother about issues to do with x because he naively thought that he had no say, given x lived with the mother and/or he was acting cautiously given the mother’s previous reporting to police about his communication with her breaching the advo which has since expired.   the father has felt constrained in liaising with the mother about issues to do with x because he naively thought that he had no say, given x lived with the mother and/or he was acting cautiously given the mother’s previous reporting to police about his communication with her breaching the advo which has since expired.   the mother’s parental capacity being impaired because she has no driver’s licence, and cannot consistently rely on others to drive her to medical and other appointments, for the management of her diagnoses, but also for g, and now for x. (b) the mother’s capacity to provide for the basic needs of x being so impaired that it is open for a finding of neglect to be made, given x’s poor attendance record at school which, in part, appears to arise from failure in her own insight about how her own poor history of school attendance has impacted her outcomes. (c) next, the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s developmental needs being impaired to the extent that, at the very least, x has not had the benefit of two referrals made in december 2022, which were aimed at assisting in managing x’s long-standing speech impairment. (d) the mother’s parenting capacity being impaired because of a lack of supports to assist manage the difficult behaviours displayed by g, which has led to x “falling through the cracks”, and the mother feeling “overwhelmed” or “overburdened”. (e) the mother’s capacity to act protectively to ensure that x is, at the very least, not exposed to family violence in circumstances where: (i) every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.   the mother’s capacity to provide for the basic needs of x being so impaired that it is open for a finding of neglect to be made, given x’s poor attendance record at school which, in part, appears to arise from failure in her own insight about how her own poor history of school attendance has impacted her outcomes. (c) next, the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s developmental needs being impaired to the extent that, at the very least, x has not had the benefit of two referrals made in december 2022, which were aimed at assisting in managing x’s long-standing speech impairment. (d) the mother’s parenting capacity being impaired because of a lack of supports to assist manage the difficult behaviours displayed by g, which has led to x “falling through the cracks”, and the mother feeling “overwhelmed” or “overburdened”. (e) the mother’s capacity to act protectively to ensure that x is, at the very least, not exposed to family violence in circumstances where: (i) every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.   next, the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s developmental needs being impaired to the extent that, at the very least, x has not had the benefit of two referrals made in december 2022, which were aimed at assisting in managing x’s long-standing speech impairment. (d) the mother’s parenting capacity being impaired because of a lack of supports to assist manage the difficult behaviours displayed by g, which has led to x “falling through the cracks”, and the mother feeling “overwhelmed” or “overburdened”. (e) the mother’s capacity to act protectively to ensure that x is, at the very least, not exposed to family violence in circumstances where: (i) every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.   the mother’s parenting capacity being impaired because of a lack of supports to assist manage the difficult behaviours displayed by g, which has led to x “falling through the cracks”, and the mother feeling “overwhelmed” or “overburdened”. (e) the mother’s capacity to act protectively to ensure that x is, at the very least, not exposed to family violence in circumstances where: (i) every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.   the mother’s capacity to act protectively to ensure that x is, at the very least, not exposed to family violence in circumstances where: (i) every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.   every intimate relationship the mother has had has involved an advo being made for her protection and yet, despite that protection, the mother has continued to engage in communication, which has either led to or raised the risk of the children being exposed to family violence, with the latest example being that despite the protection of an advo, the mother is currently breaching the advo against mr f, by allowing him into her home where the children live, and vice versa, (ii) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.  ) the mother appears to me to be minimising mr f’s behaviours, and seemingly wanting to cast blame on either the father or herself, for mr f’s acts of violence against her in december 2021.
the additional considerations
conclusion - equal time or substantial & significant time?
equal time   she continued to say that getting x to school either on time or at all would be subject to g not having a bad day, (b) she would have to rely on others to drive her to appointments for x, such as the father and/or mr f. (c) she appeared incapable of complying with an existing family violence order aimed at ensuring that she not be near or inside a home where mr f was also present and the prying eyes of the community were shuttered.   she would have to rely on others to drive her to appointments for x, such as the father and/or mr f. (c) she appeared incapable of complying with an existing family violence order aimed at ensuring that she not be near or inside a home where mr f was also present and the prying eyes of the community were shuttered.   she appeared incapable of complying with an existing family violence order aimed at ensuring that she not be near or inside a home where mr f was also present and the prying eyes of the community were shuttered.
substantial and significant time
conclusion – is it reasonably practicable?
conclusion – less than substantial and significant time
conclusion
the applicable law, analysis & conclusion – costs  the father takes home $800 per week and has funded his legal representation. the father says that, if the court were minded to make a costs order, he could afford to pay $100 per fortnight. (b) the father initially did not support the orders ultimately made by the court, but by the last day of the trial, he had changed his position.   the father initially did not support the orders ultimately made by the court, but by the last day of the trial, he had changed his position.
associate: dated: 20 april 2023
dated: 20 april 2023