last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cresswell & conroy [2023] fedcfamc2f 274
orders
the court orders that:
parenting  advise the applicant mother and if practicable provide the mother with 14 days’ notice of his intended decision, (b) invite and take into consideration any view expressed by the mother, and (c) thereafter inform the mother in writing of any decision made.   invite and take into consideration any view expressed by the mother, and (c) thereafter inform the mother in writing of any decision made.   thereafter inform the mother in writing of any decision made.   until the conclusion of term 1 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on 18 march 2023, and each saturday thereafter, from 10am until 5pm. (b) during the school holidays at the end of term 1 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on easter tuesday, 11 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 13 april 2023, and (ii) from 10am on tuesday, 18 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 20 april 2023. (c) during term 2 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 april 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am to 5pm on saturday, and from 10am to 5pm on sunday (with no overnight time in between). (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on tuesday, 11 july 2023 until 10am on saturday, 15 july 2023. (e) during term 3 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday. (f) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   commencing on 18 march 2023, and each saturday thereafter, from 10am until 5pm.   during the school holidays at the end of term 1 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on easter tuesday, 11 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 13 april 2023, and (ii) from 10am on tuesday, 18 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 20 april 2023. (c) during term 2 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 april 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am to 5pm on saturday, and from 10am to 5pm on sunday (with no overnight time in between). (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on tuesday, 11 july 2023 until 10am on saturday, 15 july 2023. (e) during term 3 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday. (f) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   from 10am on easter tuesday, 11 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 13 april 2023, and (ii) from 10am on tuesday, 18 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 20 april 2023.  ) from 10am on tuesday, 18 april 2023 until 10am on thursday, 20 april 2023.   during term 2 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 april 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am to 5pm on saturday, and from 10am to 5pm on sunday (with no overnight time in between). (d) during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on tuesday, 11 july 2023 until 10am on saturday, 15 july 2023. (e) during term 3 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday. (f) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   commencing on saturday, 29 april 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am to 5pm on saturday, and from 10am to 5pm on sunday (with no overnight time in between).   during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 10am on tuesday, 11 july 2023 until 10am on saturday, 15 july 2023. (e) during term 3 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday. (f) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   from 10am on tuesday, 11 july 2023 until 10am on saturday, 15 july 2023.   during term 3 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday. (f) during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   commencing on saturday, 29 july 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from 10am on saturday to 5pm on sunday.   during the school holidays at the end of term 3 in the 2023 school year: (i) from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023. (g) during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   from 5pm on the last day of school until 10am on friday, 29 september 2023.   during term 4 in the 2023 school year as follows: (i) commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday. (h) during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   commencing on friday, 13 october 2023 and each alternate weekend thereafter from after school on friday to 5pm on sunday.   during the school holidays at the end of term 4 in the 2023 school year: (i) in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period. (i) from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   in alternating periods of seven (7) nights by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement for the first seven (7) nights and in alternating weeks thereafter until the conclusion of the school holiday period.   from the commencement of the 2024 school year: (i) during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years. (j) in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   during school term: commencing on the second friday of each school term from after school on friday to before school on monday each alternate week. (ii) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.  ) during school holidays: for half of each school holiday period by agreement between the parties and in the absence of such agreement during the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.   in the event that mother’s day does not fall on a weekend when the child would otherwise be spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders from 10am to 5pm on mother’s day. (k) at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.   at such other times and dates and for such other periods as agreed to by the parties in writing.
property  the applicant pay the respondent the sum of $52,426, (b) the parties do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents so as to discharge the mortgage on the b street, city c property, and (c) the respondent do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents so as to indemnify the applicant for all outgoings and liabilities associated with the b street, city c property.   the parties do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents so as to discharge the mortgage on the b street, city c property, and (c) the respondent do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents so as to indemnify the applicant for all outgoings and liabilities associated with the b street, city c property.   the respondent do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents so as to indemnify the applicant for all outgoings and liabilities associated with the b street, city c property.   the property situated at d street, city c, nsw and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ... (d street, city c property), (b) the property situated at e street, town f and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ... (e street, town f property), and (c) the property situated at g street, town h nsw (“g street, town h property”) and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ....   the property situated at e street, town f and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ... (e street, town f property), and (c) the property situated at g street, town h nsw (“g street, town h property”) and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ....   the property situated at g street, town h nsw (“g street, town h property”) and being the whole of the land contained in title reference ....   all items of personality in their respective possession, custody and control, (b) any funds , shares, or other investments standing in any bank account in their name, and (c) any superannuation fund in an account in their name.   any funds , shares, or other investments standing in any bank account in their name, and (c) any superannuation fund in an account in their name.   any superannuation fund in an account in their name.
reasons for judgment
amended pursuant to r.10.14(b) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 20021 (cth) on 02 may 2023
judge obradovic:
introduction
in a nutshell  in 2013, the property at d street, city c, (“d street, city c”) was purchased for $240,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name. (b) in 2013, the parties as joint tenants purchased the property at b street, city c, (“b street, city c”) for $187,000. (c) in 2016, the property at e street, town f (“e street, town f property”) was purchased for $340,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[6] (d) in 2018, the property g street, town h (“g street, town h property”) was purchased for $135,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[7]   in 2013, the parties as joint tenants purchased the property at b street, city c, (“b street, city c”) for $187,000. (c) in 2016, the property at e street, town f (“e street, town f property”) was purchased for $340,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[6] (d) in 2018, the property g street, town h (“g street, town h property”) was purchased for $135,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[7]   in 2016, the property at e street, town f (“e street, town f property”) was purchased for $340,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[6] (d) in 2018, the property g street, town h (“g street, town h property”) was purchased for $135,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[7]   in 2018, the property g street, town h (“g street, town h property”) was purchased for $135,000 in ms cresswell’s sole name.[7]
evidence
mother’s case
father’s case
expert evidence
credit
findings of fact
the parties and their relationship
allegations of violence
apprehended domestic violence order
mother’s mental health and behaviour in court
counsel for father: now, you know that you travelled to [city aj] as a family in 2015. you know that don’t you? [ms cresswell]: ’15. is it school holidays? is it term? i cannot recall. counsel for father: your child is one year and three months old in 2015. you travelled on an aeroplane with [mr conroy] and with [x] to [city aj]? [ms cresswell]: ms breeze, i cannot recall. counsel for father: i’m putting it to you very seriously, ma’am, that you are lying to the court? [ms cresswell]: back off her honour: is that your answer? back off? [ms cresswell]: i said i cannot recall. her honour: is that your answer? [ms cresswell]: my apologies your honour. her honour: there is no need to apologise to me. i’m just asking whether that’s your answer, “back off”, or did i mishear? [ms cresswell]: i think you misheard and i – yes. her honour: all right. i will go back and listen to the recording.[9]   cresswell]: yes. i would just like to apologise to ms breeze for telling her to “back off”. i would just like to apologies to my family because they have been so supportive, and i’ve been such a bitch. i haven’t .... and one more thing. to my friends, if i still have any, thank you.[10]
counsel for father: all right. you sent him a message saying, “how do i know this is your actual roster”? [ms cresswell]: well, i had ever seen a [employer ah] roster before, so they – i can question whether or not – i hadn’t seen back then whether it was a [employer ah] roster or not. i hadn’t had that experience of knowing what they look like. counsel for father: and, on that basis, you felt that you were justified in not making [x] available to spend time with his father on the rostered days off in the roster? [ms cresswell]: ms breeze, what are you asking me to do? comply with the orders or – or – or not? i-i’m confused, because i was trying to comply with the orders. again, can we please move forward? this isn’t resolving this issue. the issue is [x] seeing his mum, who hasn’t seen him for quite some time, and he’s on supervision. can we move forward? and if you are not going to move forward to resolve this, i would like to speak to the icl. counsel for father: all right. your honour... [ms cresswell]: what has happened in the past, is the past. move forward. you are holding us here. you. i’ve been here all day. i will give you 15 more minutes to ask what you want to ask because my son – i have no idea where he is, who he’s with or what he is doing. now, i would like – i have a team here, sitting there twiddling their thumbs, who are experienced, have qualifications and probably, combined, 50 years experience, which is more than you. do you have icl background? do you? move forward. 10 minutes, both of you. i’m cross. i’m angry. i’ve bent over backwards for this man. i love my son [x] and he loves his father. let’s set up a plan. get me the icl now. counsel for father: i’m in the court’s hands, you honour.[11]
her honour: if you [ms houghton] need to take instructions, ask to be excused. i have been watching you on the screen for the last three days, and you have been talking for a significant amount of time to somebody who’s in the room with you. now, you may well take instructions as and when appropriate, but i do need you to pay attention to this please. counsel for mother: i apologise. her honour: because when i have asked you things in the past, you haven’t been listening. it’s important that you listen. ms breeze. counsel for father: thank you, your honour. i need to take instructions from my client about the prospects of an expert report. her honour: right. counsel for father: and, your honour, if it was ... [ms cresswell]: your honour, sorry to interrupt. her honour: [ms cresswell]: [ms cresswell]: can i please talk to elizabeth her honour: ms stollier? [ms cresswell]: yes. her honour: you will need to talk to your instructor about that – sorry, to mr aq about that. all right. [ms cresswell]: i need to talk to her about [x] ... her honour: just a minute, [ms cresswell]. just a minute, please. just a minute. what i will do is, ms haughton, feel free to speak to your client about anything that you need to talk to her about to take instructions and whether that includes speaking to the independent children’s lawyer. i’m not sure what [ms cresswell] wants to do. [...].[12]
expert evidence as to the mother’s mental health
report by dr j, psychologist (2019)
throughout our sessions, [the mother] has presented as appropriately concerned about her circumstances and aware of the complexities of the legal pursuits. this has been nonetheless profoundly confronting, and i am aware of at least one further episode of acute stress reaction which prompted supportive family members to seek urgent medical advice. [the mother] has good support from her family and this, as well as the support of clinicians – [...] – will continue to help build up her coping skills in managing the challenges around court proceedings, liaison with [the father], and her care of [the child].
first expert report by dr k (2019)
i formed the view that there is every indication that [the mother] is a capable caring parent. there is no indication that she is an unacceptable risk of [sic] the child. the only possible concern is that [the mother] at times of extreme stress may have a vulnerability to developing a brief psychotic episode. i am not in a position to make any specific recommendations regarding contact or residence. i have not assessed the father or the child on this occasion, therefore i do not have a direct opinion of the other important adults in this child's life. it is my view that if the court decided to restore residence to [the mother] that this should probably be done in a gradual way over perhaps six months where there is a transition from supervised to unsupervised then from day contact to residence. i do believe that the mother is capable of promoting a relationship between [the child] and the father. i am aware that in the acute phase of the illness that [the mother] was quite confused and incoherent. however, she appears to have recovered from her brief psychotic reaction. in the interview process, i found no direct evidence of anxiety, depression or mental illness. the main feature appeared to be extreme fragility.[21]   cresswell] experienced a brief psychotic disorder as outlined above and has now made a complete recovery which will not impact on the child. i believe that [ms cresswell] understands how to provide for the biological, psychological and social needs of the child. there is no indication that she would have difficulty parenting the child. i formed the view that there is every indication that [ms cresswell] is a capable caring parent. there is no indication that she is an unacceptable risk of the child. i believe [ms cresswell] wishes to promote a relationship between the child and the father as she reported to me at interview.[22]
second expert report by dr k (2020)
with regard to [the mother’s] capacity to provide instructions as to how her case is conducted including negotiation versus settlement, i believe that she has the capacity to represent herself and indicate her wishes. i believe she understands the process of the court. she understands that the judge can make decisions. [the mother] understands that she needs to be able to give clear instructions to counsel. i believe she understands the purpose of the court and the potential outcomes from the court. i believe [the mother] does have the capacity to provide instructions as to how to conduct her case. in relation to the ability to participate in proceedings, i believe that [the mother] would be quite capable of entering the witness box and answering questions and to be cross-examined by the father's legal representative. in relation to being able to endure and withstand such cross-examination, i am not concerned that it would be likely that there would be a recurrence of such an event as happened in february 2019. there may be some provision for there to be some breaks and if [the mother] does feel overly stressed during such proceedings, there may be a possibility for there to be some consideration to the fact that she has found this experience extremely stressful previously. however, on balance, i formed the view that it is unlikely that such a reaction would reoccur. as indicated above, 91% of individuals with a brief reactive psychosis do not have a recurrence of the reactive psychosis.[23]
in essence, based on the fact that [the mother] was caring for [the child] competently for the first few years of his life, i can see no objection or reason for [the mother] not resume primary care of the child. i am not the family reporter, therefore i do not have any particular view about what the parenting and contact arrangements should be, however, i believe that [the mother] would be capable of taking over full-time care of [the child] if the court deemed this appropriate.[24]
oral evidence of dr k
well, it would depend on the nature of the repeat episode or repeat crisis. if the repeat episode is deemed another psychotic episode which was similar in form to the previous one, then one would have to start questioning whether or not there was a – more likely, an ongoing psychotic process or condition such as a bipolar disorder or schizophrenia. although, it is possible to, perhaps, have another acute stress induced psychotic episode that’s another ..... reactive psychosis. but it becomes less likely once one had more than one episode. the other possibility is an acute ..... type episode or acute stress reaction that’s not psychotic in nature. but, without knowing exactly what other episodes she may have had, i’m not able to make any comment. although it was denied that she had anything when i saw her in february[25]
i am aware that she was probably unwell for a period of time over the course of the hearing last february – this culminated in, i think – on what – the last day of the court hearing where she wasn’t able to continue as far as i’m aware. so – but the fact that she feels as though the last day was the bad day and not earlier doesn’t necessarily – isn’t really a game changer in terms of whether or not she has had an acute reactive psychosis.[26]   possible medical explanation if she’s giving incorrect answers is that she might be distracted or not be understanding what’s going on in her environment. it was quite clear that – to me – that she described how she felt a sense of being disconnected with what was happening and that she felt that – she believed that there were bad things happening in the court room and that – what things were happening to people in the environment where she was at the court. so it’s possible that she wasn’t able to answer clearly what was going on. but whether she was intentionally giving wrong information about the school, i can’t say specifically.[28]
i formed the view that – based on the [p] hospital notes, that there was – the impression was an acute stress reaction and that it was not believed that there was an ongoing psychotic illness. and then that was confirmed by [dr ar] who did an assessment a month later or several weeks later.[30]
yes, it could be that the fact that she lost the direct care of [x] may have also precipitated an acute stress reaction. that’s a possibility. however, it does appear that she was quite incoherent and she did describe having what appeared to be psychotic type symptoms during the court proceedings. such as, she reported to me that she felt like the father’s barrister was speaking like she had helium in her voice and other odd things – that she thought she recognised people in the court whom she had never seen before. so they’re – it did suggest to me that the psychotic process, if i accept that – that it was occurring before the end of the court proceedings that week.[31]
if the dishonesty was to try and provide a positive spin and give her – give it more of a bolstering of her overall health and, perhaps, minimising some of the negatives – then, i guess that happens all the time and that’s, you know, within the bounds of, perhaps, normality in – in this situation. if there’s clear and fragrant [sic] non-disclosure of critical important events and – and how things unfolded, then that might reflect more of a tendency to not provide the truth. and that would be, i think, a different scenario.[32]
third expert report by dr k (2021) e mother] had not had any previous mental health problems and had been high functioning. [the mother] suffered an acute psychotic episode which appeared to result from the stress of being under cross-examination on the third day of cross-examination at the family court in february 2019. she was admitted to hospital and dr ar diagnosed an acute stress reaction on 29/4/2019. [the mother] appeared to make a complete recovery. at the time of the first psychotic episode she was hallucinating, confused, misidentified people and believed that someone was shooting a gun at her. i formed the view that her previous diagnosis was consistent with a brief reactive psychosis following which she was functioning well. i noted that this diagnosis was consistent with dsm 5 category, as at page 95 of my previous report.[33]
at [p] hospital it was noted she was discharged on 17/12/20 with a diagnosis of acute stress reaction and also possible disassociation. the case manager, [ms as], on 25/11/20 noted that she was taking [medication] 10mg at the time. the admission notes indicate she was admitted from 12/11/20 and then discharged on 18/11/2020. the entry notes by [ms at], registered nurse, on 12/11/20 noted she had been wandering and unable to redirected [sic] and had a vacant look. [dr au] on 12/11/20 noted that she wanted to be cleansed of demons that she felt were occupying her home, and she was given [medication]. on 13/11/20 [the mother] was delusional and disorganised. [the mother] wanted the staff to get rid of some demons in her room at that time. [dr av] noted there were persecutory delusions and it did appear that the court case was the trigger. [dr aw], psychiatrist, and [dr ax], noted on 12/11/20 there was an acute stress reaction and possibly a dissociative reaction.[35]
even though [the mother] has now experienced two brief psychotic episodes, in my view if the court decided it was in the child’s best interests to restore care to [the mother], the condition would not prevent [the mother] from being able to care for a child, as i believe that her parenting capacity is intact. due to the fact there have now been two episodes, i would recommend [the mother] consult a psychiatrist for monitoring of her mental status and to implement some preventative management for future stressful events, such as potential prophylactic medication and therapeutic support at the time of cross examination with her.[36]
in essence [the mother] has had another brief psychotic episode. this does not change her condition or her prognosis. in my report dated 23/8/19, i formed the view that [the mother] was suffering from a brief reactive psychosis.[37]
i remain of the view that the brief psychotic disorder should not prevent [the mother] from being able to understand and care for a child except for the brief episode when she was unwell, [the mother] would be able to fulfil the full role of caring for her child and managing the biological, psychological and social needs of the child. therefore, i believe that her parenting capacity is intact and that she could care for the child. the only caveat is that she could become acutely unwell again if under extreme stress, but this would seem highly unlikely unless there is a predictable stress that occurs. i do believe that [the mother] wants to promote a relationship between the child and the father as she understands that the child needs to have a relationship with the father. as noted in my previous report dated 6/4/20 there as a 91% chance that she would continue to remain well, according to dsm5. the fact that she has had another acute stress reaction or brief psychotic episode, or dissociative reaction still does not cause me concern about her illness. i believe that she would be able to manage and continue to function well as, in general, she will not be exposed to the high stress of a situation, such as cross examination on any regular basis.[38]
recommendations of dr k
5. in relation to [the mother’s] mental health, i believe that there are two forms of treatment that would be helpful. firstly, psychological support such as receiving ongoing supportive psychotherapy to help her make sensible decisions and cope with adversity and stresses, such as what she is receiving currently with her counsellor. this treatment is important and appropriate that should continue over long term with [ms an] or preferably a clinical psychologist. 6. the second form for ensuring her wellbeing over at least the next two years, i would recommend that she see a psychiatrist, perhaps on a 3-monthly basis over the next 2 years as reassurance for both her mental wellbeing and also to ensure that she can be fully involved in the life of [the child]. the court could then feel reassured that if there is ongoing psychiatric involvement this would act to an extent as an insurance policy against any future mental psychotic or dissociative reaction.[39]
x
early care
post separation  x was in ill health (despite an express order being in place at the time, where x must be declared unfit to drive prior to the changeover), (b) the paternal grandmother would arrive at changeover as mr conroy’s nominee, so ms cresswell would refuse to hand over x, (c) ms cresswell had “pre-bookings”, (d) ms cresswell did not accept mr conroy’s availabilities were because he had a rostered day off (“rdo”) or a requested rostered day off (“rrdo”), (e) ms cresswell asserted mr conroy had not provided his available days off, (f) ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   the paternal grandmother would arrive at changeover as mr conroy’s nominee, so ms cresswell would refuse to hand over x, (c) ms cresswell had “pre-bookings”, (d) ms cresswell did not accept mr conroy’s availabilities were because he had a rostered day off (“rdo”) or a requested rostered day off (“rrdo”), (e) ms cresswell asserted mr conroy had not provided his available days off, (f) ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   ms cresswell had “pre-bookings”, (d) ms cresswell did not accept mr conroy’s availabilities were because he had a rostered day off (“rdo”) or a requested rostered day off (“rrdo”), (e) ms cresswell asserted mr conroy had not provided his available days off, (f) ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   ms cresswell did not accept mr conroy’s availabilities were because he had a rostered day off (“rdo”) or a requested rostered day off (“rrdo”), (e) ms cresswell asserted mr conroy had not provided his available days off, (f) ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   ms cresswell asserted mr conroy had not provided his available days off, (f) ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   ms cresswell asserted that x had declined “an overnight”, and (g) ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.   ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s work roster “could be anyone’s roster”.
change of residence and current living arrangements
time post february 2019 orders  that x said to her that he “hated” his dad and wanted to “kill him”, that x also said the following: “i want my dad dead”, and “i hate my dad. i am going to kill him. wish i only had a mum and a nan.” (b) that x appeared “dirty”, with “long finger nails”, “unclean clothes”, “messy hair”, dirt on his face, and scratches and bruises all over his body. accordingly, ms cresswell had to take x to get his hair cut and/or cut his fingernails on numerous occasions. (c) that x would often arrive tired and very hungry, often saying that he had not eaten or only eaten a single sandwich all day. he would on occasion take food with him back to mr conroy’s house. (d) that x had been sick on many occasions to the point where she had to take him to the doctors. this would include fevers, vomiting, nausea, lethargy, dehydration, weakness, etc. ms cresswell contends that mr conroy would fail to take appropriate steps, pre-emptive or otherwise, to ensure x was in good health, including making and taking him to doctors’ appointments. (e) that x began to swear, commonly using the words “idiot”, “stupid”, “fricken”, “fuck”, “fucker” and “fucking”. ms cresswell also alleges that x would say “fuck. f.u.c.k. spells fuck” and “i am going to fuck my mum”. (f) that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x appeared “dirty”, with “long finger nails”, “unclean clothes”, “messy hair”, dirt on his face, and scratches and bruises all over his body. accordingly, ms cresswell had to take x to get his hair cut and/or cut his fingernails on numerous occasions. (c) that x would often arrive tired and very hungry, often saying that he had not eaten or only eaten a single sandwich all day. he would on occasion take food with him back to mr conroy’s house. (d) that x had been sick on many occasions to the point where she had to take him to the doctors. this would include fevers, vomiting, nausea, lethargy, dehydration, weakness, etc. ms cresswell contends that mr conroy would fail to take appropriate steps, pre-emptive or otherwise, to ensure x was in good health, including making and taking him to doctors’ appointments. (e) that x began to swear, commonly using the words “idiot”, “stupid”, “fricken”, “fuck”, “fucker” and “fucking”. ms cresswell also alleges that x would say “fuck. f.u.c.k. spells fuck” and “i am going to fuck my mum”. (f) that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x would often arrive tired and very hungry, often saying that he had not eaten or only eaten a single sandwich all day. he would on occasion take food with him back to mr conroy’s house. (d) that x had been sick on many occasions to the point where she had to take him to the doctors. this would include fevers, vomiting, nausea, lethargy, dehydration, weakness, etc. ms cresswell contends that mr conroy would fail to take appropriate steps, pre-emptive or otherwise, to ensure x was in good health, including making and taking him to doctors’ appointments. (e) that x began to swear, commonly using the words “idiot”, “stupid”, “fricken”, “fuck”, “fucker” and “fucking”. ms cresswell also alleges that x would say “fuck. f.u.c.k. spells fuck” and “i am going to fuck my mum”. (f) that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x had been sick on many occasions to the point where she had to take him to the doctors. this would include fevers, vomiting, nausea, lethargy, dehydration, weakness, etc. ms cresswell contends that mr conroy would fail to take appropriate steps, pre-emptive or otherwise, to ensure x was in good health, including making and taking him to doctors’ appointments. (e) that x began to swear, commonly using the words “idiot”, “stupid”, “fricken”, “fuck”, “fucker” and “fucking”. ms cresswell also alleges that x would say “fuck. f.u.c.k. spells fuck” and “i am going to fuck my mum”. (f) that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x began to swear, commonly using the words “idiot”, “stupid”, “fricken”, “fuck”, “fucker” and “fucking”. ms cresswell also alleges that x would say “fuck. f.u.c.k. spells fuck” and “i am going to fuck my mum”. (f) that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x had a number of disturbing nightmares in this period, including where he would dream of his father dying or being attacked. he would also have nightmares where he was not safe. (g) that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that there were multiple instances where mr conroy did not make x available for changeover, or where mr conroy was late for drop-off and/or pick-up. (h) that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that there was an occasion where x “put [his] finger up [his] bottom” and “smeared the poo on the bath”. x then went on to “put the end of the plug up his penis”. ms cresswell contends that such behaviour was “copied” from the children of mr conroy’s new partner. (i) that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x did not having stable living arrangements whilst he is living with mr conroy, where he sometimes sleeps “on the couch”, or in the “guestroom”, or simply “on a mattress”. (j) that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that x told her he was watching “movies for older people”, which were age inappropriate films. (k) that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.   that mr conroy, or an appropriate person, did not attend important events and/or functions at school to support x.
counsel for father: and is it that – were you frustrated in the morning when you were moving from carpark to carpark with [x]? [ms cresswell]: no, i wasn’t frustrated. the conversation wasn’t going anywhere. [x] was sitting next to me so i had to make sure he was safe. counsel for father: all right. okay. so you say that what you were doing on that morning was trying to make sure that [x] was safe? [ms cresswell]: correct.[49]
x’s attendance at pre-school and school
it is of my educational opinion that [x] attend pre-school this year due to where he falls in the calendar year... now, the tricky decision is with the age rule and i don’t recommend having children in the start of the year.[52]
yes at 3 o’clock [x] will be at [bg school].
her honour: is he attending school, is he? [ms cresswell]: yes. her honour: so you’ve enrolled him in school, have you? [ms cresswell]: yes.[53]
counsel for father: okay. and your evidence at the time to the court was that you had held [x] back for preschool in 2019, wasn’t it? [ms cresswell]: correct. counsel for father: right. and whilst you were giving that evidence to the court, you had, in fact, already enrolled and sent [x] to [bg school] and kindergarten? [ms cresswell]: correct.[55]
expert evidence as to parenting matters
child dispute conference memorandum – mr l (2017)
first family report – mr m (2018)
nothing emerged to indicate that [the father] would harm or neglect [the child] or that the child would be at risk if he were to be with his father overnight. thus, given [the child’s] age and his history of involvement with his father, their overnight involvement would seem to be the next appropriate step, [the mother] concerns notwithstanding. [the mother] has indicated that overnight time might occur when the child starts school, an event that would probably occur in 2019. but, given her claims about [the child’s] father induced anxiety, his adjustment to school, and to overnight time, may be a double burden for him. therefore, it may be more appropriate for [the child] the [sic] adjust to overnights with his father before he starts school. in addition, if the court determines that overnight time occur, [the child] might be offered appropriate child therapy (play therapy) to ease his adjustment.[57]
second family report – ms n (2020)
oral evidence of ms n
expert evidence as to child’s development
paediatric report by dr o (2020)
compliance with orders
counsel for father: ma’am, it’s the case, isn’t it, that you don’t want any time that [x] is to spend with his father to be determined or dependent on any roster that the father has? [ms cresswell]: i’m happy with alternate weekend. counsel for father: okay. and do you accept that if the father’s roster has him [working] on the alternate weekends, that under your proposal [x] would not spend time with his father? [ms cresswell]: no. as there’s negotiation he can forward his roster and then we can work around it and provide time for the father. counsel for father: all right. so, essentially, you will be in charge solely of the spend time arrangements that [x] has with his father? [ms cresswell]: there’s court orders so i have to comply. counsel for father: all right. and if the court orders that – and the court orders that you’re asking the court to make have the father spending alternate weekends with [x] for two nights. that’s right, isn’t it? [ms cresswell]: yes. counsel for father: all right. and if the father is [working] on the weekends, then with those court orders [x] won’t spend time with his father. that’s right, isn’t it? [ms cresswell]: there’s always negotiation. he can forward his roster and we can work around things. counsel for father: all right. so your answer is that you would negotiate the court orders? [ms cresswell]: to seek consent. yes. counsel for father: okay. ma’am, do you agree that [x] would benefit from his father being involved in his school week? [ms cresswell]: it would be lovely for [x] to spend time and have dinner maybe once or twice a week with his father. yes. counsel for father: all right. that’s not something that you’ve proposed, is it? [ms cresswell]: like i’ve said before, ms breeze, i wanted to streamline them and keep it simple. counsel for father: all right. it’s the case, isn’t it, ma’am, that you don’t want to be bound at all by court orders in relation to the father’s time with [x]? [ms cresswell]: i’ve always offered family plan. counsel for father: yes? [ms cresswell]: i’ve always offered to negotiation. i’ve always offered working with him to suit all three of us. counsel for father: all right. and it’s the case - - - her honour: so the answer is, “yes”, isn’t it? the answer is, “yes.” you don’t want to be bound by court orders? [ms cresswell]: no. i don’t want to be bound by court orders. [65]
living arrangements at the time of final hearing
real property
d street, city c
b street, city c  according to ms cresswell’s trial affidavits, b street, city c was purchased for $187,000, total costs including stamp duty being $194,485.65, with the deposit of $18,700 paid by both of the parties. this is in contrast to an earlier affidavit where ms cresswell asserted that mr conroy’s mother provided the deposit amount.[66] during cross-examination in february 2019, ms cresswell conceded that mr conroy’s mother wrote the check for $18,700 and that she has not been paid back for this amount.[67] however, ms cresswell again referred to the deposit having been paid by both of the parties in a later affidavit.[68] (b) ms cresswell asserts that, as part of the purchase of b street, city c, herself and mr conroy applied their savings to avoid paying mortgage insurance, ms cresswell contributing $14,233.86, and mr conroy contributing $12,419.13 (totalling $26,652.99).[69] (c) in a later affidavit ms cresswell asserts that she paid $26,642.99[70] from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges and to avoid paying mortgage insurance.[71] during cross-examination in february 2019, ms cresswell denied mr conroy had transferred money to her for the purchase of b street, city c, and stated that the $26,000 was her savings and that ‘[a]ll of it was mine.’[72] when shown bank statements showing transfers from mr conroy, ms cresswell disagreed with the assertion that the money was for the purchase of b street, city c, however she did not know what the money was for.[73] when shown unredacted bank statements, ms cresswell’s evidence was that the entry “deposit mr conroy – mr conroy house insurance” ‘had nothing to do with the house deposit.’[74] when questioned about the amount she had claimed mr conroy paid towards b street, city c in her earlier affidavit, ms cresswell conceded that the amount had been arbitrary and that ‘it was used as a strategy to see how much money [mr conroy] would say he contributed into the house.’[75] (d) in a latter affidavit, ms cresswell maintained the position that the sum of $26,642.99 was paid by her from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges.[76]   ms cresswell asserts that, as part of the purchase of b street, city c, herself and mr conroy applied their savings to avoid paying mortgage insurance, ms cresswell contributing $14,233.86, and mr conroy contributing $12,419.13 (totalling $26,652.99).[69] (c) in a later affidavit ms cresswell asserts that she paid $26,642.99[70] from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges and to avoid paying mortgage insurance.[71] during cross-examination in february 2019, ms cresswell denied mr conroy had transferred money to her for the purchase of b street, city c, and stated that the $26,000 was her savings and that ‘[a]ll of it was mine.’[72] when shown bank statements showing transfers from mr conroy, ms cresswell disagreed with the assertion that the money was for the purchase of b street, city c, however she did not know what the money was for.[73] when shown unredacted bank statements, ms cresswell’s evidence was that the entry “deposit mr conroy – mr conroy house insurance” ‘had nothing to do with the house deposit.’[74] when questioned about the amount she had claimed mr conroy paid towards b street, city c in her earlier affidavit, ms cresswell conceded that the amount had been arbitrary and that ‘it was used as a strategy to see how much money [mr conroy] would say he contributed into the house.’[75] (d) in a latter affidavit, ms cresswell maintained the position that the sum of $26,642.99 was paid by her from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges.[76]   in a later affidavit ms cresswell asserts that she paid $26,642.99[70] from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges and to avoid paying mortgage insurance.[71] during cross-examination in february 2019, ms cresswell denied mr conroy had transferred money to her for the purchase of b street, city c, and stated that the $26,000 was her savings and that ‘[a]ll of it was mine.’[72] when shown bank statements showing transfers from mr conroy, ms cresswell disagreed with the assertion that the money was for the purchase of b street, city c, however she did not know what the money was for.[73] when shown unredacted bank statements, ms cresswell’s evidence was that the entry “deposit mr conroy – mr conroy house insurance” ‘had nothing to do with the house deposit.’[74] when questioned about the amount she had claimed mr conroy paid towards b street, city c in her earlier affidavit, ms cresswell conceded that the amount had been arbitrary and that ‘it was used as a strategy to see how much money [mr conroy] would say he contributed into the house.’[75] (d) in a latter affidavit, ms cresswell maintained the position that the sum of $26,642.99 was paid by her from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges.[76]   in a latter affidavit, ms cresswell maintained the position that the sum of $26,642.99 was paid by her from her “westpac bank account” to cover the stamp duty, costs, and solicitor charges.[76]   did the initial design and drawings, (b) arranged and instructed the draftsperson, (c) guttered the entire house, (d) arranged, instructed and paid electricians, plumbers, and other tradesmen, (e) purchased, paid for, transported and installed the vanities in the bathroom, (f) sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   arranged and instructed the draftsperson, (c) guttered the entire house, (d) arranged, instructed and paid electricians, plumbers, and other tradesmen, (e) purchased, paid for, transported and installed the vanities in the bathroom, (f) sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   guttered the entire house, (d) arranged, instructed and paid electricians, plumbers, and other tradesmen, (e) purchased, paid for, transported and installed the vanities in the bathroom, (f) sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   arranged, instructed and paid electricians, plumbers, and other tradesmen, (e) purchased, paid for, transported and installed the vanities in the bathroom, (f) sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   purchased, paid for, transported and installed the vanities in the bathroom, (f) sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   sourced the floor boards, and transported them from sydney to city c, (g) sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   sourced the shower screen, and transported it from sydney to city c, (h) sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   sourced the main front door, and transported it from the region bj to city c, and (i) sourced the tiles in city c.   sourced the tiles in city c.
e street, town f property
g street, town h property
parties’ current financial positions
determination as to parenting orders
relevant legal principals
court’s determination
parenting capacity
willingness to facilitate relationship with other parent
capacity to meet x’s needs
issues of risk
other relevant considerations
capacity to make joint decisions
where x is to live
time with non-resident parent
parental responsibility
determination as to property adjustment orders
relevant legal principles
what are parties’ contributions?  working continually since commencement of the parties’ relationship in 2003, (b) financially supporting ms cresswell thus enabling her to save funds which were ultimately used for the purchase of d street, city c, which was also used as security for further property purchase at e street, town f, (c) working consistently over a period of 19 months renovating b street, city c so that the parties and x could live in it, (d) having his mother assist in the purchase of b street, city c by providing a loan for the deposit, (e) being responsible for meeting the vast majority (if not all) of the mortgage repayments, rates and utilities associated with b street, city c both during the parties’ relationship and post separation, (f) renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   financially supporting ms cresswell thus enabling her to save funds which were ultimately used for the purchase of d street, city c, which was also used as security for further property purchase at e street, town f, (c) working consistently over a period of 19 months renovating b street, city c so that the parties and x could live in it, (d) having his mother assist in the purchase of b street, city c by providing a loan for the deposit, (e) being responsible for meeting the vast majority (if not all) of the mortgage repayments, rates and utilities associated with b street, city c both during the parties’ relationship and post separation, (f) renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   working consistently over a period of 19 months renovating b street, city c so that the parties and x could live in it, (d) having his mother assist in the purchase of b street, city c by providing a loan for the deposit, (e) being responsible for meeting the vast majority (if not all) of the mortgage repayments, rates and utilities associated with b street, city c both during the parties’ relationship and post separation, (f) renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   having his mother assist in the purchase of b street, city c by providing a loan for the deposit, (e) being responsible for meeting the vast majority (if not all) of the mortgage repayments, rates and utilities associated with b street, city c both during the parties’ relationship and post separation, (f) renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   being responsible for meeting the vast majority (if not all) of the mortgage repayments, rates and utilities associated with b street, city c both during the parties’ relationship and post separation, (f) renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   renovating d street, city c including while he was off work, for a period of 6 weeks in early 2015, for the purposes of making d street, city c habitable for tenants, which ms cresswell then leveraged to acquire the e street, town f property, and (g) providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   providing care to x, primarily post february 2019.   being x’s primary carer pre february 2019, (b) working since commencement of the parties’ relationship in 2003, (c) making financial contributions towards the purchase of b street, city c by way of initial purchase costs, and further limited contributions towards the renovations, (d) enabling the parties to live rent-free with ms r at times when they were living together thus providing each of them with an opportunity of saving their income, which ultimately resulted in purchase of properties, and (e) making the sole contributions towards g street, town h property.   working since commencement of the parties’ relationship in 2003, (c) making financial contributions towards the purchase of b street, city c by way of initial purchase costs, and further limited contributions towards the renovations, (d) enabling the parties to live rent-free with ms r at times when they were living together thus providing each of them with an opportunity of saving their income, which ultimately resulted in purchase of properties, and (e) making the sole contributions towards g street, town h property.   making financial contributions towards the purchase of b street, city c by way of initial purchase costs, and further limited contributions towards the renovations, (d) enabling the parties to live rent-free with ms r at times when they were living together thus providing each of them with an opportunity of saving their income, which ultimately resulted in purchase of properties, and (e) making the sole contributions towards g street, town h property.   enabling the parties to live rent-free with ms r at times when they were living together thus providing each of them with an opportunity of saving their income, which ultimately resulted in purchase of properties, and (e) making the sole contributions towards g street, town h property.   making the sole contributions towards g street, town h property.
the pool
assessment of contributions
future needs
overall adjustment
costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 15 march 2023
dated: 15 march 2023
annexures
annexure “a” - procedural history summary
annexure “b” – documents read in the proceedings
ms cresswell relied on the following documents:  amended initiating application filed on 16 july 2018, (b) amended financial statement filed 16 july 2018, (c) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “child matters”, (e) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “property matters”, (f) affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   amended financial statement filed 16 july 2018, (c) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “child matters”, (e) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “property matters”, (f) affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “child matters”, (e) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “property matters”, (f) affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “child matters”, (e) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “property matters”, (f) affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell filed 11 february 2019, titled “property matters”, (f) affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of dr k filed 12 september 2019, (g) mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   mother’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (h) further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   further amended financial statement of the applicant mother filed 11 may 2020, (i) affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell filed on 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of mr br filed 11 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms r filed 11 may 2020, (l) report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   report of dr k dated 6 april 2020, (m) balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   balance sheet filed 15 may 2020, (n) applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   applicant mother’s written submissions filed 14 december 2020, (o) affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell filed 16 october 2020, (p) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 11 august 2021, (q) affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   affidavit of ms cresswell sworn and filed 16 november 2021, (r) minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   minute of order sought by the applicant mother and emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).
mr conroy relied on the following documents:  amended response filed 20 july 2018 (property only), (b) amended financial statement of the respondent father filed 23 july 2018, (c) affidavit of mr conroy sworn 23 july 2018, filed 24 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms s (paternal grandmother) filed 19 july 2018, (e) affidavit of mr conroy filed 8 february 2019 (parenting only), (f) affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   amended financial statement of the respondent father filed 23 july 2018, (c) affidavit of mr conroy sworn 23 july 2018, filed 24 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms s (paternal grandmother) filed 19 july 2018, (e) affidavit of mr conroy filed 8 february 2019 (parenting only), (f) affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy sworn 23 july 2018, filed 24 july 2018, (d) affidavit of ms s (paternal grandmother) filed 19 july 2018, (e) affidavit of mr conroy filed 8 february 2019 (parenting only), (f) affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of ms s (paternal grandmother) filed 19 july 2018, (e) affidavit of mr conroy filed 8 february 2019 (parenting only), (f) affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 8 february 2019 (parenting only), (f) affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 12 february 2019, (g) respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   respondent father’s minute of parenting orders dated 13 may 2020, (h) respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   respondent father’s case outline document filed 14 may 2020, (i) amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   amended financial statement of respondent father filed 11 may 2020, (j) affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy signed 11 may 2020, filed 12 may 2020, (k) affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of ms s filed 11 may 2020, (l) affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of ms t filed 11 may 2020, (m) affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 16 october 2020, (n) respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   respondent father’s written submissions filed 1 december 2020, (o) affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 18 december 2020, (p) affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 5 march 2021, (q) affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of ms s filed 5 march 2021 , (r) affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   affidavit of mr conroy filed 2 august 2021, (s) minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),   minute of order sought by the respondent father emailed to the court on 17 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021),
the icl relied on the following documents:  amended initiating application filed on 16 july 2018, (b) amended response to initiating application filed 20 july 2018, (c) independent children’s lawyer’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (d) icl’s written submissions filed 19 november 2020, (e) minute of order sought by the icl emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   amended response to initiating application filed 20 july 2018, (c) independent children’s lawyer’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (d) icl’s written submissions filed 19 november 2020, (e) minute of order sought by the icl emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   independent children’s lawyer’s case outline document filed 13 may 2020, (d) icl’s written submissions filed 19 november 2020, (e) minute of order sought by the icl emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   icl’s written submissions filed 19 november 2020, (e) minute of order sought by the icl emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).   minute of order sought by the icl emailed to the court on 16 november 2021 (in accordance with order 6 of orders made by judge obradovic on 9 march 2021).
annexure “c” - exhibits
key: am ‑ applicant mother, rf ‑ respondent father, icl ‑ independent children’s lawyer.
[1] cf parties’ evidence but note earlier finding of court in cresswell & conroy [2017] fcca 912 at [33], [35].[2] see annexure “a” to these reasons for judgment[3] see report of dr k (4 august 2021) lines 255-6[4] see annexure “a” to these reasons for judgment[5] see annexure “a” to these reasons for judgment[6] see affidavit of ms cresswell (16 july 2018) [23][7] see affidavit of ms cresswell (11 may 2020) exhibit 6[8] it is not clear on the evidence when in fact ms cresswell’s employment was terminated. for the purposes of the court’s determination, the actual date of termination of her employment is not a relevant matter. in ms cresswell’s affidavit of 16 july 2018 at [27] she asserts it was due to her pregnancy and that concerns were raised to the governing authority in 2014 and acted upon later in 2014; by late 2014 documents were signed and settlement was agreed upon.[9] t:105.45-6, 106.1-16[10] t:150.46-7, 151.1-2[11] t:269.20-46[12] t:357.6-43[13] t:142.44-143.2[14] t:144.20-2[15] see report prepared by dr k (23 august 2019) in affidavit of dr k (9 september 2021) 11 (annexure c)[16] t:307.8-29[17] t:306.15-24[18] t:393.1-13[19] t:674.13-5[20] noting that this event post dates the report[21] report prepared by dr k (23 august 2019) 11-12 in affidavit of dr k (12 september 2019) 17-18 (annexure c)[22] report prepared by dr k (23 august 2019) 12-3 in affidavit of dr k (12 september 2019) 18-19 (annexure c)[23] report prepared by dr k (6 april 2020) 10 lines 326-43 in affidavit of mr aq (23 april 2020) 28 (annexure c)[24] report prepared by dr k (6 april 2020) 10 lines 345-9 in affidavit of mr aq (23 april 2020) 28 (annexure c)[25] t:333.21-32[26] t:335.37-42[27] see reasons for judgment below at [171][28] t:338-9 [29] t:341-2[30] t:343.17-20[31] t:344.19-27[32] t:344.32-9[33] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 239-47[34] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) line 253[35] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 259-64[36] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 18-24[37] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 274-6[38] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 333-47[39] report prepared by dr k (4 august 2021) lines 370-80[40] t:496.25-8[41] t:57.16-45, 58.1-38[42] t:59.1-2 [43] evidence act 1995 (cth) s128[44] t:168.10 [45] see affidavit of mr conroy (11 may 2020) 17 (annexure )[46] t:288.31-2[47] t:292.21-45[48] t:395.40-6, 396.1[49] t:396.39-44[50] tranche #1[51] t:50.18-20[52] t:51.15-20 [53] t:155.3-9[54] t:221.38[55] t:221.41-5[56] as suggested by dr k[57] family report by mr m (7 march 2018) [52][58] family report by ms n (27 june 2020) pt 10.1[59] t:578.15-16[60] t:580.27-8[61] t:582.13 [62] see t:585.31, 594.21[63] t:586.42-3[64] t:253.30-45[65] t:252.1-45[66] see affidavit of ms cresswell (16 july 2018) [19][67] t:79.16-26[68] affidavit of ms cresswell (11 may 2020) [225][69] affidavit of ms cresswell (25 october 2016), t:91.46-7, 92.1-19[70] the difference of $10 appearing in ms cresswell’s evidence[71] affidavit of ms cresswell (16 july 2018) [20][72] t:87.3-12; see also t:82.39-42[73] t:84.16-28[74] t:130.30-9[75] t:92.31-6. 93.1-17[76] see affidavit of ms cresswell (11 may 2020) [225][77] t:94.1-17[78] see slater & light [2011] famcafc 1 at [45]; mehmood & ali [2021] fedcfamc2f 194[79] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520 at [26] cited with approval by the full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 (“mccall”) at [121][80] mccall at [122][81] mrr v gr [2010] hca 4 at [15][82] banks & banks [2015] famcafc 36[83] see stanford v stanford [2012] hca 52 [37]-[42][84] oamra & williams [2021] famcafc 117 at [35][85] bevan & bevan [2014] famcafc 19 (“bevan”), chapman & chapman [2014] famcafc 91 and scott & danton [2014] famcafc 203[86] for example, peters & walker [2015] famca 732[87] see generally, russell & russell [1999] famca 1875; (1999) flc 92-877; teal & teal [2010] famcafc 120, but in the context of s.79[88] bevan at [86][89] dickons v dickons [2012] famcafc 154; (2012) 50 fam lr 244 (bryant cj, faulks dcj, murphy j) at [24] (“dickons”)[90] dickons at [24][91] aldrin & celona [2021] fedcfamc1a 16 (austin, mcevoy & altobelli jj) at [12-13] (“aldrin”)[92] blandford & esmore [2022] fedcfamc1a 67 (aldridge, harper & riethmuller jj) at [14][93] despite the findings made in 2017 ms cresswell contended that the parties separated in august 2014[94] black & kellner [1992] famca 2[95] in the marriage of briese [1985] famca 23, approved by the full court in oriolo v oriolo [1985] famca 54[96] in the marriage of weir [1992] famca 69; (1992) 16 famlr 154