last updated: 1 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
daleel & daleel [2023] fedcfamc2f 293
orders
the court orders that:  instruct such real estate agent as agreed between the parties and where the parties are unable to agree on the agent, then the wife shall nominate three (3) real estate agents and the husband shall thereafter select one of those agents (“the agent”), (b) instruct such solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the husband (“the conveyancer”), (c) sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale by public auction in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (d) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (e) agree upon a reserve price for the auction and failing agreement the reserve price shall be $830,000, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   instruct such solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the husband (“the conveyancer”), (c) sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale by public auction in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (d) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (e) agree upon a reserve price for the auction and failing agreement the reserve price shall be $830,000, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale by public auction in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (d) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (e) agree upon a reserve price for the auction and failing agreement the reserve price shall be $830,000, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (e) agree upon a reserve price for the auction and failing agreement the reserve price shall be $830,000, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   agree upon a reserve price for the auction and failing agreement the reserve price shall be $830,000, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   in payment of the agent’s commission, marketing and advertising costs, auctioneer’s fees and any other expense properly incurred in respect of the sale of the property, (b) in payment of any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the property, (c) in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale to the conveyancer, (d) pay the amount of $3000 to the child support agency in respect of the liability owed to the wife by the husband, (e) in payment of the balance then remaining as to 40% to the wife and 60% to the husband, (f) from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   in payment of any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the property, (c) in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale to the conveyancer, (d) pay the amount of $3000 to the child support agency in respect of the liability owed to the wife by the husband, (e) in payment of the balance then remaining as to 40% to the wife and 60% to the husband, (f) from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale to the conveyancer, (d) pay the amount of $3000 to the child support agency in respect of the liability owed to the wife by the husband, (e) in payment of the balance then remaining as to 40% to the wife and 60% to the husband, (f) from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   pay the amount of $3000 to the child support agency in respect of the liability owed to the wife by the husband, (e) in payment of the balance then remaining as to 40% to the wife and 60% to the husband, (f) from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   in payment of the balance then remaining as to 40% to the wife and 60% to the husband, (f) from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   from the wife’s share at order 6(e) above pay to the husband the sum of $178.80 (being the amount necessary to see the husband receive a 60% adjustment noting the value of the property held by the parties in their individual names).   the wife’s superannuation, (b) the wife’s bank accounts, (c) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the wife’s possession, (d) any other property or financial resource in the wife’s possession or control.   the wife’s bank accounts, (c) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the wife’s possession, (d) any other property or financial resource in the wife’s possession or control.   the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the wife’s possession, (d) any other property or financial resource in the wife’s possession or control.   any other property or financial resource in the wife’s possession or control.   the husband’s superannuation, (b) the husband’s bank accounts, (c) the husband’s motor vehicle, (d) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the husband’s possession, and (e) any other property or financial resource in the husband’s possession or control.   the husband’s bank accounts, (c) the husband’s motor vehicle, (d) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the husband’s possession, and (e) any other property or financial resource in the husband’s possession or control.   the husband’s motor vehicle, (d) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the husband’s possession, and (e) any other property or financial resource in the husband’s possession or control.   the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects in the husband’s possession, and (e) any other property or financial resource in the husband’s possession or control.   any other property or financial resource in the husband’s possession or control.
reasons for judgment
myers j:  six (6) nights a fortnight commencing on friday after school, (b) special days including dates during eid and mother’s day.   special days including dates during eid and mother’s day.   instruct such real estate agent as nominated by the respondent (“the agent”), (b) instruct such solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the respondent (“the conveyancer”), (c) list the property for sale by private treaty at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, and sell the property at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, (d) sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (e) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   instruct such solicitor or conveyancer as nominated by the respondent (“the conveyancer”), (c) list the property for sale by private treaty at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, and sell the property at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, (d) sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (e) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   list the property for sale by private treaty at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, and sell the property at such price as nominated by the respondent, in consultation with the agent, (d) sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (e) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   sign all documents requested by the agent in relation to listing the property for sale in accordance with these orders, except a contract or agreement for sale which has not been authorised by the other party, (e) not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   not confer on any other agent, without the consent of the other party, any right to any sole or exclusive agency in respect of the property or to any commission, (f) cooperate in every way with the agent in relation to the marketing of the property including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent and ensuring the property is clean, neat and in good condition at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer.   in payment of the agent's commission, marketing and advertising costs, auctioneer's fees and any other expense properly incurred in respect of the sale of the property, (b) in payment of any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the property, (c) in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale, (d) in payment in the amount of $480,000 to the applicant: (e) in payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   in payment of any council and water rates and maintenance levies outstanding in respect of the property, (c) in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale, (d) in payment in the amount of $480,000 to the applicant: (e) in payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   in payment of the legal costs and disbursements of the sale, (d) in payment in the amount of $480,000 to the applicant: (e) in payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   in payment in the amount of $480,000 to the applicant: (e) in payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   in payment of the balance then remaining to the respondent.   the applicant's superannuation, (b) the applicant's bank accounts, (c) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects m the applicant's possession, and (d) any other property or financial resource in the applicant's possession.   the applicant's bank accounts, (c) the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects m the applicant's possession, and (d) any other property or financial resource in the applicant's possession.   the personal belongings, furniture, furnishings and effects m the applicant's possession, and (d) any other property or financial resource in the applicant's possession.   any other property or financial resource in the applicant's possession.   life insurance policies and superannuation funds standing in his/her name respectively, (b) shares in a public or private companies, (c) entitlements under a trust, (d) vehicles registered in the name of the respective party at the time of the making of these orders.   shares in a public or private companies, (c) entitlements under a trust, (d) vehicles registered in the name of the respective party at the time of the making of these orders.   entitlements under a trust, (d) vehicles registered in the name of the respective party at the time of the making of these orders.   vehicles registered in the name of the respective party at the time of the making of these orders.
background:
mr liederman: you’ve said the $180,000 that came for the [b street, suburb c] house - - -? wife: ---yes. mr liederman: - - - was from the sale of the previous house, which i am correct is the [j street, suburb k] house? wife: ---yes. mr liederman: yes? wife: ---yes. mr liederman: and you’ve said previously in cross-examination, mere minutes ago, that that was the father’s father’s house and that that was by form of an inheritance? wife: ---the house in [suburb l] belonged to his father. his father sold that house for 140. he gave [mr m] 80 – i don’t exact – the exact amount i don’t remember. he gave the brother 70, and we took 70 or 80 – 60 or 80. i’m not sure exactly. mr liederman: and when did this happen? wife: ---that was in – when we bought the [j street, suburb k] house. mr liederman: which was when? wife: ---we bought it in – let me have a think. 2001, 2003 – i lived with my in-laws for three years and then we moved to [j street, suburb k] house. so that was about 2003. we paid maybe 70,000, 65,000, if i remember right.
mr liederman: [mr daleel], at the very commencement, you were asked about – of the cross-examination, you were asked about your current borrowing capacity and you made reference to your sons. can you tell me – can you tell the court what you were going to say about your sons?— husband: -well, i did inquire about this to the bank about my borrowing capacity. mr liederman: yes? --- husband: and they said i was a liability, but my sons could borrow the money.
description
ownership
applicant’s value
respondent’s value
assets
b street, suburb c
joint
$830,000
bank account
husband
$2221
motor vehicle 1
$8000
household contents
$3000
wife
motor vehicle 2
$7500
assets subtotal
$853,721
liabilities
child support debt
n/a
liabilities subtotal
$0
superannuation
type of interest
member
accumulation
$2082
superannuation subtotal
total (assets – liabilities)
$850,721
total (assets – liabilities + superannuation)
$855,803
$852,803
financial resources
financial resources subtotal
total (assets – liabilities +superannuation + financial resources + other)
the actions in question are variously referred to in discussions as 'conduct', 'misconduct', or 'fault'. those terms seem to be used interchangeably. as a matter of convenience, we will use the term 'conduct'. ... put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one party towards the other during the marriage which is demonstrated to have had a significant adverse impact upon that party's contributions to the marriage, or, put the other way, to have made his or her contributions significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a trial judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties' respective contributions within s 79. we prefer this approach to the concept of 'negative contributions' which is sometimes referred to in this discussion.
associate: dated: 17 march 2023
dated: 17 march 2023