last updated: 1 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rivers & rivers [2023] fedcfamc2f 296
orders
the court orders that:  identify the issue, (b) set out his proposal, (c) invite the mother to respond with any alternate proposal within a stated and reasonable period of time, and (d) inform the mother promptly of the decision he has taken.   set out his proposal, (c) invite the mother to respond with any alternate proposal within a stated and reasonable period of time, and (d) inform the mother promptly of the decision he has taken.   invite the mother to respond with any alternate proposal within a stated and reasonable period of time, and (d) inform the mother promptly of the decision he has taken.   inform the mother promptly of the decision he has taken.   on easter monday, (b) on mother’s day, (c) on boxing day, (d) on the mother’s birthday, (e) on the children’s birthdays, and (f) with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   on mother’s day, (c) on boxing day, (d) on the mother’s birthday, (e) on the children’s birthdays, and (f) with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   on boxing day, (d) on the mother’s birthday, (e) on the children’s birthdays, and (f) with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   on the mother’s birthday, (e) on the children’s birthdays, and (f) with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   on the children’s birthdays, and (f) with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   with such time occurring within seven (7) days before or after the actual date of such event.   engage with the supervisor and arrange for times as reasonably available for the supervisor, (b) the father shall deliver the children to the supervisor and collect the children at the end of the supervised time, and (c) the mother shall pay the costs of the supervisor.   the father shall deliver the children to the supervisor and collect the children at the end of the supervised time, and (c) the mother shall pay the costs of the supervisor.   the mother shall pay the costs of the supervisor.   notify the other parent as soon as practicable, (b) provide the other parent with the name and contact details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which the child or children attend as soon as practicable, and (c) inform the practitioner or medical facility that both parents have permission to access the child or the children’s medical records and receive information concerning the child or the children upon request.   provide the other parent with the name and contact details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which the child or children attend as soon as practicable, and (c) inform the practitioner or medical facility that both parents have permission to access the child or the children’s medical records and receive information concerning the child or the children upon request.   inform the practitioner or medical facility that both parents have permission to access the child or the children’s medical records and receive information concerning the child or the children upon request.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge carty
introduction
background  x born in 2011, (b) y born in 2012, and (c) z born in 2015.   y born in 2012, and (c) z born in 2015.   z born in 2015.   the children live with the father, and spend time with the mother supervised by b contact centre children’s contact centre for not less than 2 hours each fortnight and, until b contact centre is available, supervised by c contact centre or d contact centre, with the parties to share the fees equally, (b) the mother be at liberty to have facetime or skype communication with the children on one occasion each week, (c) in the event the mother elects to undertake dbt, she be at liberty to provide a copy of the child dispute memorandum to her treating psychologist, (d) the father keep z enrolled in family day care at city p, and obtain a referral for a comprehensive paediatric assessment of y, and (e) each parent be restrained from denigrating the other, or any member of the other’s family, within hearing of the children.   the mother be at liberty to have facetime or skype communication with the children on one occasion each week, (c) in the event the mother elects to undertake dbt, she be at liberty to provide a copy of the child dispute memorandum to her treating psychologist, (d) the father keep z enrolled in family day care at city p, and obtain a referral for a comprehensive paediatric assessment of y, and (e) each parent be restrained from denigrating the other, or any member of the other’s family, within hearing of the children.   in the event the mother elects to undertake dbt, she be at liberty to provide a copy of the child dispute memorandum to her treating psychologist, (d) the father keep z enrolled in family day care at city p, and obtain a referral for a comprehensive paediatric assessment of y, and (e) each parent be restrained from denigrating the other, or any member of the other’s family, within hearing of the children.   the father keep z enrolled in family day care at city p, and obtain a referral for a comprehensive paediatric assessment of y, and (e) each parent be restrained from denigrating the other, or any member of the other’s family, within hearing of the children.   each parent be restrained from denigrating the other, or any member of the other’s family, within hearing of the children.
legal principles in parenting proceedings  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
conduct of the hearing
proposals of the parties
the mother’s proposal  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, (b) the children spend time with the mother, supervised by d contact centre every fortnight for the next six months, (c) thereafter, for a further six months, the children spend supervised time with the mother, conducted by maternal family members, (d) thereafter, for six months, the children spend unsupervised time with the mother, during the day for four or five hours, and (e) finally, unsupervised overnight time.   the children spend time with the mother, supervised by d contact centre every fortnight for the next six months, (c) thereafter, for a further six months, the children spend supervised time with the mother, conducted by maternal family members, (d) thereafter, for six months, the children spend unsupervised time with the mother, during the day for four or five hours, and (e) finally, unsupervised overnight time.   thereafter, for a further six months, the children spend supervised time with the mother, conducted by maternal family members, (d) thereafter, for six months, the children spend unsupervised time with the mother, during the day for four or five hours, and (e) finally, unsupervised overnight time.   thereafter, for six months, the children spend unsupervised time with the mother, during the day for four or five hours, and (e) finally, unsupervised overnight time.   finally, unsupervised overnight time.
the father’s proposal
the proposal of the independent children’s lawyer  the parents must use the “our family wizard’ application or a similar co-parenting application, to communicate on any matter relating to the children’s health, development, education, attendance at extra-curricular and sporting activities, (b) forthwith, the father must cease the children’s continued attendance upon “ag counsellors” and the parents must obtain a referral for the children to attend upon “company ah” or similar suitably qualified therapist for the children to participate in family counselling, with the intention of supporting the implementation of the court’s orders, (c) the father and mother be permitted to supply a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment, and a copy of the final court orders to the children’s treating therapists, and (d) the mother is permitted to supply a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy.   forthwith, the father must cease the children’s continued attendance upon “ag counsellors” and the parents must obtain a referral for the children to attend upon “company ah” or similar suitably qualified therapist for the children to participate in family counselling, with the intention of supporting the implementation of the court’s orders, (c) the father and mother be permitted to supply a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment, and a copy of the final court orders to the children’s treating therapists, and (d) the mother is permitted to supply a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy.   the father and mother be permitted to supply a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment, and a copy of the final court orders to the children’s treating therapists, and (d) the mother is permitted to supply a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy.   the mother is permitted to supply a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy.
issues in dispute  the spend time arrangements for the children with the mother, and the related issues of: (i) the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, (ii) consideration of the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse neglect or family violence, (iii) whether the mother has demonstrated that she has adequately addressed her mental health needs, and (iv) whether supervision of the children’s time with the mother is necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate. (b) whether the parents will use a parenting communication application such as “our family wizard”. (c) whether the father must cease the children’s attendance on ag counsellors and whether the parents will be required to obtain a referral for the children to attend upon company ah and participate in family counselling. (d) whether the parents will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment and final orders to the children’s treating therapists, (e) whether the mother will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy, and (f) the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.   the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, (ii) consideration of the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse neglect or family violence, (iii) whether the mother has demonstrated that she has adequately addressed her mental health needs, and (iv) whether supervision of the children’s time with the mother is necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate.  ) consideration of the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse neglect or family violence, (iii) whether the mother has demonstrated that she has adequately addressed her mental health needs, and (iv) whether supervision of the children’s time with the mother is necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate.  i) whether the mother has demonstrated that she has adequately addressed her mental health needs, and (iv) whether supervision of the children’s time with the mother is necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate.  ) whether supervision of the children’s time with the mother is necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate.   whether the parents will use a parenting communication application such as “our family wizard”. (c) whether the father must cease the children’s attendance on ag counsellors and whether the parents will be required to obtain a referral for the children to attend upon company ah and participate in family counselling. (d) whether the parents will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment and final orders to the children’s treating therapists, (e) whether the mother will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy, and (f) the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.   whether the father must cease the children’s attendance on ag counsellors and whether the parents will be required to obtain a referral for the children to attend upon company ah and participate in family counselling. (d) whether the parents will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment and final orders to the children’s treating therapists, (e) whether the mother will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy, and (f) the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.   whether the parents will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment and final orders to the children’s treating therapists, (e) whether the mother will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy, and (f) the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.   whether the mother will have permission of the court to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy, and (f) the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.   the allocation of parental responsibility for the children.
the spend time with arrangements for the children with the motherconsideration of the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse neglect or family violence
“whilst the mother may not meet full dsm-v criteria for borderline personality disorder and may well be able to present under the right conditions, as a highly functioning and well- regulated adult, clearly there is enough evidence to demonstrate that she demonstrate (sic) several traits which characterise borderline personality traits. borderline personality disorder is often a misused and poorly understood condition. it should be remembered that having borderline personality disorder is not deliberate. it is not a diagnosis people choose to have. it is often associated with a great deal of confusion and enormous sense of shame because the individual can be highly functioning, compassionate, and nurturing until they are triggered and become dysregulated, volatile, and erratic”.[18]
“...the mother expressed a wealth of information about the children in a deeply caring and nurturing manner....there is much for her to gain if she can find the courage to return to her therapist to work out ways to be the parent, she knows she can be.”[19]
“...serious polypharmacy od of prescribed medications ... following conflict with her partner and did not attend the cmhs follow up”.[24]
“...threatening to kill herself via text to sister, on a background of relationship break up. avo served today in ed saying [ms rivers] cannot have contact with her x3 children or partner. on assessment pt denied si. and was uncooperative with the process of admission...has a hx of depression-spent 3 days in the mater as a result of dsh attempt 18/12 ago. risk-medium to self and others...struggling with bad mood swings-goes angry...to upset. up and down. unable to control. when angry-gets verbally aggressive-yelling, throwing things, smashing things...good insight and seeking support”. [27]
“intermittent si with no plans and intent. severe anxiety with panic attacks...anxiety and depression affecting day to day functioning....struggling with mood swings”.
“...has limited insight into her problems and behaviour and she needs further psychological supportive therapy and psychoeducation”.[29]
“sick to death of [z]...she has been smothering me to death since she was born and i have never had any help. even when i begged you and told you i was ready to kill myself to get away from it.” [39]
“i felt myself getting angry so i turned and went back into my bedroom and shut the door for a few minutes to calm down. [z] was getting angrier and more frustrated and was kicking and banging on the door to come into me. after a few minutes i opened the door and asked [z] to stop banging on the door and give me a minute. she then went to go into the room and i blocked her from coming in. i shut the door again. after a few minutes i opened the door again, [z] came in and we laid on the bed together”.[51]
the children’s views and their relationships with each parent
has the mother demonstrated that she has adequately addressed her mental health needs
“...concerns about being hyperactive and easily distractible with this significantly affecting work productivity with requests to be assessed for adult adhd. she also reports being anxious in social situations and group settings. i have commenced her on escitalopram.”
the letter notes relevant past history of panic attacks, anxiety generalised. there is no mention of history of diagnoses of borderline personality traits or depression. the court is concerned that the mother’s current gp has not been made aware that the mother was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder traits in late 2019.
“i went through what was required, followed up with diagnosis. my behaviour has not been of concern to people who are supervising me. mental health doesn’t have an end date. i have learned coping and management skills.”
is supervision of the children’s time with the mother necessary to protect them from risk of harm, and if supervised time is required what orders are appropriate.
further additional considerations
will the court require the father to cease the children’s continued attendance upon ag counsellors and the parents to obtain a referral for the children to attend upon “company ah” or such other child and family psychologist (“the children’s treating therapist”) who the parents may agree, to arrange for the children to participate in family counselling, with the intention of supporting the implementation of the court’s orders?
whether the parents will have permission to provide a copy of the family report, reasons for judgment and final orders to the children’s treating therapists, and whether the mother will have permission to provide a copy of the family report and reasons for judgment to any therapist, psychologist or psychiatrist engaged by her for the purpose of supporting her ongoing therapy
allocation of parental responsibility for the children
whether the parents will use a parenting communication application such as “our family wizard”
conclusion
associate: dated: 17 march 2023
dated: 17 march 2023
[1] family report paragraph 12[2] exhibit m[3] mother’s affidavit filed 12 march 2020 at paragraph 74[4] notes of the children’s counselling on 25 march 2021 record that x expressed that it was “definitely a possibility” that mum might take off with the children. y said that if the supervisor went to the toilet “oh no, mum would probably run us to the car and take off.” and that “sometimes she used to try and take us from school so we wouldn’t see our dad”: exhibit j page 118[5] father’s affidavit paragraph 89[6] exhibit j contains the notes of the children’s counselling with ag counsellors[7] section 60ca [8] section 60cc(2)[9] section 60cc(2a)[10] section cg(1)(b)[11] section 60cc (3) [12] section 61da[13] section 65daa[14] exhibit g[15] affidavit of mother filed on 30 september 2020, confined to paragraphs 33 to 43 inclusive; and affidavit of mother filed on 9 march 2020, except paragraphs 46 to 48 inclusive. [16] compare exhibit f tendered by icl on 23/8/2022 and exhibit 1 tendered during final submissions on 17/11/2022[17] exhibit 1[18] family report paragraph 137[19] family report paragraph 138[20] family report paragraph 34[21] family report paragraph 39[22] exhibit gg: the mother’s psychologist at g psychologists on 29 july 2020 recorded “complex trauma???”[23] father’s affidavit paragraph 44[24] exhibit v[25] exhibit l[26] exhibits k and p[27] exhibit p[28] exhibit t[29] exhibits v and x[30] father’s affidavit paragraph 45; exhibit k[31] exhibit w[32] exhibit o[33] father’s affidavit paragraph 48[34] exhibit q[35] exhibit m[36] id[37] mother’s affidavit 9 march 2020 paragraphs 50, 54[38] father’s affidavit paragraph 33[39] father’s affidavit paragraph 34[40] father’s affidavit paragraph 49[41] father’s affidavit paragraph 51[42] father’s affidavit paragraphs 35-36[43] father’s affidavit paragraph 37[44] father’s affidavit paragraph 38[45] mother’s affidavit 9 march 2020 paragraphs 64-67[46] child dispute conference memorandum to court paragraph 6[47] mother’s affidavit 9 march 2020 paragraphs 64-72[48] when the mother left the boys at home alone and z’s report to the pre-school lead to the police taking the boys to the police station[49] exhibit k[50] father’s affidavit paragraphs 57-60[51] mother’s affidavit 9 march 2020 paragraphs 10-13[52] ibid paragraphs 13-14[53] ibid paragraph 16-17[54] exhibit j page 120[55] exhibit j[56] mother’s affidavit filed 12 march 2020, paragraph 23[57] family report [46][58] family report [67][59] family report [46][60] exhibit j page 126[61] family report [115][62] exhibit j, for example at pages 118, 119, 120, 122, 124, 126[63] exhibit i[64] exhibit 2[65] exhibit 5[66] exhibit ff[67] rivers & rivers [2020] fcca 2052 – paragraph 94[68] exhibit gg[69] as at 30 september 2020[70] exhibit 4 demonstrates that the support that the mother received from city p family support was limited to three meetings. the mother referred herself to city p fs to attend the circle of security parenting program, which she completed. the first meeting was and initial meeting, the second meeting was to complete a case plan to set goals for the work, which was to provide one on one individual 123 magic and emotional coaching parenting program and general support.[71] exhibit 5[72] exhibit 3 indicates that the mother engaged in 1 hour counselling sessions twice in november 2018, at least monthly from january 2019 until july 20919 and at least monthly between february and august 2020, with 3 sessions in may 2020[73] mother’s affidavit 30 september 2020 paragraph 33; exhibit ff is a letter from dr aq to the mother’s gp dated 19 november 2020, after dr aq saw the mother.[74] exhibit v[75] exhibit t[76] exhibits gg & ff[77] exhibits gg[78] exhibit ff[79] which the court understands refers to the condition attention deficit hyperactivity disorder[80] dr av at aw medical[81] exhibit d[82] child dispute conference memorandum to court paragraphs 30 and 31[83] m v m (1988) 166 clr 69[84] ibid at [25][85] father’s affidavit paragraphs 76, 77, 79[86] ibid paragraph 85[87] father’s affidavit paragraphs 108-109 and annexure b[88] exhibit cc[89] exhibit dd[90] father’s affidavit paragraphs 100 & 105[91] exhibit j[92] exhibit j pages 129-130, 149[93] exhibit j pages 141-142[94] exhibit j[95] exhibit ff[96] as i propose to make an order that the father will have sole parental responsibility for the children, there is no need to address the matters in s 65daa