last updated: 11 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bansal & mathai [2023] fedcfamc2f 307
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
this hearing
documents relied upon
objections to material
the wife and the wife’s parents’ case
... the administration of justice requires [ms d] to be restrained from acting when the court is being asked to determine the triable question (see paragraph 17, above), what occurred during the 25 february 2020 meeting will be very relevant. [ms d], as a non-party to the alleged agreement, will give probative evidence about whether the parties had in fact reached an agreement and what those terms were. a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public could only conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that [ms d] be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and appearance of justice. there is no doubt that [ms d] cannot give impartial evidence about what happened during the meeting whilst at the same time acting as the advocate for her client. even if [ms d’s] recollection of the meeting is ultimately accepted by the court following the trial, for the same reasons stated, there can be no reason why she continue to act for the applicant whilst the terms of the agreement remain in dispute . the court should find that it is in the administration of justice that [ms d] be restrained from acting for the applicant and the order described at paragraph 1 and 2, above. ... duty of loyalty the court can restrain a solicitor from acting against a former client, not only on the grounds of the prevention of disclosure of confidential information and public pol icy, but also on the basis of the solicitor's duty of loyalty to the former client, which continued after termination of the retainer. in spincode pty ltd v look software pty ltd and others [2001] vsca 248, (2001) 4 vr 501 brooking ja at [53] opined that the duty of loyalty, which survived termination, was an independent ground for the jurisdiction and identified the following three possible sources of the relevant duty: an equitable obligation of loyalty which forbids the holding of two successive inconsistent engagements an equitable obligation of loyalty , which imposed 'an abiding negative obligation not to act against the former client in the same [or closely related] matter'. an implied term of the contract of retainer that a solicitor would not act against a client in the dispute in relation to which the solicitor had been retained by it. brooking ja's formulation of the duty of loyalty has been endorsed by numerous decisions in victoria, although the preponderance of authority throughout australia has not been adopted throughout australia, but we submit are consistent with the full court of the family court's ruling in osferatu and osferatu [2015] famcafc 177. [notations omitted]
mr twidale: ...the genesis of this application is that firstly, there is a meeting on 25 february 2020. it is common ground that the three – the three defendants and the applicant met at the offices of the solicitor. it is a dispute as to what was discussed at length at that meeting, what documents were presented at that meeting, whether advice was given as alleged by either party. but it is common ground that there was a meeting. in relation to why this meeting is important, it’s important because the parties at least – on any ground – on any view of the world, discussed an agreement that had been reached by the parties.
the applicant says the parties had reached an agreement and says that agreement is encapsulated in a loan document, which your honour will see in reading the material. it is a written loan document in draft form. my client however will say the agreement is of different terms and of a different nature. so the dispute for trial will be what are the terms of that agreement? the second case i will take you to ... is the matter of county securities. it’s a nsw court of appeal decision which says when you look at post-contract – post-contract conduct, you can infer from that conduct what the terms of that agreement were. you are entitled to say what did the parties do after the contract when determining whether there was an agreement reached as alleged and what those terms were. and what will happen in this hearing of this trial is that ...at least my client...will say that... [the] solicitor will be required to give evidence as to the substance of that conversation on 25 february because that will relate to what was in fact agreed between the parties. what was agreed on that day or what happened on that day will decide what the actual terms of the relationship was between the applicant on the one part and the respondents on the other. and if ...the solicitor is required to give evidence about the substance of that meeting, she can’t at the same time continue to act for the applicant in this case. she is in fact restrained under the administration of justice grounds because she is essentially has two hats on. she is giving material evidence about a meeting and she is acting for the applicant at the same time. ...
the husband’s case
mr panna: your honour, this is a dispute primarily between the husband and the parents of the wife. so – and it’s a relatively simple dispute in the sense that what the court in the substantive proceeding will need to determine is what was the agreement between the parties back in october or november when they entered into the purchase of the property? what is not in dispute is the contributions made by the husband and the wife. what is not in dispute is the amount that the wife’s parents put into the property. so what was the agreement prior to the meeting of 25 february? now, my learned friends have said that the meeting on 25 february is the – is a crucial meeting. we say, with respect, the agreement between the parties pre-dates that.
as far as the meeting on the 25th is concerned, we say the meeting, as alleged by the respondents, did not occur. it was a five minute meeting, it was not a 15 minutes. it seems to be the maximum that has been put by the respondents. there was no discussion about the terms that the respondents say was the agreement between the parties. what is not in dispute is that an agreement was in fact drawn up by the solicitor based upon his – the evidence from the husband and the solicitors, based upon his instructions. now, what follows from that is that nobody – that is the respondents do not agree that that represents the terms of whatever was said to the solicitor. ...
... mr panna: ...irrespective of how – what the evidence of the respondent [is] as to what was said, it’s quite clear that nobody agrees that ...these are the terms. the evidence from the respondent says that this draft document did not represent the terms of the parties and this draft document does not represent what was said to the solicitor. now, this meeting of the 25th has generated a great deal of heat in this matter because each side makes statements...where both can’t be right. are we – and my submission would be that this is an overblown meeting where ...it cannot determine the real issues between the parties.
the real issue between the parties is what was the agreement, not what was said to the solicitor but what was in fact a real agreement between the parties. now, what is not in dispute is that the second and third respondents say in their defence to the statement of claim – now, your honour will see that at paragraphs 4(f) of the defence to the statement of claim filed by the second and third defendants – that the agreement originally was conditional and it was a trust, that the property was going to be purchased on trust for the husband and wife. however, what they then say is because of events that occurred after the purchase of the property, that original agreement was just to buy the property on trust for the husband and wife. it came to an end and ...their contention is that the husband and the wife do not have an equitable interest in the property. having said that however, if one looks at the affidavit filed by the second respondent on 14 july at paragraph 8, the second and third respondents say that the husband and wife have a beneficial interest in the property as to 11 per cent. now we’re not arguing about whether it’s 11 per cent or not but it appears on the respondent – the second and third respondent’s own evidence there is a beneficial interest in the property. and what the court will have to determine is, what was that agreement? so when it comes to whatever was said apparently at the meeting, we say none of that can be confidential. it cannot be confidential because both the husband – the husband was present so whatever was said is information that can be used by the husband. my learned friends said that [ms d] will be required to give evidence. with respect to my learned friend, i – how can he call – unless he wants to call [ms d] to give evidence, when her evidence is no such discussion took place, i can assure him, given the evidence that we have got before the court, the husband is not going to call her to give that evidence. so she is not going to be a witness in this case. so as far as the parties are concerned, the agreement that was drafted has not been executed and the court will have to determine what are the terms of the arrangement. that essentially – that will take us then to the submission i will be making that whatever was discussed was not confidential information. it cannot be relied upon as a basis for restraining the – [ms d]. the authorities are quite clear as to what needs to be established. as far as saying that there was a fiducial relationship, let’s just put this into context. the husband’s position is that these – the respondents – that the wife and her father turned up uninvited. there is a dispute about that. there was a five minute conversation where the solicitor said “i’m not going to advise you, i’m not going to act for you, i have got instructions from the husband”. the respondents’ position is the discussion took place on a longer basis, about 15 minutes where information was conveyed. now, you – we say, well, what information was conveyed that can be confidential. and in my submissions i set out all the authorities as to why we say this just is not a proper basis for making a finding that anything that was said at that meeting could possibly be confidential information for the purposes of restraining a solicitor. when it comes to the administration of justice....
... ...as far as administration of justice is concerned, whilst there is jurisdiction of the court to do so, the courts have repeatedly said great caution must be exercised before restraining a solicitor. and if your honour comes to a conclusion that there was no confidential information conveyed and the cursory meeting between the wife and second respondent and the solicitor is no more than that. we say there is no fiduciary duty owed in those circumstances, even if one can say there was a solicitor-client relationship. one asks rhetorically, even if there were a solicitor-client relationship, what is the alleged breach of duty? merely continuing to act is not sufficient. the respondents must identify the alleged breach that would occur and if it’s confidential information or they’re stuck with the fact there is no confidential information and that’s the problem that they ultimately face.
... this alleged telephone conversation is denied by the husband and [ms d] in their said 1 december 2021 affidavits. they depose that no such telephone conversation occurred. ... the draft agreement as far as the respondents are concerned does not represent whatever they contend was the agreement or understanding. it is common ground that the draft agreement was not executed by the respondents as they did not agree with the terms expressed therein. it is also clear that whatever was discussed between the parties on the 25th february 2020 or any other time, and whatever information was allegedly given by the first and second respondent to [ms d] about the agreement that the respondents allegedly had with the husband, that information was not accurately contained in the draft agreement provided by the husband’s solicitors to them. it is unclear what the respondents contend was the agreement or understanding between the parties in respect of the property. ... the third point to make about this issue is that even if, contrary to the husband’s and the solicitor’s evidence, there was discussion on the 25th february 2020 as alleged by the wife and second respondent, that information was not and could not be confidential. it is a misconception to assert that the information about the terms of the agreement or understanding about the property, conveyed in the presence of the husband, could be classed as “confidential” and that the husband and the solicitor could be restrained from disclosing or using it in future. ... the first point to make on this issue is that there is no plausible basis for the assertion that the solicitor will be a witness for the husband. it is clear on the evidence filed by the husband and [ms d] that they contend that she did not have any discussions with the wife and second respondent about the terms of the agreement or understanding whatsoever and that she only took instructions from the husband and the draft agreement was based solely upon his instructions. the central issue in this proceeding between the parties is the terms of the agreement or understanding entered into by the parties in order to purchase the property in october 2019. that agreement or understandings predate the meeting with [ms d] in february 2020. ... it is implausible that the respondents would call [ms d] to give evidence in this proceeding in respect of any issue given what she and the husband have deposed to in their affidavits. ... however, as it was pointed out in incentive dynamics, at page 9 of 10 by justice north:
“although it may be unwise for a solicitor to continue to act in the circumstances, it does not follow that the court will restrain the continued engagement: yamaji v. westpac banking corporation (no. 1) (1993) 115 alr 235, at 237. an applicant for an injunction must establish more than that the solicitor may be called as a witness in the case. such applicant must show a real and sensible possibility of the misuse of confidential information. as i have already found, the applicants have not done so in this case.” law as to fact finding on hearing on the papers   what, if any, information was provided to the husband’s solicitors by the respondents on the 25th february 2020 or some other time, (b) whether any such information was confidential or could be classed as confidential or is now confidential, (c) whether there any risk that such confidential information could be misused to the detriment of the respondents, (d) whether the solicitors were acting for all parties in drawing up the draft agreement, (e) whether there is any identifiable conflict of interest in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (f) whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether any such information was confidential or could be classed as confidential or is now confidential, (c) whether there any risk that such confidential information could be misused to the detriment of the respondents, (d) whether the solicitors were acting for all parties in drawing up the draft agreement, (e) whether there is any identifiable conflict of interest in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (f) whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether there any risk that such confidential information could be misused to the detriment of the respondents, (d) whether the solicitors were acting for all parties in drawing up the draft agreement, (e) whether there is any identifiable conflict of interest in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (f) whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether the solicitors were acting for all parties in drawing up the draft agreement, (e) whether there is any identifiable conflict of interest in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (f) whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether there is any identifiable conflict of interest in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (f) whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether there is any breach of duty owed to the respondents in the solicitors continuing to act for the husband, (g) whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.   whether there is any basis to restrain the solicitors from continuing to act for the husband on the basis of “public policy”.
... it must, therefore, follow that [ms d] is not a material witness on behalf of the husband in respect of the central issue about the parties arrangements or understanding because she has deposed to, as has the husband, that there was no discussion with the respondents about those arrangements or understandings and that the draft agreement was only based on the instructions from the husband.
no findings of fact on untested evidence it is submitted that the court should reject the submissions and invitation by the second and third respondent to draw adverse inferences against the husband or the solicitor on untested evidence and on submissions that were never put to the husband and the solicitor. in grattan and grattan (no. 3) [2014] famca 839, justice cronin was asked by the applicant /wife seeking to restrain a solicitor from continuing to act and to draw adverse inferences against him. his honour, at [22], said:
“in my view, that is an inference i would not be prepared to draw on the untested evidence. i am not in a position to make a finding of fact about untested evidence. the affidavit of [mr e], late as it was, remains silent on the issue. i do not draw an adverse inference based upon that silence.”
6. at [24] his honour said,
“there was considerable evidence about the conduct and behaviour as between the husband and [mr e] but in my view, it would be inappropriate for the court to draw any adverse inference on the untested evidence. [mr e] and the husband (like the wife) had known each other for many years and just what inferences could be drawn, i am unsure.” [mr e] was a solicitor who had extensive dealings with the wife and the husband, both socially and professionally. see, [13]-14], [16]-[17]. despite the fact that the solicitor had acted for and advised the wife and was well known socially to both the wife and the husband, his honour dismissed the application to restrain the solicitor. to a similar effect, that it is inappropriate to make adverse findings on untested evidence, see, craig duggan v. process holdings pty ltd [2021] vsc 555, [139], per justice lyons. for the purpose of determining this application to restraint the solicitor it is not necessary or desirable to resolve all issues about the circumstances in which the meeting of the 25 february 2020 came to be organised as they are peripheral to the substantive dispute and issues between the parties.
... the husband’s claim against the respondents is set out in his statement of claim. the issues for trial will turn on the matters raised by the parties in their pleadings and not on the disputed events about the circumstances of this meeting or the alleged conflicting allegations about the respondents’ intentions and discussions at the meeting. ... it is necessary to clearly identify what was allegedly discussed at the meeting on 25 february 2020 in order to establish the factual context in which this application is made by the respondents. ... the respondents invite the court to make adverse findings and inferences from the alleged conflicting evidence filed on behalf of the husband. for the reasons outlined above it is inappropriate for the court to make findings of fact on untested evidence. see, grattan & grattan, above. ... the central issue in this application is an objective consideration of what was discussed, and more particularly, what information was allegedly conveyed by the second respondent to the solicitor in the presence of the husband and the wife, and what follows as a matter of law from that meeting. ... as the respondents did not seek to cross examine the husband or the solicitor the court should not make findings about the veracity or integrity of the husband or the solicitor on the disputed matters in the affidavits.
... in the recent case of craig duggan v. process holdings pty ltd [2021] vsc 555, justice lyons, at [61]-[65], helpfully summarised the relevant legal principles and at [66] to [71] the relevant solicitors rules in respect of an application to restrain a solicitor from continuing to act for the plaintiff. ... at [20], his honour[2] said:
“i do not accept that the mere circumstance that a solicitor will be a material witness, even on a controversial matter, of itself justifies restraining the solicitor from continuing to act. as windeyer j pointed out in scallan v scallan [2001] nswsc 1078, it is, for example, not unusual for instructing solicitors in contested probate proceedings to give evidence of facts relevant to instructions for and execution of a will. similarly, in contested conveyancing proceedings, it is not unusual for solicitors who have acted on the conveyance to continue to act in the proceedings for specific performance or rescission and to give evidence in those proceedings. accordingly, despite rule 19 of the law society of new south wales professional conduct and practice rules, which imposes a professional obligation (as distinct from a private right), i do not accept that in every case where a solicitor acting for a party is a material witness even on a controversial matter, the court will restrain the solicitor from continuing to act.”
chronology of significant events
events
dear [the husband], [ms d] has passed on your details, and i have prepared a draft loan agreement (see attached) based on your initial instructions. please have a look through the draft and advise if any issues at this stage. query: should there be a .....? i believe this should be accounted for in the agreement, see paragraph 9 of the draft and please provide instructions about this issue. also if you could please provide contact details/email address for the lenders so that once finalised we can forward the agreement to them to obtain their own independent legal advice, and have the agreement signed. [emphasis in original]
hi [ms d], attached are the changes her dad wrote for the agreement and the [bank] loan document for the house. thanks [the husband]
the parties’ positions in the substantive proceedings
the evidentiary material from which the court might have drawn an inference as to the intention of the parties included their acts and declarations before or at the time of the purchase, also immediately after it as to constitute a part of the transaction. evidence of those acts and declarations were admissible either for or against the party did the act or made the declaration, but any subsequent declarations would have been admissible only as admissions against interest (shepherd v cartwright [1954] ukhl 2, (1955) a.c. 431, at 445, charles marshall pty ltd v grimsley [1956] hca 28, (1956) 95 clr 353, at 365.
i confirm that [the property] was settled utilising joint funds and in accordance with the loan agreement drafted on 2 march 2020[5]. this agreement contains a charging clause which allows my client to secure the property up to the value of his contribution and any interest. ... my client has instructed that i seek the return of his contribution of $50,000 within 14 days, failing which he will have no choice but to lodge a caveat on the property pursuant to his beneficial interest... [emphasis added]
hi [the husband], i hope this email finds you well. we have had a request to cancel two scheduled payments from ... account ending [...]27 on the 28th of every month to pay a [bank name] home loan for the amounts of $1295 and $1272. as this scheduled payment was set up via your internet banking, you will need to log in and cancel the payment. if this could be processed within seven working days, it would be highly appreciated kindest regards [customer service advisor]
hi [customer service advisor] the scheduled payment have already been cancelled few days ago. thanks, [the husband]
hi [the wife], the security doors that were ordered are ready to be installed. the company should have been in contact with you. i paid them $1200 cash as a deposit in front of you to [mr g]. i have taken $1200 from our joint bank account to pay the deposit back to myself. thanks, [the husband]
7. in 2019, we purchased a property (“the matrimonial property”). we remained at the property until we separated on 13 june 2020, at which time i left the matrimonial property. ... 9. my contributions to the shared property from the marriage are the following:
- $50,000.00 that i contributed for the purchase of the matrimonial property - the jewellery that i gifted to the respondent during the marriage. - household items which were purchased to set up the matrimonial property there is no dispute over the ownership of the jewellery as it was purchased and gifted from me. there are no other substantial assets of the marriage, annexure "-1" is a true copy of the loan document which substantiates my contribution to the loan for the matrimonial property. the loan document shows that each party contributed $50,000.00 towards the loan, however the respondent’s solicitors are stating that the respondent contributed $100,000.00.  phasis added]   first, all amounts and fees required to repay and discharge the [bank] [$580,000] mortgage, (b) second, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (c) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers, [the husband and the wife]   second, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (c) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers, [the husband and the wife]   the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers, [the husband and the wife]   first, all amounts and fees required to repay and discharge the [bank] [$580,000] mortgage, (b) second, the sum of $50,000 to the husband, (c) third, the sum of $50,00 to the wife, (d) fourth, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (e) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers [the husband and wife]   second, the sum of $50,000 to the husband, (c) third, the sum of $50,00 to the wife, (d) fourth, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (e) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers [the husband and wife]   third, the sum of $50,00 to the wife, (d) fourth, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (e) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers [the husband and wife]   fourth, the sum of $221,965 to the lenders [the wife’s parents], (e) the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers [the husband and wife]   the balance, if any, to be retained by the borrowers [the husband and wife]
we strenuously reject the assertion that [ms d] has a conflict of interest in continuing to act for [the husband]. [ms d] has never acted for his wife or her parents in any capacity. the fact [ms d] met the wife of the wedding and congratulated the couple does not put her into a conflict situation. [ms d] did not meet the parents at the wedding. the father of the wife attended [ms d’s] office in her company together with our client, unannounced and without warning. they came to ask about loan agreements and the father-in-law stated that he had his own lawyer. he brought a draft loan agreement, which [ms d] did not read. she told him that he and his wife would need to get advice from their lawyers and that she was only acting for our client. [ms d] heard nothing further from our client’s wife or her parents. we request that you immediately withdraw your unfounded allegations of conflict, failing which we reserve the right to produce this letter in support of our opposition to any application to restrain [ms d] of our firm to act. we enclose an affidavit sworn by our client’s father, which deposes to your attempts to negotiate a settlement of the property proceedings without our involvement. the contents of the affidavit is serious and subject to receiving contrary instructions, we expect to be making an application for you to be restrained from continuing to act in this case. we would invite you to obtain your own advice and consider your position in view of the serious allegations, which have been made against you.
a) the wife's parents would take out a mortgage with [bank] in their names as the wife and i were unable to obtain a loan of our own. b) the wife's parents would register their names on the title of the matrimonial home. c) the wife and i would be responsible for the repayments on the mortgage. d) the wife's parents would contribute $221,965 of their own savings. e) the wife and i would each contribute $50,000 of our individuals savings, with such sums to be deposited into the wife's parent's nominated account. f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
b) the wife's parents would register their names on the title of the matrimonial home. c) the wife and i would be responsible for the repayments on the mortgage. d) the wife's parents would contribute $221,965 of their own savings. e) the wife and i would each contribute $50,000 of our individuals savings, with such sums to be deposited into the wife's parent's nominated account. f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
c) the wife and i would be responsible for the repayments on the mortgage. d) the wife's parents would contribute $221,965 of their own savings. e) the wife and i would each contribute $50,000 of our individuals savings, with such sums to be deposited into the wife's parent's nominated account. f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
d) the wife's parents would contribute $221,965 of their own savings. e) the wife and i would each contribute $50,000 of our individuals savings, with such sums to be deposited into the wife's parent's nominated account. f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
e) the wife and i would each contribute $50,000 of our individuals savings, with such sums to be deposited into the wife's parent's nominated account. f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
f) if the relationship between the wife and i broke down, then the matrimonial home would be sold and the proceeds of sale would be distributed:
i. firstly, to repay the [bank] mortgage, ii. secondly, i would receive my $50,000 that i paid towards the home, iii. thirdly, the wife would receive her $50,000 that she paid, fourthly, the wife's parents would receive the $221,965 that they contributed from their savings, and v. the balance would be divided equally between the wife and i.
... the beneficial interest that [the husband] and [the wife] jointly have in [the property] is to the extent of $106,425.00 at its highest, being 11.086% of the current valuation of the reflection drive property, which is now been ascertained in the sum of $960,000.00. i say so by reason of the following: a) when [the property] was acquired for some of $901,965.00 including stamp duty and other settlement costs, the contribution of [the husband] and [the wife] was in the sum of $100,000.00 being 11.086% of the cost of acquisition. b) [the property] has now been valued pursuant to the orders of the court and the joint valuation arrived at ... in the sum of $960,000.00. 11.086% of $960,000.00 is the sum of $106,425.00. i say that [the husband] and [the wife] would thus have a beneficial interest in relation to [the property] to the maximum value of $106,425.00.
a) when [the property] was acquired for some of $901,965.00 including stamp duty and other settlement costs, the contribution of [the husband] and [the wife] was in the sum of $100,000.00 being 11.086% of the cost of acquisition. b) [the property] has now been valued pursuant to the orders of the court and the joint valuation arrived at ... in the sum of $960,000.00. 11.086% of $960,000.00 is the sum of $106,425.00. i say that [the husband] and [the wife] would thus have a beneficial interest in relation to [the property] to the maximum value of $106,425.00.
b) [the property] has now been valued pursuant to the orders of the court and the joint valuation arrived at ... in the sum of $960,000.00. 11.086% of $960,000.00 is the sum of $106,425.00. i say that [the husband] and [the wife] would thus have a beneficial interest in relation to [the property] to the maximum value of $106,425.00.
... the second and third respondent now wish to detract from the agreed terms of the loan agreement, which includes terms for the sale of the property in the event of the breakdown of my marriage. this has caused me significant loss and damage thus far. i have suffered an opportunity loss since the money i invested in the purchase could have been invested elsewhere. ... finally, i reject the assertions made in paragraph 5 of the second respondent affidavit filed in this proceeding. i believe that the matters deposed to in the second respondent affidavit sworn on 11 may 2021 is an inaccurate account of the conversation which occurred and, in any event, support the proposition that [the property] is a matrimonial asset and at all times was to be purchased and held on trust on behalf of myself and the first respondent wife. this is the sole reasons that these meetings between our families occurred, and a loan document drafted. the loan document was never rejected nor were the terms of that agreement varied until such times that my solicitors issued proceedings. [emphasis added]
... at a2 to his sworn affidavit dated 15 july 2021, the applicant has appended only one of such drafts with amendments. i repeat that in no point in time was the draft of the terms and conditions as set out in the loan agreement agreed or executed by either the third respondent or i. ... [emphasis added]
a. the applicant, b. the first respondent, c. the second respondent, and d. [ms d] of [the solicitor] all four persons were privy to the discussions that took place in relation to the drawing up of the alleged loan deed ('-1 ' hereto). i refer to contents of paragraph 15 hereof. [redacted...[7]] i also say that when the applicant [the husband] requested that the first respondent [the wife] and i meet with [ms d] at her office on 25 february 2020, i was under the impression that [ms d] was to represent all three of us in drawing up a common document, as discussed in the meeting at [the solicitors] on 25 february 2020 . in the present proceeding, [the solicitor], located at [the solicitor’s address], of which [ms d] is the principal, has represented the applicant from the inception of these proceedings. given my attendance at her office on 25 february 2020, [ms d] has spoken with me directly and advised me accordingly. in the process, she has gotten to know me, and i feel that my wife and i are at a strict disadvantage with her continuing to represent the applicant. at the meeting held on 25 february 2020, i discussed various matters directly with [ms d], in relation to the acquisition of [the property] [redacted...[8]]   the husband – $50,000, (b) the wife – $50,000, (c) the wife’s parents – $221,965, (d) “a loan of $580,000 from [bank] taken out in the names of [the wife’s parents]”.   the wife – $50,000, (c) the wife’s parents – $221,965, (d) “a loan of $580,000 from [bank] taken out in the names of [the wife’s parents]”.   the wife’s parents – $221,965, (d) “a loan of $580,000 from [bank] taken out in the names of [the wife’s parents]”.   “a loan of $580,000 from [bank] taken out in the names of [the wife’s parents]”.
the common intention is express, alternatively implied, from the discussions the parties entered into and by seeking to record this common intention in a draft agreement prepared on or around 2 march 2020 and sent by email from [the solicitors] to [the husband].
applicable law
the uniform rules
27 solicitor as material witness in client’s case
27.1 in a case in which it is known, or becomes apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence material to the determination of contested issues before the court, the solicitor may not appear as advocate for the client in the hearing. 27.2 in a case in which it is known, or becomes apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence material to the determination of contested issues before the court the solicitor, an associate of the solicitor or a law practice of which the solicitor is a member must not continue to act for the client if doing so would prejudice the administration of justice. [emphasis added]
legal principles of the authorities
unlike the united states of america where there is a common law of each state, australia has a unified common law which applies in each state but is not itself the creature of any state. perhaps the validity of that proposition is not as readily apparent to a state judge bound by the authority of his or her own full court or court of appeal as it is to a judge of a federal court who must apply the common law...
76 the foregoing authorities establish the following:- during the subsistence of a retainer, where the court’s intervention to restrain a solicitor from acting for another is sought by an existing client of the solicitor, the foundation of the court’s jurisdiction is the fiduciary obligation of a solicitor, and the inescapable conflict of duty which is inherent in the situation of acting for clients with competing interests [prince jefri]. once the retainer is at an end, however, the court’s jurisdiction is not based on any conflict of duty or interest, but on the protection of the confidences of the former client (unless there is no real risk of disclosure) [prince jefri]. after termination of the retainer, there is no continuing (equitable or contractual) duty of loyalty to provide a basis for the court’s intervention, such duty having come to an end with the retainer [prince jefri, belan v casey, photocure, british american tobacco, asia pacific telecommunications, contra spincode, mcveigh, sent]. however, the court always has inherent jurisdiction to restrain solicitors from acting in a particular case, as an incident of its inherent jurisdiction over its officers and to control its process in aid of the administration of justice [everingham v ontario, black v taylor, grimwade v meagher, newman v phillips fox, mitchell v pattern holdings, spincode, holborow, williamson v nilant, bowen v stott, law society v holt]. prince jefri does not address this jurisdiction at all. belan v casey and british american tobacco are not to be read as supposing that prince jefri excludes it. asia pacific telecommunications appears to acknowledge its continued existence. the test to be applied in this inherent jurisdiction is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public would conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a legal practitioner should be prevented from acting, in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the due administration of justice, including the appearance of justice [everingham v ontario, black v taylor, grimwade v meagher, holborow, bowen v stott, asia pacific telecommunications]. the jurisdiction is to be regarded as exceptional and is to be exercised with caution [black v taylor, grimwade v meagher, bowen v stott]. due weight should be given to the public interest in a litigant not being deprived of the lawyer of his or her choice without due cause [black v taylor, grimwade v meagher, williamson v nilant, bowen v stott]. the timing of the application may be relevant, in that the cost, inconvenience or impracticality of requiring lawyers to cease to act may provide a reason for refusing to grant relief [black v taylor, bowen v stott]. [bold emphasis added]  ] that said, i do not accept that the mere circumstance that a solicitor will be a material witness, even on a controversial matter, of itself justifies restraining the solicitor from continuing to act. as windeyer j pointed out in scallan v scallan [2001] nswsc 1078, it is, for example, not unusual for instructing solicitors in contested probate proceedings to give evidence of facts relevant to instructions for and execution of a will. similarly, in contested conveyancing proceedings, it is not unusual for solicitors who have acted on the conveyance to continue to act in the proceedings for specific performance or rescission and to give evidence in those proceedings. accordingly, despite r 19 of the law society of new south wales professional conduct and practice rules, which imposes a professional obligation (as distinct from a private right), i do not accept that in every case where a solicitor acting for a party is a material witness even on a controversial matter, the court will restrain the solicitor from continuing to act. although some observations of campbell cj in chapman v rogers, ex parte chapman [1984] 1 qd r 542 at 545, may go somewhat further, the cases indicate — as campbell cj did in that case itself — that the line is crossed only when the solicitor has a personal stake in the outcome of the proceedings or in their conduct, beyond the recovery of proper fees for acting, albeit that the relevant stake may not necessarily be financial, but involves the personal or reputational interest of the solicitor, as will be the case if his or her conduct and integrity come under attack and review in the proceedings. the presence of such circumstances will be a strong indication that the interests of justice — which in this field involve clients being represented by independent and objective lawyers unfettered by concerns about their own interests — require the lawyer to be restrained from continuing to act.  ] although as stated in mcgillivray the decision to restrain a practitioner from acting is a discretionary decision, there are three grounds upon which the injunction may be sought, as set out by brereton j in the decision of kallinicos v hunt [2005] nswsc 1181, (2005) 64 nswlr 561. the first basis relates to a breach of confidence arising from the law of contract and equity, the second as derived from a solicitor's fiduciary duties in accordance with equitable principles, and the third due to a superior court's inherent supervisory jurisdiction over its officers (see also spincode pty ltd v look software pty ltd [2001] vsca 248, (2001) 4 vr 501).  ] in kooky garments ltd v charlton (supra), thomas j held that the court's inherent jurisdiction to supervise the conduct of counsel included the ability to intervene to restrain a practitioner from acting and at 590 stated that:
the court is entitled to assume that solicitors and counsel appearing before it possess that independence. solicitors not only owe a duty to their clients to do the best for them but also owe an overriding duty to the court ... as part of their professional responsibility, therefore, solicitors and counsel must ensure that they do not appear in a matter in which they have an actual or potential conflict of interest or where, by reason of their relationship with their client, their professional independence can be called in question." (my emphasis) ] this issue was discussed by austin j in the decision of oceanic life ltd v hih casualty and general insurance ltd [1999] nswsc 292, at para 48, where his honour observed that solicitors acting in litigation owe a duty to the court in addition to their duties to the client and that:
... a solicitor who acts in litigation owes a relevant legal duty to the court, as well as an ethical duty. the duty to the court arises from the court's concern that it should have the assistance of independent legal representation for the litigating parties: see d a ipp, "lawyers' duties to the court" (1998) 114 lqr 63, 93. in the realm of conflicts of interest and conflicts of duty, the solicitor's duty to the court may not be much different from his or her fiduciary duties to former and present clients. however, the duty to the court tends to be expressed in such a way as to emphasise the public interest in preserving confidence in the administration of justice, and therefore in the appearance as well as the reality of independence, and the court's practical approach to its supervisory discretions: freuhauf finance corporation pty ltd v feez ruthning (1991) 1 qd r 558, murray v macquarie bank ltd (1991) 33 fcr 46, carindale country club estate pty ltd v astill [1993] fca 218, (1993) 42 fcr 307, macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350, kooky garments ltd v charkon [1994] 1 nzlr 587, watson v watson (supreme court of new south wales, equity div (santow j), unreported, 25 may 1998)." (my emphasis)
his honour: and i’ve got in mind a decision of [grieves]. ... mr panna: yes. yes, i’ve got that judgment, your honour. his honour: thank you. all right. now, i haven’t read it since i lost in it, but it has got a little footnote in my notes to turn to it if ever i have such a case. but, in that case, the solicitor ... was disqualified. ... mr panna: yes. but i’ve read that judgment, your honour, and again it really turns on its own facts, like all these cases really turn on their own facts. at paragraph 88 of that judgment, the court said:
in the matter before the court, the wife contends that the husband’s solicitor may have, due to his longstanding personal relationship with his [client,] and social interaction with the parties, knowledge of the wife’s personality, attitude [and] approach to litigation as discussed in [thevenaz] and [magro]. additionally, the wife submitted that, on the fair-minded observer test, the husband’s solicitor, as a close friend of the husband, had entered into [“the fray”] – not dissimilar to ..... my learned friend said – she was intermingled in some way, that is, [ms d] was intermingled. well, with respect to my learned friend, the mere fact that a solicitor acts for a party for a long time and it’s not his clients, that is, it’s not the wife and it’s not the respondents – she has acted for the husband for over a decade, and there might be a friendship – that in itself is not a basis for disqualifying a solicitor from acting in a proceeding. the solicitor does not enter into the fray merely because they are – have had some – a longstanding business relationship. and one of my learned friends said, “well, if you look at the affidavit of [ms d], she talks about friendship.” i said, “well, that’s – you might say ..... non-legal ..... – so what?” the fact that a solicitor has a longstanding relationship and is friendly with a party doesn’t mean that they can be disqualified on that basis alone. there must be something more to that and they must be more than just simply a threat that the solicitor will be called to give evidence. and we said, “well, give evidence about what?” now, although the question about confidential information has now been sidelined because my learned friends say that’s not the basis upon which they seek to restrain the solicitor. that is still a – it’s a critical issue because, if no confidential information has been conveyed, upon what basis should the court then restrain the solicitor. may i put the question a slightly different way? my learned friend mr twidale said the solicitor was acting for everybody. let me go back. ask the question. even if that were correct, which we say it’s not, but even if we were correct, what flows from that? what’s the breach of duty that could be alleged against [ms d], merely by that assertion, that is, she was acting for everybody? was she provided with any information that can be used to the disadvantage of the parties in this proceeding, in the substantive proceeding? in my submission, the fact that my learned friends have not even bothered now to try and identify – and they haven’t identified – any confidential information that was allegedly conveyed to [ms d] really puts this part of their submission to zero, in my submission. merely having acted for someone in the past is not a basis for restraint, and this has been made quite clear in a number of cases which have been referred to in my submission. so let’s talk about – for a moment, about the alleged getting-to-know-you factors. if your honour looks at the cases where the getting-to-know-you factors, such as the [yunghanns] case, that’s cases where there has been a longstanding relationship between the solicitor and the party that’s complaining about them now appearing against them. and it would be a remarkable case where a 15-minute conversation, as the respondents allege, is sufficient basis for saying the solicitor has got to know the second respondent and the wife. we say, well, that’s an extraordinary proposition. the mere fact that they spoke for 15 minutes, which on the husband’s side and [ms d’s] side they say there was nothing more than a formal greeting and a formal discussion about – not going to enter any further into any further discussion – but the mere fact that there was a 15-minute conversation, now, apparently, qualifies as a getting-to-know-you factor case. now, in my submissions, i say that this – although it is a matter that the courts do look at from time to time, it’s not something that’s given a great deal of weight, for obvious reasons. how do you assess getting-to-know-you factors in a case where you’re trying to restrain the solicitor? ..... what is it about the second respondent or the wife that [ms d] knows that can be used to their disadvantage in this case? what is it? now, your honour asked the question earlier about onus of proof – onus. in my submission, if the respondents cannot satisfy your honour, they cannot discharge the onus that there’s a proper basis for restraining the solicitor, then the application should be dismissed.
... the solicitor faces the real prospect of being called or forced to give evidence in the proceedings on a significant issue as to parental conduct and conflict impacting on the children. his credit and that of his client will be in issue. as such his objectivity must be in issue and be influenced by his perceived duty to his client.  6] we turn then to his honour’s conclusion that if the husband did not call his solicitor as a witness, this would raise an “evidentiary issue” referring to jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8, (1959) 101 clr 298, [1959] alr 367 (jones v dunkel). [137] it is helpful to bear in mind that even in the context of parenting proceedings, the wife, who contends that the solicitor assaulted her mother, bears the evidentiary onus of proving the alleged assault. the husband has joined issue with the allegations, saying that the account is a fabrication. [138] in cook’s construction pty ltd v brown (2004) 49 acsr 62, [2004] nswca 105, young cj said: as to this point it must be borne in mind that jones v dunkel is actually just one aspect of a wider principle. that wider principle is that in judging evidence the court has regard to the material available to a party. if the person that the court is considering is a person who does not bear the onus of proof and that person fails to call a witness, the inference may be drawn that the witness is not likely to assist the person’s case. that is jones v dunkel itself. [139] in blatch v archer [1774] engr 2, (1774) 98 er 969 at 970,64 it was said:  7] it is helpful to bear in mind that even in the context of parenting proceedings, the wife, who contends that the solicitor assaulted her mother, bears the evidentiary onus of proving the alleged assault. the husband has joined issue with the allegations, saying that the account is a fabrication. [138] in cook’s construction pty ltd v brown (2004) 49 acsr 62, [2004] nswca 105, young cj said: as to this point it must be borne in mind that jones v dunkel is actually just one aspect of a wider principle. that wider principle is that in judging evidence the court has regard to the material available to a party. if the person that the court is considering is a person who does not bear the onus of proof and that person fails to call a witness, the inference may be drawn that the witness is not likely to assist the person’s case. that is jones v dunkel itself. [139] in blatch v archer [1774] engr 2, (1774) 98 er 969 at 970,64 it was said:  8] in cook’s construction pty ltd v brown (2004) 49 acsr 62, [2004] nswca 105, young cj said: as to this point it must be borne in mind that jones v dunkel is actually just one aspect of a wider principle. that wider principle is that in judging evidence the court has regard to the material available to a party. if the person that the court is considering is a person who does not bear the onus of proof and that person fails to call a witness, the inference may be drawn that the witness is not likely to assist the person’s case. that is jones v dunkel itself. [139] in blatch v archer [1774] engr 2, (1774) 98 er 969 at 970,64 it was said:  9] in blatch v archer [1774] engr 2, (1774) 98 er 969 at 970,64 it was said:
... it is certainly a maxim that all evidence is to be weighed according to the proof which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the power of the other to have contradicted.  0] although he bears no evidentiary onus on this issue, the husband himself has evidence to give relevant to the issue of whether the alleged assault took place. [141] the solicitor is a witness who could cast light upon the issue of whether the alleged assault took place. a failure by the husband to call him could be taken into account in determining whether the wife had discharged her evidentiary onus of proving that an assault took place. that, of course, does not then mean that the evidence of the wife’s mother must be accepted in preference to that of the husband. neither does it mean that having assessed the sufficiency of all of the evidence, including what the husband has to say, the court will accept the wife’s version of events. [142] the husband has indicated that he will not call his solicitor no doubt understanding that there may, but not necessarily will, be evidentiary consequences. [143] that being the case, the basis for his honour’s conclusion falls away and this did not provide a basis for enjoining the solicitor from acting.  1] the solicitor is a witness who could cast light upon the issue of whether the alleged assault took place. a failure by the husband to call him could be taken into account in determining whether the wife had discharged her evidentiary onus of proving that an assault took place. that, of course, does not then mean that the evidence of the wife’s mother must be accepted in preference to that of the husband. neither does it mean that having assessed the sufficiency of all of the evidence, including what the husband has to say, the court will accept the wife’s version of events. [142] the husband has indicated that he will not call his solicitor no doubt understanding that there may, but not necessarily will, be evidentiary consequences. [143] that being the case, the basis for his honour’s conclusion falls away and this did not provide a basis for enjoining the solicitor from acting.  2] the husband has indicated that he will not call his solicitor no doubt understanding that there may, but not necessarily will, be evidentiary consequences. [143] that being the case, the basis for his honour’s conclusion falls away and this did not provide a basis for enjoining the solicitor from acting.  3] that being the case, the basis for his honour’s conclusion falls away and this did not provide a basis for enjoining the solicitor from acting.
the solicitor being subject to a subpoena issued by the wife  4] as part of his honour’s conclusion that there was a “real possibility” that the solicitor would be called in the parenting proceedings was his postulation that, perhaps, the wife would issue a subpoena to the solicitor to give evidence in her case. why the wife would consider that course is not explained and it is difficult to imagine that the wife’s advisors would counsel that course.
operation of s 36 of the evidence act 1995 (cth)  5] his honour said “the reality is that ... [the solicitor] if present in court called by reason of s 36 of the evidence act” (at [32]).65 that section provides a means by which documents may be produced to the court in the absence of a subpoena or other process. it does not provide the basis for the arbitrary calling of a person to give evidence merely because the person happens to be present in court. the words “give evidence and to produce documents” makes that abundantly clear. [146] to the extent that the primary judge suggested that during the hearing of the proceedings the solicitor could be compelled to give evidence by means of s 36 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), he was wrong.  6] to the extent that the primary judge suggested that during the hearing of the proceedings the solicitor could be compelled to give evidence by means of s 36 of the evidence act 1995 (cth), he was wrong.  7] thus, this basis on which the primary judge decided to enjoin the husband’s solicitor from continuing to act on the inevitable prospect that the solicitor would be required to give evidence in the proceedings was in our view incorrect.  ] the court will restrain a legal practitioner from continuing to act for a party if a reasonable person, informed of the relevant facts, might reasonably anticipate a danger of misuse of confidential information of a former client and that there is a real and sensible possibility that the interest of the practitioner in advancing the case might conflict [emphasis added] with practitioner’s duty to keep the information confidential, and to refrain from using that information to the detriment of the former client: mallesons stephen jaques v kpmg peat marwick (1990) 4 war 357 (mallesons) at 362–3, farrow mortgage services pty ltd (in liq) v mandall properties pty ltd [1995] vicrp 1, [1995] vr 1 at 5, prince jefri bolkiah v kpmg (a firm) [1998] ukhl 52, [1999] 2 ac 222 (bolkiah) at 237, newman v phillips fox (1999) 21 war 309 (newman) at [63], sent and primelife corporation ltd v john fairfax publication pty ltd and hills [2002] vsc 429 (sent) at [33]. [63] the strictness of this test arises not least because of the special fiduciary position of a legal practitioner towards his or her client: mallesons at 361, carindale country club estate pty ltd v astill [1993] fca 218, (1993) 42 fcr 307 (carindale) at 310–11, in re a firm of solicitors [1997] ch 1 (in re a firm of solicitors) at 9. drummond j explained in carindale at 311 that the reason for the emphasis on the fiduciary character of that relationship was twofold:  ] the strictness of this test arises not least because of the special fiduciary position of a legal practitioner towards his or her client: mallesons at 361, carindale country club estate pty ltd v astill [1993] fca 218, (1993) 42 fcr 307 (carindale) at 310–11, in re a firm of solicitors [1997] ch 1 (in re a firm of solicitors) at 9. drummond j explained in carindale at 311 that the reason for the emphasis on the fiduciary character of that relationship was twofold:
first, there is a public element in the work that a solicitor does in that he is an officer of the court and, in performing his professional function, he plays an integral part in the administration of justice ... secondly, the existence of legal professional privilege and the policy considerations which justify its continued recognition are inconsistent with a rule that would too readily allow a solicitor, who has received confidential information from one client, to later act for another client against the old client’s interests. 4] the third and final basis for mr nash’s contention that mills oakley should be restrained arises from the court’s inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and restrain solicitors from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction: grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452, dealer at [37], [93]–[94]. the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public would conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that the solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice. this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and “to be exercised with appropriate caution”, with due weight to be given “to the public interest in the client not being deprived of the solicitor of its choice”: dealer at [95].  3] the primary judge correctly identified the relevant principles. they have been comprehensively summarised by brereton j in kallinicos v hunt (2005) 64 nswlr 561, [2005] nswsc 1181 (at [76]) and griffiths j in mumbin v northern territory (no 1) [2020] fca 475 (at [39]). justice griffiths’ summary was as follows:
the relevant principles which guide the exercise of the court’s separate discretion are broadly as follows: (a) the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd (2014) 228 fcr 252, 318 alr 507, 108 ipr 26, [2014] fca 1065 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here). (c) due weight must be given to the public interest in a client not being deprived of the legal practitioner of its choice, however, this important value can be over-ridden in an appropriate case (dealer support services at [95] per beach j). (d) this basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information (dealer support services at [96] per beach j). (e) this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd (2014) 228 fcr 252, 318 alr 507, 108 ipr 26, [2014] fca 1065 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here). (c) due weight must be given to the public interest in a client not being deprived of the legal practitioner of its choice, however, this important value can be over-ridden in an appropriate case (dealer support services at [95] per beach j). (d) this basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information (dealer support services at [96] per beach j). (e) this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here). (c) due weight must be given to the public interest in a client not being deprived of the legal practitioner of its choice, however, this important value can be over-ridden in an appropriate case (dealer support services at [95] per beach j). (d) this basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information (dealer support services at [96] per beach j). (e) this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   due weight must be given to the public interest in a client not being deprived of the legal practitioner of its choice, however, this important value can be over-ridden in an appropriate case (dealer support services at [95] per beach j). (d) this basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information (dealer support services at [96] per beach j). (e) this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   this basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information (dealer support services at [96] per beach j). (e) this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   this basis for disqualification is an “exceptional one” and is “to be exercised with appropriate caution” (geelong school supplies pty ltd v dean (2006) 237 alr 612, [2006] fca 1404 at [35] per young j). (f) a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).   a legal practitioner may be restrained from acting in a matter not only where the practitioner has a conflict of interest viz a viz a former client, but also viz a viz a person who is “as good as” a client (macquarie bank ltd v myer [1994] vicrp 22, [1994] vr 350 at 359 per j d phillips j).  4] the primary judge also correctly identified that there was a difference between the expression of the test by brereton j as being whether the hypothetical referee would conclude that the proper administration of justice required that lawyer be prevented from acting, and the above formulation of the test by griffiths j as whether the referee might so conclude. the primary judge observed that the latter might formulation conforms or coheres more closely with the test for apprehended bias, but as ward cj in eq noted in michael smith real estate pty ltd (t/as raine & horne marrickville) v chmait [2021] nswsc 1160 (at [63]–[64]), the weight of authority favours the former would formulation adopted not only by brereton j but also by nettle j in sent v john fairfax publication pty ltd [2002] vsc 429 (at [113]), mcdougall j in el-cheikh v miraki [2017] nswsc 1765 (at [20]), and beach j in dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd (2014) 228 fcr 252, 318 alr 507, 108 ipr 26, [2014] fca 1065 (at [94]). [115] the primary judge observed (in obiter) that if he had concluded that there was no real risk of misuse of confidential information, or only a minimal risk, he would nonetheless have concluded that a fair-minded member of the public would say that ms chrysanthou should not act for mr porter. this conclusion was not inconsistent with the prevailing authorities which accept that the basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information. but this is not the way the case was decided because his honour did find that there was such a risk on the facts as found.  5] the primary judge observed (in obiter) that if he had concluded that there was no real risk of misuse of confidential information, or only a minimal risk, he would nonetheless have concluded that a fair-minded member of the public would say that ms chrysanthou should not act for mr porter. this conclusion was not inconsistent with the prevailing authorities which accept that the basis for disqualification is not discharged by it simply being demonstrated that there is no risk of the misuse of confidential information. but this is not the way the case was decided because his honour did find that there was such a risk on the facts as found.  phasis added).
76. ... the test to be applied in this inherent jurisdiction is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public would conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a legal practitioner should be prevented from acting, in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the due administration of justice, including the appearance of justice.  phasis in original) (citations omitted) it was contended that the hypothetical observer would be concerned about the prospect of the wife being without legal representation. in that respect, the wife submitted that: the hypothetical observer would likely consider the cause of justice advanced by the continued representation by ms d, the counsel who prepared and appeared for the wife at the twelve day trial in 2016, particularly as the further trial will be determined upon much the same evidence as the previous hearing.  fe’s summary of argument filed on 27 july 2022, paragraph 25)
disposition regrettably, it appears that the primary judge was led into error by the parties in these proceedings, who contended that the relevant principle to be applied in determining whether a legal practitioner should be prevented from acting for a party, in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process, is the principle set out above. the correct test that should have been applied by the primary judge, in determining whether a legal practitioner should be restrained from acting on behalf of a party, is that which is adumbrated by the full court of the federal court of australia (besanko, lee and abraham jj) in porter v dyer (2022) 402 alr 659 who applied, with approval, the following statement of principle by griffiths j in mumbin v northern territory of australia (no 1) [2020] fca 475: the relevant principles which guide the exercise of the court’s separate discretion are broadly as follows: (a) the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the court has an inherent jurisdiction to ensure the due administration of justice, to protect the integrity of the judicial process and to restrain legal practitioners from acting in a particular case as part of its supervisory jurisdiction (see, for example, grimwade v meagher [1995] vicrp 28, [1995] 1 vr 446 at 452 per mandie j and dealer support services pty ltd v motor trades association of australia ltd [2014] fca 1065, 228 fcr 252 at [37] per beach j). (b) the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).   the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably informed member of the public might conclude that the proper administration of justice requires that a solicitor be prevented from acting in the interests of the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the appearance of justice (i prefer this formulation of the principle, as opposed to the use of the term “would”: see timbercorp at [62] per anderson j and the cases cited therein, as opposed to the different formulation adopted by beach j in dealer support services at [94], upon which the jawoyn claim applicant relied, but i would regard even that higher standard to have been met in the circumstances here).
... phasis in the original) additionally, we refer to and adopt that which was said by thomas j in a new zealand case, kooky garments ltd v charlton [1994] 1 nzlr 587 at 590 where, in commenting on the role of legal practitioners as officers of the court, his honour stated:
in such cases, apart altogether from the position of the client, the court is not receiving the assistance of counsel who are observably independent. independence is a function of counsel. the court is entitled to assume that solicitors and counsel appearing before it possess that independence. solicitors not only owe a duty to their clients to do the best for them but also owe an overriding duty to the court. the same overriding duty is owed by counsel who have been granted a right of audience to appear in this court. as part of their professional responsibility, therefore, solicitors and counsel must ensure that they do not appear in a matter in which they have an actual or potential conflict of interest or where, by reason of their relationship with their client, their professional independence can be called in question. significantly, that conflict of interest can arise where the personal or reputational interest of the legal practitioner is at stake in the proceedings. in that respect, in mitchell v burell [2008] nswsc 772, brereton j stated that: ... [the] line is crossed only when the solicitor has a personal stake in the outcome of the proceedings or in their conduct, beyond the recovery of proper fees for acting, albeit that the relevant stake may not necessarily be financial, but involves the personal or reputational interest of the solicitor, as will be the case if his or her conduct and integrity come under attack and review in the proceedings. the presence of such circumstances will be a strong indication that the interests of justice – which in this field involve clients being represented by independent and objective lawyers unfettered by concerns about their own interests – require the lawyer to be restrained from continuing to act. otnotes omitted]
ms d’s relationship with the husband
what happened in the lead up and at the meeting
the three limbs of osferatu
delay
the witness issue
has ms d entered the fray? the grieves issue
parties’ costs notices
12.06 costs notices (1) unless the court otherwise orders, this rule applies to all court events, except in an appeal to which chapter 13 applies. (2) not less than 1 day before each court event, the lawyer for a party must give the party a written notice of: (a) the party’s actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the event, and (b) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses. (3) not less than 1 day before each court event: (a) a party’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each other party, a copy of the notice given to the party under subrule (2), and (b) an unrepresented party must file with the court, and serve on each other party, a written statement of: (i) the actual costs incurred by the party up to and including the event, and (ii) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event. (4) if a party is receiving legal aid: (a) subrule (2) and paragraph (3)(a) do not apply to the party’s lawyer, and (b) not less than 1 day before the first day of the trial, the party’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each party, a written statement of the actual costs incurred by the lawyer up to and including the trial. (5) not less than 1 day before the first day of the trial, an independent children’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each party, a written statement of the actual costs incurred by the independent children’s lawyer up to and including the trial. (6) in a financial proceeding, unless the court otherwise orders: (a) a notice under subrule (2) or a statement under paragraph (3)(b) must specify the source of the funds for the costs paid or to be paid, and (b) a party who makes a payment to a lawyer for costs or future costs must disclose to the lawyer the source of funds from which the payment is made.   the party’s actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the event, and (b) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   a party’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each other party, a copy of the notice given to the party under subrule (2), and (b) an unrepresented party must file with the court, and serve on each other party, a written statement of: (i) the actual costs incurred by the party up to and including the event, and (ii) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event.   an unrepresented party must file with the court, and serve on each other party, a written statement of: (i) the actual costs incurred by the party up to and including the event, and (ii) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event.   the actual costs incurred by the party up to and including the event, and (ii) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event.  ) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event.   subrule (2) and paragraph (3)(a) do not apply to the party’s lawyer, and (b) not less than 1 day before the first day of the trial, the party’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each party, a written statement of the actual costs incurred by the lawyer up to and including the trial.   not less than 1 day before the first day of the trial, the party’s lawyer must file with the court, and serve on each party, a written statement of the actual costs incurred by the lawyer up to and including the trial.   a notice under subrule (2) or a statement under paragraph (3)(b) must specify the source of the funds for the costs paid or to be paid, and (b) a party who makes a payment to a lawyer for costs or future costs must disclose to the lawyer the source of funds from which the payment is made.   a party who makes a payment to a lawyer for costs or future costs must disclose to the lawyer the source of funds from which the payment is made.
note: the court may relieve a party from being required to disclose the source of the funds if, for example, the source is a third party (see rule 1.31).   if a person fails to comply with subrule (3), (4) or (5), the person must file the relevant costs estimate or particulars of costs with the court and serve it on each other party within 3 days of the court event or within such other time period as the court directs. (8) the court may record, by way of notation, on the face of a case management order the terms of any costs notice and any comments it has about costs incurred in the proceeding, including in relation to their consistency with previous costs notices, and their proportionality. (9) in this rule:
lawyer does not include counsel instructed by another lawyer.   by the second and third respondents on 10 january 2022, (b) by the first respondent on 10 january 2022, and (c) by the applicant on 14 january 2022.
2. judgment otherwise be reserved.
... i further note the email from the associate to the parties on 16 december 2021 requesting their costs notices pursuant to rule 12.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. chambers confirms receipt of this requested notice from the first respondent and the second & third respondents. could the solicitor for the applicant please provide the requested cost notice by 4.00pm on friday 21 january 2022. could the solicitor for the applicant please confirm who is acting for the applicant. i note the court has on record [the solicitors] however emails have been received from [other solicitor]. please do not hesitate to contact chambers if you have any queries. kind regards, (associate) ...
ms d’s conduct of the proceeding/offers
aggregate of events
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 march 2023
dated: 21 march 2023
appendix 1
objections to evidence and rulings
#
affidavit
paragraph no.
basis of objection
ruling
1
affidavit of the wife’s father, sworn 13 august 2021
16- 1st sentence, from “i say that the applicant in this proceeding....to loan documents”
comment. argumentative. opinion not relevant (only relevant evidence is admissible. s.55 evidence act). an opinion or comment or argumentative statement by a deponent is not relevant and therefore, not admissible.
an opinion or comment or argumentative statement by a deponent is not relevant and therefore, not admissible.
struck out. opinion and argument.
2
18-2nd sentence, from “[ms d] will be a material witness ...... required for cross examination purposes”
opinion, comment, argumentative, not relevant
3
18-3rd sentence, from “i was under the impression.... 25 february 2020”
subjective belief not probative, opinion, comment, argumentative, not relevant
stays in. belief of party relevant.
4
19- 2nd sentence, from “she has gotten to know me and i feel that my wife and i are at as strict disadvantage with her continuing to represent the applicant”
opinion, comment, argumentative, not relevant.
passage, “she has gotten to know me and”, struck out, opinion and conclusion, and balance stays in, relevant.
5
19-3rd sentence, from “given the above circumstances it is most inappropriate for [the solicitors]......the applicant”
opinion, argumentative comment, not relevant
comment, not relevant
6
20, whole
not relevant, argumentative, comment.
stays in. date of complaint/s relevant
7
affidavit of the wife, 6 september2021
9- 1st sentence, from “i agree that [ms d] will be a material witness to the terms of the loan agreement .....”
opinion, argumentative. comment, not relevant
comment, not relevant
struck out. opinion and conclusion.
8
11- 3rd sentence, whole
opinion, argumentative, comment, not relevant
“vehemently”, struck out, mere argument. balance stays in, denial relevant.
9
12 -whole
opinion, comment, argumentative, not relevant
struck out, argument, comment and conclusion.
10
affidavit of the wife’s father, sworn 24 november 2021
7-4th sentence, whole.
speculation, not relevant, argumentative
stays in. relevant.
11
7-5th sentence, whole
stays in, relevant.
12
8-10th sentences, whole, from “i verily believe that [ms d] utilized the documents .... [to end]”
speculation, opinion, comment, argumentative, not relevant
13
8-11th sentence, whole, from “i further believe that without my instructions ...[to end]
14
16- 2nd sentence, from “i believe that [ms d] has a conflict of interest......[to end]”
struck out. opinion of a legal conclusion not relevant.
15
16- 6th sentence, whole
part struck out, from “i believe...up to, witness to”. opinion of a legal conclusion not relevant.
16
affidavit of the wife, 24 november 2021
4- second paragraph, second sentence, from “my understanding was that the loan document......[to end]
not relevant, argumentative, subjective belief not relevant
17
5-3rd sentence, from “furthermore, i say that [the property] has never been matrimonial property and in that regard...”
6, 3rd paragraph, whole, from “the assertion by the applicant demonstrates that the applicant...[to end
26, 2 and 3 sentences-whole
27-whole
not relevant, comment, opinion argumentative
struck out for reasons asserted
33, whole
[1] see paragraphs 8 and 9 of the wife's affidavit filed 6 september 2021.[2] brereton j in mitchell v burrell cited at [36] of these reasons. [3] see recital of all of paragraph [20] of mitchell v burell later in these reasons under the heading “legal principles of the authorities”.[4] letter annexed to husband’s affidavit filed 12 april 2021 as annexure -6 at 29/29 and annexure -6 to the affidavit of the wife’s father filed 11 may 2021 and annexure -1 to the wife’s affidavit of30 march 2021 and referred to in written submission without objection.[5] this is the “draft agreement”.[6] see affidavit of ms mathai filed 19 july 2021[7] struck out upon objection by “objections” filed 14 december 2021.[8] ibid.[9] grieves at paragraph [88].[10] see grieves at [49].[11] see the first instance decision, burns & sellers [2018] famca 91 at [21]. [12] see the last line of the [37] of charisteas 2022 recited above.