last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sykes & sykes [2023] fedcfamc2f 334
orders
the court orders that:  the senior court child expert at court children services at the city b registry of this court at level 2, commonwealth law courts building, city b, nsw shall endeavour to explain these orders to x before introducing the mother to x, (b) the senior court child expert shall endeavour to assist x in leaving the above registry with the mother, (c) the father is not to return to level 2 of the city b registry following the pronouncement of these orders today.   the senior court child expert shall endeavour to assist x in leaving the above registry with the mother, (c) the father is not to return to level 2 of the city b registry following the pronouncement of these orders today.   the father is not to return to level 2 of the city b registry following the pronouncement of these orders today.   each wednesday from after school to 5.30pm, and (b) each saturday from 10.00am to 1.00pm.   each saturday from 10.00am to 1.00pm.   each alternate wednesday from after school to 6.30pm, and (b) every alternate weekend from saturday from 10.00am to sunday 3.00pm.   every alternate weekend from saturday from 10.00am to sunday 3.00pm.   each alternate wednesday from after school to 7.00pm, and (b) each alternate week from friday after school to sunday 3.00pm.   each alternate week from friday after school to sunday 3.00pm.   each alternate wednesday from after school to before school on thursday, and (b) each alternate week from friday after school to monday morning before school.   each alternate week from friday after school to monday morning before school.   with the mother for the first half of the christmas school holiday periods in odd numbered years and in alternate years thereafter and the second half in even numbered years and in alternate years thereafter, and (b) with the father for the second half of the christmas school holiday periods in odd numbered years and in alternate years thereafter and the first half in even numbered years and in alternate years thereafter.   with the father for the second half of the christmas school holiday periods in odd numbered years and in alternate years thereafter and the first half in even numbered years and in alternate years thereafter.   in all even numbered years: (i) with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the mother from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday, (iv) with the father from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school day), (b) in all odd numbered years: (i) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day, (ii) with the father from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the father from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, (iv) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday), (c) on father’s day, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 9.00am to 7.00pm on father’s day, (d) on mother’s day, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the applicant mother from 9.00am to 7.00pm on mother’s day, (e) on the mother’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the mother’s birthday, (f) on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day, (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the mother from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday, (iv) with the father from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school day),  ) with the mother from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the mother from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday, (iv) with the father from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school day),  i) with the mother from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday, (iv) with the father from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school day),  ) with the father from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school day),   in all odd numbered years: (i) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day, (ii) with the father from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the father from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, (iv) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday), (c) on father’s day, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 9.00am to 7.00pm on father’s day, (d) on mother’s day, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the applicant mother from 9.00am to 7.00pm on mother’s day, (e) on the mother’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the mother’s birthday, (f) on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day, (ii) with the father from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the father from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, (iv) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday),  ) with the father from 12 noon christmas day to 12 noon boxing day, (iii) with the father from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, (iv) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday),  i) with the father from the conclusion of school good friday until 12 noon easter sunday provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, (iv) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday),  ) with the mother from 12 noon easter sunday until the commencement of school on the tuesday following the easter monday (or 10.00am in the event of a non-school tuesday),   on father’s day, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 9.00am to 7.00pm on father’s day, (d) on mother’s day, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the applicant mother from 9.00am to 7.00pm on mother’s day, (e) on the mother’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the mother’s birthday, (f) on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   on mother’s day, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the applicant mother from 9.00am to 7.00pm on mother’s day, (e) on the mother’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the mother’s birthday, (f) on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   on the mother’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the mother’s birthday, (f) on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   on the father’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 7.00pm in the event of a non-school day on the father’s birthday, (g) on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   on x’s birthday, if x is with the father, x shall spend time with the mother from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday, (h) on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.   on x’s birthday, provided the child has begun to spend unsupervised time with the father pursuant to the above orders, if x is with the mother, x shall spend time with the father from 3.00pm to 7.00pm in the event of a school day and 9.00am to 2.00pm in the event of a non-school day on x’s birthday.
changeovers
interstate travel
international travel  the travelling parent gives the non-travelling parent not less than four weeks written notice of their intention to travel overseas with x, including the primary destination, (b) subject to the preceding sub-paragraph, the travelling parent provides written confirmation to the non-travelling parent that any travel overseas shall be limited to countries which: (i) are parties to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading, or (ii) a country that is not a party to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading and the non-travelling party gives written consent for x to travel in that country, (iii) at least 14 days prior to departure, the travelling parent provides to the non-travelling parent: copies of return tickets for x, a detailed itinerary including addresses and telephone numbers for the accommodation in which x will be staying, a list of all the countries x will be visiting (including transit destinations).   subject to the preceding sub-paragraph, the travelling parent provides written confirmation to the non-travelling parent that any travel overseas shall be limited to countries which: (i) are parties to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading, or (ii) a country that is not a party to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading and the non-travelling party gives written consent for x to travel in that country, (iii) at least 14 days prior to departure, the travelling parent provides to the non-travelling parent: copies of return tickets for x, a detailed itinerary including addresses and telephone numbers for the accommodation in which x will be staying, a list of all the countries x will be visiting (including transit destinations).   are parties to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading, or (ii) a country that is not a party to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading and the non-travelling party gives written consent for x to travel in that country, (iii) at least 14 days prior to departure, the travelling parent provides to the non-travelling parent: copies of return tickets for x, a detailed itinerary including addresses and telephone numbers for the accommodation in which x will be staying, a list of all the countries x will be visiting (including transit destinations).  ) a country that is not a party to the hague convention and where no current travel warning advising against non-essential travel to that country has been issued by the department of foreign affairs and trading and the non-travelling party gives written consent for x to travel in that country, (iii) at least 14 days prior to departure, the travelling parent provides to the non-travelling parent: copies of return tickets for x, a detailed itinerary including addresses and telephone numbers for the accommodation in which x will be staying, a list of all the countries x will be visiting (including transit destinations).  i) at least 14 days prior to departure, the travelling parent provides to the non-travelling parent: copies of return tickets for x, a detailed itinerary including addresses and telephone numbers for the accommodation in which x will be staying, a list of all the countries x will be visiting (including transit destinations).
extra-curricular activities and schooling
communication & exchange of information   any serious medical problems or illnesses suffered by x while in the other’s care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed for x, (c) any medical emergency pertaining to x, and (d) any other matter relevant to x’s welfare.   any medication that has been prescribed for x, (c) any medical emergency pertaining to x, and (d) any other matter relevant to x’s welfare.   any medical emergency pertaining to x, and (d) any other matter relevant to x’s welfare.   any other matter relevant to x’s welfare.
injunctions
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
documents relied upon
evidence
mother’s trial affidavit filed 15 march 2022
father’s trial affidavit filed 11 march 2022  has attended 6 counselling sessions at school, beginning 20th august 2020. during these sessions, [x] has been learning coping strategies for managing anxiety. [x] displayed difficulty engaging in class following his parent’s separation. [x] often became emotional during class and reported somatic complaints such as stomach aches and headaches. after approximately 2 weeks he engaged in the classroom as he had previously. [x] has expressed experiencing anxiety following his parent’s separation, including difficulty sleeping and preoccupation with thoughts about where he will live. in the last week, [x] has demonstrated difficulty regulating his emotions in class. [x] has responded well to mindfulness activities to regulate his emotions.   attended his initial session on 9 october 2020. at this session i was able to take a history from [x] and his father about his mother’s sudden departure from the family home on the 27th august while [x] was at school. she also removed [x]’s belongings to the new location and took [x] there after school. [x] has been traumatised by this experience. his mother retained him until [x] became so distressed that she returned him to his father. since this time his mother is insisting that [x] continue to visit her regularly. [x] is extremely anxious that his mother will once again try to retain him at her home against his will. he only visits her on his bike with at least two friends and talks to her over the fence. most recently on 23 october during one of these visits his mother grabbed [x]’s hands and handlebars of the bike and told him words to the effect that he was not to leave. [x] had to struggle free and rode home to his father in an extremely distressed state that his mother had tried to retain him against his wishes. [x] has been too anxious to go near his mother’s house since. i plan some further sessions of supportive ipt counselling for [x] to talk through the issues that are troubling him. (court’s italics)
oral evidence of the parties
ms kaiti: if the court was to make your proposed orders and [x] goes to live with you – and let’s assume the court makes an order that he spends no – he’s to spend no time with his father for 12 weeks after he moves back in with you. if it gets to a point – i’m just hypothesising now – he has moved back in with you. he knows he can’t see the father for 12 weeks – this is your proposed order. and let’s assume you get into an argument with the child, and let’s assume that he starts screaming at you. what are you going to do? [ms sykes]: walk away, tell him i’m walking away, because that’s important for him to know – that i’m not going anywhere, i’m just leaving his space. and i was advised to get him, like, a box of stress toys so that he could play with those until he calms down, and then we can try and--- ms kaiti: yes. well, what if he throws the toys away, keeps on screaming at you, what are you going to do? [ms sykes]: call a friend or a family member. ms kaiti: right. and what are you going to do in the meantime with [x] while you wait for the friend to come? [ms sykes]: just let him scream, as long as he’s not hurting himself. ms kaiti: is it possible you might ask him to go to his room? ms sykes: it’s a – it’s a small house. it – i don’t think that would help too much. ms kaiti: what if he says to you, “i’m leaving. i’m going back to dad’s,” and he proceeds to walk out the front door, what are you going to do then? [ms sykes]: i would have to try and ask him to stop and then just follow him and call somebody for help. ms kaiti: all right. well, what if he doesn’t stop, what are you going to do? [ms sykes]: then i would keep following him. ms kaiti: would you physically apprehend him and bring him home? [ms sykes]: if he was getting into danger, like running across a road, then i would stop him.
ms mcmahon: yes, and so nothing really has worked, has it, to date? [mr sykes]: well, you can’t treat the kid as bad as you treated him for years and then expect it all just to go away in five minutes. [ms u], the [c contact centre] supervisor, made it quite clear he needs more counselling and then she thought she could move forward with it. now, she’s stopped him from going to counselling altogether, so we’re back to square one.
evidence of the paternal grandmother
evidence of mr h, forensic psychologist
4(b) ...based on [dr w’s] referral and [ms sykes]’ account of her symptoms, it is my opinion that she met criteria for [mental health conditions] commenced treatment. [ms sykes] described significant distress in the reported emotionally abusive behaviours by her then-partner, resulting in low mood, sleep disturbance, lethargy, hypervigilance when at home, amotivation, nervousness, hopelessness, and feelings of worthlessness. she acknowledged very infrequent passive suicidal ideation (i.e., once to twice a year), but this did not appear to be a predominant symptom and she reported that she was able to effectively manage these through thought challenging. she denied a prior history of any mental health concerns, and the above symptoms appeared to emerge in the context of the reported emotional abuse by her partner rather than being long­standing mental health difficulties. [ms sykes]’ symptoms have largely persisted through the time that she has engaged in treatment with me due to her facing additional situational stressors, including the process of leaving her ex-partner, her father’s ill heath, the death of her father, family court proceedings, and limited contact with her son. i have utilised a combination of [mental health therapies] with [ms sykes], with a focus on thought challenging to address her negative self-talk, behavioural activation, relaxation, mindfulness, and problem-solving. [ms sykes] has presented as engaged during treatment sessions and has implemented suggested strategies between appointments. this has been effective in managing some of her symptoms, but others have remained difficult to control throughout her time in treatment (e.g., sleep disturbance). i recently reduced the duration of her sessions from 60 minutes to 30 minutes as the focus has shifted from treatment to maintenance (i.e., monitoring her mental health and implementation of adaptive coping skills). ... 4(d) ...she has reported that she has had more frequent phone contact with her son, but she has found these phone calls to be distressing due to her son’s presentation and her difficulty engaging him in conversation. despite these challenges, she has persisted and remained solution-focused in her coping. ... 4(e) ...in addition to ongoing treatment with me, i have encouraged [ms sykes] to continue to consult with her general practitioner regarding her use of psychotropic medication to manage her mood. she is not currently taking any psychotropic medication and reported that at present she is able to manage her symptoms with cognitive and behavioural strategies alone. she stated that she is willing to return to taking psychotropic medication in the future if she experiences a significant deterioration in her mental health. i have also supported [ms sykes]’ recent engagement with psychologist [ms y] at [p counsellors]. i am aware that she has attended two sessions with [ms y] and the focus has been on developing strategies for reconnecting with her son and managing any difficult behaviours that he may exhibit in the event that the parenting arrangements are amended so that he resides with her. ... 4(f) ...as the primary source of [ms sykes]’ psychological distress at present is her limited contact with her son, i believe that her emotional and psychological wellbeing would be improved if the parenting arrangements allow for greater and more prolonged access to her son. in the absence of this currently, it is recommended that she remain in treatment with me and continue to implement adaptive coping strategies to manage her psychological distress.
4(g) ...it is my opinion that this would remove the primary source of [ms sykes]’ psychological distress, leading to an improvement in her mental wellbeing and alleviation of her symptoms. it is likely that having her son reside with her will create a new source of stress for [ms sykes] given the rupture in their relationship, so it is recommended that she continue to engage in treatment with me and [ms y] for a period of time to monitor how she adjusts. [ms sykes] has expressed a motivation to continue with both forms of intervention.
4(h) ...it is my opinion that [ms sykes]’ symptoms of mental ill health are not lifelong or chronic. i believe that they emerged in the context of a reported emotionally abusive behaviour by her ex­partner and have since been maintained through the addition of other situational stressors as her life circumstances have changed (e.g., leaving her ex-partner, limited contact with her son). she presents with a number of protective factors (e.g., adaptive coping skills, positive support network, psychological mindedness), which i believe have buffered her from her symptoms having a significant impairment on her daily functioning. it is my opinion that her prognosis is sound, but i do not expect her symptoms to abate entirely until the sources of her distress are resolved (e.g., lack of contact with her son, family court proceedings).
child dispute conference held on 9 december 2020
reports of mr g
single expert report
166. at this stage there is agreement for [x] to live with the father in the interim. in the interim it is recommended that [x] spend one day each weekend (9am to 4pm) for four weeks with the mother, before commencing overnight time each alternate weekend (saturday to sunday) for four occasions before moving to each alternate weekend friday to monday. if the court holds concerns that the mother poses an unacceptable risk of harm then it is recommended that the time occur in the presence of a family member or friend of the mother. it is recommended that all changeovers occur at a contact centre, with the exception of the mother returning [x] to school on a monday. if any orders are not complied with it is recommended the matter be urgently relisted and the court may need to make orders for [x] to live with his mother and spend limited time with his father. if there is full compliance with the orders it is recommended that after six months of the time being established with the mother further assessment occurs. it is recommended that the parents and [x] attend [p counsellors] immediately and that information from [p counsellors] is sourced for the information of the court and any future assessor.
ms kaiti: if that time did – if orders were made in line with what the father is seeking and those orders do not – are not followed – doesn’t – not followed, because the father has said that he has complied with orders and takes [x] to the contact centre, etcetera – just [x] won’t go. but if that continues on the father’s proposal, are there any risks to [x] in that regard? [ms z]: i just – i think it’s – i’m just not quite clear about the question, but my concern is that the father has not complied with the orders. he has not been able to facilitate the time. he is the parent responsible for facilitating that time. so i think i would cavil with that assessment that he appears to have made, and that he has not demonstrated his ability to facilitate it. so i would not be hopeful or aspirational that it’s likely to occur in the future.
ms kaiti: and in relation to the mother’s proposal about [x] being – it’s more or less forced to live with her, because he won’t be having any contact with the father – he will be just placed in her care – is there anything that she can do to make it an easier – to make it easier for [x] adjust while living with her to – with no contact with his father?--- [ms z]: so, essentially, it’s about managing the initial escalation of what you anticipate with [x]’s behaviour. so what you would anticipate might be what the father has talked about and him being disruptive. it would be highly likely – when i saw the parties, they were living close – quite close proximity to each other. i could see that they – the possibility that [x] may abscond. things to think about when a child is transitioning and settling would be the mother taking some time off work so she’s available one on one, that the mother has people who are very supportive to her around, that she thinks about people who [x] might have had a good relationship with before and make sure that they’re around. living quite a distance apart would be preferable, from my perspective, and in some cases, a family member takes – takes a child on a holiday so the – it’s completely removed from the current situation, just to settle in to have some time to focus on the relationship.
ms kaiti: now, it has been a year since you made that – since you wrote your report. it has been a year of [x] not having a relationship with his mother. does that impact on any orders that the court – of – any orders in light of – that the court can make in relation to [x]? so what i mean by that, [ms z], is it the situation that this current situation is further entrenched – it has been a year, and [x] views about the mother and towards the mother are further entrenched?--- [ms z]: that seems to be correct. yes. ms kaiti: and wouldn’t that make – would that make it more difficult for the mother’s proposal about a change of residence for [x] to start living with her? would that make it more difficult for [x]?--- [ms z]: i’m not sure if it would be more difficult, but it certainly – it would be more difficult for him to spend time with his mother while he was living with his father. i would agree with that. in terms of living with his mother, i think it would have been as equally as difficult 12 months ago as it would be today. ms kaiti: would there be any – would this – would there be further risks now with the time delay of being – it has been a year of no time. has that opened up any further risks? [ms z]: i’m unclear what you mean. ms kaiti: well, he’s more or less – you say that he has a – we don’t want to be in a situation where he’s not spending time with – not spending time, the longer it goes on for – that is, not spending time – his position is further entrenched? [ms z]: yes. ms kaiti: would that make it more difficult for [x] to adapt to a change of residence with his mother? [ms z]: as i said, i don’t think it would make it any more difficult than it was 12 months ago. but the older he gets, particularly when he enters the adolescent stage of development, that is when i would say that it’s almost impossible to move a child from one parent to the other parent who they’ve previously rejected, so there’s certainly a time imperative there, and his – his younger age will assist in his ability to transition, or more in his ability to resist the transition.
ms kaiti: so if [x] was restored to – not restored – if [x] was to live with his mother and spend time with his father in due course, what risks are there if he was to live with his mother in light of reports to [ms o] where he has said he would kill himself?--- [ms z]: well, i – i think that the court needs to take into account his emotional state and that that’s showing he’s very distressed. i think the court also needs to consider [ms o]’s qualifications in terms of her interactions with him. i don’t know particularly, and again, i’m – i’m loath to make a – a comment. i – i’ve met him on the one occasion. i can’t say whether he’s more likely or not to do that, but i would anticipate the mother, as any focused parent would, would manage that, seek appropriate support and advice about that and protect him.
ms kaiti: now, have you got any recommendations as to further counselling for [x]? let’s say he’s – an order is made that he lives with his mother. do you agree with me that he will require counselling to occur during that period – during that transition?--- [ms z]: i think you have to be really careful about that – and my view may not be shared with [mr g], for example – because in that initial transition period, the first two to four weeks, if he’s attending counselling, he’s likely to use that as a vehicle to report negatively about the mother and – as opposed to giving him that time to settle into the relationship, have a realistic understanding of what his relationship is actually like with his mother – those sorts of things. so while i would suggest counselling in the longer term, in the immediate term i would suggest the mother access counselling support as to how to manage it. if there is an acute incident – for example, self-harm – then, yes, he would need some intervention. but otherwise, my suggestion would be to leave it for two to four weeks, preferably four weeks, if – if the mother felt that that was appropriate, and that the mother make some decisions about whether she felt he needed it or not. my advice – my strong advice – would be to ensure that the person providing the psychological support is qualified and has expertise in the complex dynamics which we’re talking about with this family, so that they’re alive to multiple hypotheses as opposed to rather just aligning with the father or aligning with the mother.
ms kaiti: living with the father with a view for [x] to start spending supervised time and moving to unsupervised time?--- [ms z]: i think you have to think about what the purpose of that counselling is. is that counselling to emotionally support him in a day-to-day – on a day-to-day basis, or is it about supporting him in spending time with his mother? and if it’s the latter, then i think [mr g] has demonstrated that that’s not practical and not likely to be helpful.
ms mcmahon: so notwithstanding that the father never heard the mother ever make any threat, this counsellor – and i’m not sure where she has got this information from – presumably the father – that the counsellor has made this recommendation on the basis of all of these threats to kill people, when no actual threats were ever actually said, or heard by the father. what do you say about that? in terms of what that says about the father---and parenting? [ms z]: well, it raises concerns if he – if he was not genuinely fearful of the mother or fearful for [x]’s safety, then it raises concern about what other dynamic may be there that’s influencing him in terms of not supporting [x]’s relationship with his mum.   z]: my view and my understanding from [mr g]’s records is that it – it’s fairly clear that if the father had supported, genuinely supported [x] in his relationship with his mother and facilitated it, that [x] would have attended. that relies on the father not basing what occurs on the basis of [x] says he doesn’t want to go. that’s on the father genuinely supporting the relationship and saying, “look, mate, i think it’s good for you to go.” i think they’re very aligned with each other. i think [x] looks up to his dad. i think that [x] is likely to do whatever his dad asks him, if it’s genuine.
ms mcmahon: now, are you aware of the kind of work that has been carried out around divorced parents and their children by people such as [mr ab]? [ms z]: yes. ms mcmahon: and they talk about, don’t they, a kind of continuum that relationships sit along when parties separate? so you have a kind of positive interaction with both parents, and the child is pretty happy with that, and then it goes along to the more extreme part of the continuum, where, you know, the child is estranged, possibly realistic estrangement because of terrible abuse or whatever, right to the other extreme of alienation, and they call it pathological alienation, where there doesn’t really seem to be a real underlying apparent reason for the level of rejection. now, pausing there, where do you say that [x] sits along that continuum?--- [ms z]: again, it is a continuum, and that i would agree that he is on the end of the spectrum, that he is alienated from the mother. however, i would also point out that the mother very openly said, “i have contributed – contributed to this in some ways.” and that’s what we see, and it’s referenced in that work as well, that it’s not unusual for both parents to contribute. it’s about looking at the relative contribution of that. i don’t think – as i’ve said in my report, i don’t think he is realistically estranged from his mother. i think there are a whole lot of other dynamics at play, but that the mother has contributed to some extent.
ms ticehurst: looking at the mother’s proposal, as i understand it, your preference – are you still favouring her proposed orders, or a self-executing order, as proposed – or as you were asked some questions about by the court?--- [ms z]: i think my preference, as i’ve clearly stated, is for [x] to live with his father and to spend time with his mother, if that can be achieved, but what i don’t want to do is set it up to fail and that – that it continues. so i think if the court considered that it was a possibility, or, preferably, likely, that the father would be able to facilitate the time so that [x] doesn’t just turn up and say – rejects the mother, then – then i would want that to happen. but the court has to consider how realistic that is.
ms ticehurst: with regard to the risks that have been – you’ve been asked some questions about what would happen if [x] was to move into mum’s household, what the risks would be. it would be fair to say – i think you’ve already answered this – it would be enormously distressing for [x], wouldn’t it?--- [ms z]: yes. i think it – it would be, particularly because he has got what seems to be quite an enmeshed relationship with his dad, so that’s going to be very difficult – that experience of separating from him would be very difficult and disruptive and – and distressing for him.
ms ticehurst: and the really tricky part – as i said, it is a very, very complex area, but there are cases, aren’t there, where alignments are concerned, where children turn up at a contact centre, and they – they reject the parent, but they’re not distressed. they just make it clear, “we’re not going to go,” but it’s not accompanied by an emotional effect. in this particular case, you would have read the [c contact centre] reports and [l contact service] reports, and particularly i’m referring to the [c contact centre] report which is annexed to the father’s affidavit. it was the visit on 7 june 2021. it’s annexure j, if i can just take you to the page. what the report writer says – or the service says is that they felt they couldn’t continue anymore because of [x]’s– essentially, it was, as i understood it, his distress. where there’s emotion accompanied with the rejection, does that give you more concern around these expressions of self-harm?--- [ms z]: it depends. so it depends on whether those expressions at the contact centre or at the changeover with the supervisor are – are reflective of him feeling a need to demonstrate to his father his loyalty to his father in quite significant distress, and so – and i also imagine he feels quite distressed because it must be very difficult for him to be thinking about going to spend time with his mother, when he knows – or if the court finds, if he thinks that his father does not support that, and he’s particularly connected to his father and/or if he’s fearful of his father. so the answer is it’s possible, but there are so many different dynamics potentially at play that it’s difficult for me to say with any certainty, yes, this is very likely, or, no, it’s not very likely at all. you have to take it seriously, and the court would have to consider if he is to go to live with his mum, does the mother have the capacity to respond appropriately if those statements were to be made, and to seek treatment, and to provide him with a safe and stable environment. and – and it’s possible that he may get there and feel a relief as well. so it’s very difficult to make assumptions that this is likely to happen or not.
his honour: thank you. okay. well, then assume, [ms z], that the mother is presently ingesting medication, but i think [mr h]’s evidence was that, nevertheless, these symptoms had persisted to the present time, and his last consultation with the mother was on 7 march this year. so, again, just focusing on the mother’s likely parenting capacity for the child in circumstances where the child comes to live with the mother, and let’s assume for the moment that there’s challenging behaviours exhibited by the child in the presence of the mother or towards the mother, then does this concern you that the mother’s mental health symptomology, at least in certain respects, persists, despite treatment?--- [ms z]: i think it doesn’t surprise me that they persist, given she’s not spending time with her child, so i would expect that some symptoms would continue to persist in that context. i think what the court has to think about is her coping and adjustment and what that means if the child was to come back with her. and so – i’m not her treating psychologist, so i’m – i’m wary of making comments about that, but, in a general sense, your honour, when this sort – when it’s being considered – so if a child is to go and live with a previously rejected parent, it does require quite a sophisticated parenting approach. and so if you were to find that she didn’t have that capacity, then, yes, that would be a factor to think about.
mr nasti: well, you’ve heard his honour’s summary of things which are in issue, that another 12 months has elapsed since the last time we were in court, there had been one attempt which was – which didn’t go well for contact, and there was one attempt at counselling, which also didn’t go well. what is your evidence in terms of the position of [x] now, one further year down the track, in terms of your recommendation about him effectively being able to be moved to his mother’s care?--- [ms z]: what i would say – just being mindful of the evidence given before – is that my evidence does not change because the dynamic itself has not changed, so the same dynamic remains in place, further therapy has been attempted, further supervised time has been attempted, and it has been unsuccessful. so nothing has changed in terms of my prior evidence given, with the exception of the situation is now probably further entrenched. mr nasti: and that further entrenchment, is that another reason – or a reason why the option of moving the child has become more distant, or has that, in your view, not changed that dynamic, that you still say that that’s an option, which is a safe option for [x]?--- [ms z]: i think it’s a safe option, but it’s a balance that his honour has spoken about on the last occasion. he talked about the possible distress to the child, whether or not – the things that you’ve raised in terms of whether he will abscond or not, so it’s always a balance. neither is ideal, if he lives with his father and doesn’t spend time with his mother, that’s not ideal. if he moves to live with his mother then there is likely to be distress for him about that, and he may settle with her, and he may have the opportunity to have with both parents, but it’s a balance. there is, very sadly, no perfect outcome for [x] in this matter. ... ms mcmahon: [ms z], so the icl has taken you through the updating position, as has his honour – and, sorry, i’m acting on behalf of the mother. you would agree with me it’s clear that if [x] – sorry, if the decision as to whether [x] spends time with the mother is left to the father, given what you’ve read, it’s not going to happen, is it? [ms z]: i agree with that. ms mcmahon: yes. and we have – when you talk about the balance, i guess getting to, i guess, the very sticky sharp point of this issue, is that – well, what the mother is doing is asking his honour to, i guess, provide her the ability or the option to spend time with [x], which although it may provide some temporary psychological upset for [x], there could be a long-term benefit if that is managed appropriately, would you agree with that? [ms z]: yes.
legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) (the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration) ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.   in the child’s interview with the single expert report writer, he tended to use the term “we” and “us” referring to himself and the father, rather than using “i or me”. the child repeated to the single expert report writer many key themes the father had stated in his single expert report interview. often when the child was asked by the single expert report writer for further contextual information the child responded with, “i don’t know”, (b) the child told the single expert report writer that he was living with the father and not seeing the mother. when asked why he was not seeing the mother, the child said, “it is just from the court what they have said”, (c) the child was asked by the single expert report writer what the mother had allegedly done to scare his friends and the father’s friends from coming over to the family home to which he stated that he did not know, (d) the child was asked by the single expert report writer what sort of things would the mother be screaming about, to which the child replied, “i can’t remember now”, (e) the child told the single expert report writer that the father does not really like the mother and that they have never actually got along. he told the single expert report writer that the father wants him to stay with the father. when asked by the single expert report writer whether the father thought he should spend time with the mother the child stated, “i don’t think so because he wants me to feel safe”, (f) the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the child told the single expert report writer that he was living with the father and not seeing the mother. when asked why he was not seeing the mother, the child said, “it is just from the court what they have said”, (c) the child was asked by the single expert report writer what the mother had allegedly done to scare his friends and the father’s friends from coming over to the family home to which he stated that he did not know, (d) the child was asked by the single expert report writer what sort of things would the mother be screaming about, to which the child replied, “i can’t remember now”, (e) the child told the single expert report writer that the father does not really like the mother and that they have never actually got along. he told the single expert report writer that the father wants him to stay with the father. when asked by the single expert report writer whether the father thought he should spend time with the mother the child stated, “i don’t think so because he wants me to feel safe”, (f) the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the child was asked by the single expert report writer what the mother had allegedly done to scare his friends and the father’s friends from coming over to the family home to which he stated that he did not know, (d) the child was asked by the single expert report writer what sort of things would the mother be screaming about, to which the child replied, “i can’t remember now”, (e) the child told the single expert report writer that the father does not really like the mother and that they have never actually got along. he told the single expert report writer that the father wants him to stay with the father. when asked by the single expert report writer whether the father thought he should spend time with the mother the child stated, “i don’t think so because he wants me to feel safe”, (f) the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the child was asked by the single expert report writer what sort of things would the mother be screaming about, to which the child replied, “i can’t remember now”, (e) the child told the single expert report writer that the father does not really like the mother and that they have never actually got along. he told the single expert report writer that the father wants him to stay with the father. when asked by the single expert report writer whether the father thought he should spend time with the mother the child stated, “i don’t think so because he wants me to feel safe”, (f) the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the child told the single expert report writer that the father does not really like the mother and that they have never actually got along. he told the single expert report writer that the father wants him to stay with the father. when asked by the single expert report writer whether the father thought he should spend time with the mother the child stated, “i don’t think so because he wants me to feel safe”, (f) the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the child was asked by the single expert report writer to think really hard about whether there was anything he could remember which was good about the mother. he thought for a while and said, “nothing”, (g) when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   when the child was asked by the single expert report writer why he was worried the mother may not return him to the care of the father, the child said, “i don’t know”, (h) the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.   the single expert report writer spoke with the child about the observation session with each of his parents. the single expert report writer explained that she would be present for the entire duration of the time. the child stated it was okay and did not protest or appear to be distressed in any way at the prospect of being seen in the company of his mother. when the father and the paternal grandmother entered the room for the observation session the single expert report writer explained to the father that after their observation session she will be seeing the child with the mother. the father stated he was not aware that an observation session was to occur as part of the assessment. the father apologised to the child and said he did not know about it. he asked the child if he wanted to see the mother and reassured him that he did not have to if he did not wish to. the child then said he did not wish to see the mother. the court does not accept the oral evidence of the father in this context, inter alia, that he had not stated to the single expert report writer that he would not agree to the observation session occurring with the mother.  e court should state that the above conduct of the father and the paternal grandmother at the single expert report interviews in front of the child is very concerning. such conduct in front of the child was not child focused and tended to reinforce the child’s adverse views towards the mother. and such uncontained conduct of the father and paternal grandmother in a formal setting such as the single expert report interviews does raise a real concern in the court as to the ability and willingness of the father and the paternal grandmother to shield the child from their negative views of the mother in the father’s home),   the single expert report writer’s opinion and related evidence that the child and the father are very aligned and have an enmeshed relationship with each other. in this context, she had stated, inter alia, that the child looks up to the father and was likely to do whatever the father asks him, “if it’s genuine”. the court also refers to her opinion and related evidence relating to the father’s unwillingness and inability to facilitate a meaningful relationship between the child and the mother, (j) in the first report of family therapist mr g dated 6 may 2021, the child had told mr g that the father had reminded him to say certain negative things about the mother earlier in the day. the child’s account of life prior to the parties’ separation, around the time of separation, and following separation was generally vague, and when pressed for details by mr g, the details were also vague. similarly, the child’s account to mr g was generally expressed as a joint position he held with the father, for example, “she lied to us” and “she took all our food”. mr g had stated that the child has a very strong attachment with the father, he trusts the father and he believes what the father says. mr g had stated that the child’s views relating to the mother (such as the child being upset and angry with the mother, and that she acted poorly toward him and the father at the time of the parties’ separation) had been in part directly and indirectly influenced by the father. mr g had stated that the father continues to give signals to the child that is not safe for the child to be with the mother. mr g had stated that given the trust that the child has in the father, it is extremely likely that the child would comply with an instruction from the father that the child spends time with the mother. he had stated that no further reportable family therapy would appear appropriate unless the father commits to actively, rather than passively, supporting and encouraging the child’s relationship with the mother, including spending time with her, (k) in the second report of mr g dated 23 september 2021, mr g had stated that the father continues to assert that it is not safe for the child spend time with the mother, that the child does not want to spend time with the mother, and that the father cannot and will not force the child spend time with the mother. he stated that the child continues to trust the father and accept the father’s views. he stated that it would appear extremely unlikely that family therapy will be beneficial unless the father is actively supporting of the child having an ongoing relationship with the mother including spending time with her.   in the first report of family therapist mr g dated 6 may 2021, the child had told mr g that the father had reminded him to say certain negative things about the mother earlier in the day. the child’s account of life prior to the parties’ separation, around the time of separation, and following separation was generally vague, and when pressed for details by mr g, the details were also vague. similarly, the child’s account to mr g was generally expressed as a joint position he held with the father, for example, “she lied to us” and “she took all our food”. mr g had stated that the child has a very strong attachment with the father, he trusts the father and he believes what the father says. mr g had stated that the child’s views relating to the mother (such as the child being upset and angry with the mother, and that she acted poorly toward him and the father at the time of the parties’ separation) had been in part directly and indirectly influenced by the father. mr g had stated that the father continues to give signals to the child that is not safe for the child to be with the mother. mr g had stated that given the trust that the child has in the father, it is extremely likely that the child would comply with an instruction from the father that the child spends time with the mother. he had stated that no further reportable family therapy would appear appropriate unless the father commits to actively, rather than passively, supporting and encouraging the child’s relationship with the mother, including spending time with her, (k) in the second report of mr g dated 23 september 2021, mr g had stated that the father continues to assert that it is not safe for the child spend time with the mother, that the child does not want to spend time with the mother, and that the father cannot and will not force the child spend time with the mother. he stated that the child continues to trust the father and accept the father’s views. he stated that it would appear extremely unlikely that family therapy will be beneficial unless the father is actively supporting of the child having an ongoing relationship with the mother including spending time with her.   in the second report of mr g dated 23 september 2021, mr g had stated that the father continues to assert that it is not safe for the child spend time with the mother, that the child does not want to spend time with the mother, and that the father cannot and will not force the child spend time with the mother. he stated that the child continues to trust the father and accept the father’s views. he stated that it would appear extremely unlikely that family therapy will be beneficial unless the father is actively supporting of the child having an ongoing relationship with the mother including spending time with her.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  towards the end of the parties’ relationship, as the mother found it difficult to retain a close and connected relationship with the child, she became frustrated and tried to pressure the child to come with her or do what she wanted, (b) the parties’ highly conflictual relationship led to both parties verbally abusing each other in front of the child, and it is likely that the child felt unsafe by such conduct and would have picked up on at times each parent’s dislike of the other. the court infers that this verbal abuse was probably most prevalent during the latter stages of the parties’ relationship, accepting the mother’s evidence that by reason of the father’s verbal abuse towards her she experienced great anxiety and stress and then attended upon her psychologist in about mid-august 2019, and accepting her evidence that by the date of separation in august 2020 she had found the relationship with the father intolerable and she then left the family home. the court does not accept the father’s evidence that it was the mother who yelled more often at himself and at the child from an early age, (c) the mother had, during the parties’ relationship, on at least several occasions, been angry, argumentative and had shouted at the child after having become frustrated with his behaviour, albeit she had tried to apologise to the child afterwards. it is likely that the child had become scared as a result of such behaviour by the mother. the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context. (the court should state that it does not accept that this behaviour of the mother had occurred regularly over a lengthy period of time, and nor does the court accept that she verbally abused or belittled the child, as alleged by the father. in this context, the court observes, for example, that the father had told the single expert report writer on two occasions during their interview that after the separation and in late 2020 he had told the mother that if she wanted to come home she could – “i said you can still always come home” – and he had thought “it would be better for x’s sake, i thought it would be better for him”), (d) there was an occasion when the mother had planned to take the child to see her father who was dying. the father then arranged something more desirable for the child and did not support him leaving with the mother. the child refused to go with the mother and the father said, “i am not forcing him to go” so the mother tried to drag the child around the shoulders. the court accepts the mother’s statements to the single expert report writer in relation to this incident which is contrary in part to the father’s evidence in this context, (e) on 21 october 2020 the mother was trying to speak to the child about what he would be wearing for a school activity the following day and when he went to leave, “i stopped him by grabbing his wrist on the bike to stop him from leaving. he had his hand on the handlebar, he brushed me off, i went ‘okay’.”   the parties’ highly conflictual relationship led to both parties verbally abusing each other in front of the child, and it is likely that the child felt unsafe by such conduct and would have picked up on at times each parent’s dislike of the other. the court infers that this verbal abuse was probably most prevalent during the latter stages of the parties’ relationship, accepting the mother’s evidence that by reason of the father’s verbal abuse towards her she experienced great anxiety and stress and then attended upon her psychologist in about mid-august 2019, and accepting her evidence that by the date of separation in august 2020 she had found the relationship with the father intolerable and she then left the family home. the court does not accept the father’s evidence that it was the mother who yelled more often at himself and at the child from an early age, (c) the mother had, during the parties’ relationship, on at least several occasions, been angry, argumentative and had shouted at the child after having become frustrated with his behaviour, albeit she had tried to apologise to the child afterwards. it is likely that the child had become scared as a result of such behaviour by the mother. the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context. (the court should state that it does not accept that this behaviour of the mother had occurred regularly over a lengthy period of time, and nor does the court accept that she verbally abused or belittled the child, as alleged by the father. in this context, the court observes, for example, that the father had told the single expert report writer on two occasions during their interview that after the separation and in late 2020 he had told the mother that if she wanted to come home she could – “i said you can still always come home” – and he had thought “it would be better for x’s sake, i thought it would be better for him”), (d) there was an occasion when the mother had planned to take the child to see her father who was dying. the father then arranged something more desirable for the child and did not support him leaving with the mother. the child refused to go with the mother and the father said, “i am not forcing him to go” so the mother tried to drag the child around the shoulders. the court accepts the mother’s statements to the single expert report writer in relation to this incident which is contrary in part to the father’s evidence in this context, (e) on 21 october 2020 the mother was trying to speak to the child about what he would be wearing for a school activity the following day and when he went to leave, “i stopped him by grabbing his wrist on the bike to stop him from leaving. he had his hand on the handlebar, he brushed me off, i went ‘okay’.”   the mother had, during the parties’ relationship, on at least several occasions, been angry, argumentative and had shouted at the child after having become frustrated with his behaviour, albeit she had tried to apologise to the child afterwards. it is likely that the child had become scared as a result of such behaviour by the mother. the court accepts the mother’s evidence in this context. (the court should state that it does not accept that this behaviour of the mother had occurred regularly over a lengthy period of time, and nor does the court accept that she verbally abused or belittled the child, as alleged by the father. in this context, the court observes, for example, that the father had told the single expert report writer on two occasions during their interview that after the separation and in late 2020 he had told the mother that if she wanted to come home she could – “i said you can still always come home” – and he had thought “it would be better for x’s sake, i thought it would be better for him”), (d) there was an occasion when the mother had planned to take the child to see her father who was dying. the father then arranged something more desirable for the child and did not support him leaving with the mother. the child refused to go with the mother and the father said, “i am not forcing him to go” so the mother tried to drag the child around the shoulders. the court accepts the mother’s statements to the single expert report writer in relation to this incident which is contrary in part to the father’s evidence in this context, (e) on 21 october 2020 the mother was trying to speak to the child about what he would be wearing for a school activity the following day and when he went to leave, “i stopped him by grabbing his wrist on the bike to stop him from leaving. he had his hand on the handlebar, he brushed me off, i went ‘okay’.”   there was an occasion when the mother had planned to take the child to see her father who was dying. the father then arranged something more desirable for the child and did not support him leaving with the mother. the child refused to go with the mother and the father said, “i am not forcing him to go” so the mother tried to drag the child around the shoulders. the court accepts the mother’s statements to the single expert report writer in relation to this incident which is contrary in part to the father’s evidence in this context, (e) on 21 october 2020 the mother was trying to speak to the child about what he would be wearing for a school activity the following day and when he went to leave, “i stopped him by grabbing his wrist on the bike to stop him from leaving. he had his hand on the handlebar, he brushed me off, i went ‘okay’.”   on 21 october 2020 the mother was trying to speak to the child about what he would be wearing for a school activity the following day and when he went to leave, “i stopped him by grabbing his wrist on the bike to stop him from leaving. he had his hand on the handlebar, he brushed me off, i went ‘okay’.”
section 60cc(3) additional considerations
3(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
3(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
3(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child
3(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
3(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living
3(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
3(f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
3(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
3(h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
3(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
3(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
3(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter
3(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
3(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant   z]: he’s likely to use that as a vehicle to report negatively about the mother and – as opposed to giving him that time to settle into the relationship, have a realistic understanding of what his relationship is actually like with his mother – those sorts of things. so while i would suggest counselling in the longer term, in the immediate term i would suggest the mother access counselling support as to how to manage it. if there is an acute incident – for example, self-harm – then, yes, he would need some intervention. but otherwise, my suggestion would be to leave it for two to four weeks, preferably four weeks, if – if the mother felt that that was appropriate, and that the mother make some decisions about whether she felt he needed it or not.
parental responsibility
associate: dated: 24 march 2023
dated: 24 march 2023