last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
galpin & varley [2023] fedcfamc2f 369
orders
the court orders that:  the children spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties and failing agreement:- (i) for a period of six weeks from the making of these orders each alternate saturday for a period of three hours supervised by “b contact centre” or any other such professional service as agreed between the parties, (ii) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 12 noon on an unsupervised basis, (iii) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on an unsupervised basis, and (iv) thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm.   for a period of six weeks from the making of these orders each alternate saturday for a period of three hours supervised by “b contact centre” or any other such professional service as agreed between the parties, (ii) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 12 noon on an unsupervised basis, (iii) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on an unsupervised basis, and (iv) thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm.  ) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 12 noon on an unsupervised basis, (iii) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on an unsupervised basis, and (iv) thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm.  i) for a period of eight weeks thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on an unsupervised basis, and (iv) thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm.  ) thereafter each saturday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm.   addressing or referring to the mother by any derogatory, insulting or belittling name or nickname in the presence or hearing of the said children or either of them, (b) addressing or referring to the mother by any name or nickname other than “mother” or “mum” in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (c) referring to any other person other than the mother as the said children’s “mother” or “mum”.   addressing or referring to the mother by any name or nickname other than “mother” or “mum” in the presence or hearing of the children or either of them, (c) referring to any other person other than the mother as the said children’s “mother” or “mum”.   referring to any other person other than the mother as the said children’s “mother” or “mum”.   to address or refer to the mother by any derogatory, insulting or belittling name or nickname, (b) to address or refer to the mother by any name, including her first name, other than “mother” or “mum”, and (c) to address or refer to any other person other than the mother as “mother” or “mum”.   to address or refer to the mother by any name, including her first name, other than “mother” or “mum”, and (c) to address or refer to any other person other than the mother as “mother” or “mum”.   to address or refer to any other person other than the mother as “mother” or “mum”.   the application for review filed on 14 december 2022, (b) the application in a proceeding filed on 8 september 2022, and (c) the response to an application in a proceeding filed on 19 october 2022.   the application in a proceeding filed on 8 september 2022, and (c) the response to an application in a proceeding filed on 19 october 2022.   the response to an application in a proceeding filed on 19 october 2022.
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
collectively referred to as (“the children”).
background  galpin] the girls have said that [ms varley] hit [y] across the back of the head and we’re mandatory reporters so we’ve had to report it to you and the department. we are also obliged to tell you. [y] told us the girls were having dinner and they were both laughing and [ms varley] told them to stop and then hit [y] on the back of the heard knocking her off her chair.
1. the final parenting orders made, by consent, in the family court of australia on 21 september 2018 in relation to the children [x], born [in] 2011 and [y], born [in] 2012 (“the children”) are suspended. 2. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. 3. the children live with the father. 4. the children spend time with the mother as agreed between the parties or, failing agreement, on the following basis: a) for a period of eight weeks from the making of these orders, each alternate saturday for a period of two hours supervised by [b contact centre] or any other such professional supervision service as agreed between the parents, b) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate saturday commencing at 9:00am and concluding at 5:00pm, c) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate weekend commencing at 9:00am saturday and concluding at 5:00pm sunday, d) thereafter, each alternate weekend commencing at the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if the children do not attend school) and concluding at 5:00pm sunday, 6. the children shall have telephone communication with the mother every monday, wednesday and friday when the children are not otherwise spending time with the mother, at 6.30pm, with such call to be facilitated by the mother telephoning the father’s mobile phone, and the father is to ensure that the children are available to talk to the mother, that the father’s mobile phone is charged and available to take such call, and that the father provide the children with privacy for the duration of such call. 8. both parents are restrained from saying anything to or in the presence of the children which is abusive, belittling or demeaning of the other parent and are restrained from allowing the children to remain in the presence of any other person who is speaking in an abusive, belittling or demeaning manner about the other parent. 9. both parents are restrained from discussing any matters pertaining to these proceedings, or sharing the contents of any documents filed, produced or otherwise referring to these proceedings, with the children. 10. both parents must keep the other parent informed of their residential address and telephone number. 11. both parents shall attend family therapy provided by [k families, town l] with the children in separate sessions to one another and the parties are to forthwith do all acts and things to implement this order and commence family therapy.
a) for a period of eight weeks from the making of these orders, each alternate saturday for a period of two hours supervised by [b contact centre] or any other such professional supervision service as agreed between the parents, b) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate saturday commencing at 9:00am and concluding at 5:00pm, c) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate weekend commencing at 9:00am saturday and concluding at 5:00pm sunday, d) thereafter, each alternate weekend commencing at the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if the children do not attend school) and concluding at 5:00pm sunday,
b) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate saturday commencing at 9:00am and concluding at 5:00pm, c) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate weekend commencing at 9:00am saturday and concluding at 5:00pm sunday, d) thereafter, each alternate weekend commencing at the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if the children do not attend school) and concluding at 5:00pm sunday,
c) thereafter, for a period of eight weeks, each alternate weekend commencing at 9:00am saturday and concluding at 5:00pm sunday, d) thereafter, each alternate weekend commencing at the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if the children do not attend school) and concluding at 5:00pm sunday,
d) thereafter, each alternate weekend commencing at the conclusion of school on friday (or 3:00pm if the children do not attend school) and concluding at 5:00pm sunday,
the children, [x] born [in] 2011 and [y] born [in] 2012 (“the children”), spend time with the mother each alternate saturday for a minimum period of two hours, and up to a maximum of six hours at the mother’s discretion, supervised by [b contact centre] or any other such professional supervision service as agreed between the parties.
competing proposals
4(b) thereafter, for the next eight (8) weeks for a period of six (6) hours commencing at 10:00am, and concluding at 4:00pm, supervised by [b contact centre] or any other professional supervision services agreed between the parties. 4(c) thereafter, each alternate saturday commencing at 9:00am and concluding at 5:00pm.
3. the mother be restrained from causing the children to visit and/or stay at her residence. 4. the mother have time with the children each alternate weekend on either a saturday or sunday for a period of up to three hours supervised by a professional contact service with such times to be determined by communication between the parties and the professional contact service.
order 4 of the orders made on 6 december 2022 be varied to that the following order is inserted after 4a and 4b:
4(a)(i) commencing 25 march 2023, for a period of 8 weeks, each alternate saturday commencing at 10:00am and concluding at 2:00pm.
evidence
the law  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  0] ... apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
parental responsibility
consideration
meaningful relationship 8] ...should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...
risk of harm in the mother’s household
the alleged incident of 12 may 2022
the pinop informed police that on the evening of thursday 12 may 2022 she was home with her elder sister and the defendant at [n street, suburb o]. both the pinop and her sister were sitting at the dinner table and began laughing together. the defendant told the girls to stop laughing which the pinop has left the table and gone to the toilet before returning and sitting down. the pinop began laughing again with her sister who had a mouth full of water and as a result the pinop sister spat the water out which hit the defendant and the floor. in reaction to this the pinop continued laughing with the defendant then striking out and slapping the pinop to the back of the head. the force of this slap knocked the pinop off her chair. when asked how hard this “slap” was she was able to explain that on a scale of 1 to 10 it was around a “7, 6 or 5”. the pinop was able to quantified [sic] her assessment as she had learnt about scales at school. the pinop further informed police that after being slapped she said “oow” to which the defendant replied, “yeah that’s what you get for laughing, you deserved that.” the pinop re-seated at the table and finished her dinner before going to her bedroom. in the days following the assault, the pinop informed staff of her school who made their mandatory notifications.
dad i’m scared of [ms varley]. i didn’t want to tell you because she would then stop us from seeing you. we don’t know when [ms varley] is going to go off. please don’t send us back. if you send us back we are just going to run away. [x] said “she hits us all the time and yells and screams and we live in a pigsty. please don’t send us back.”
...process of reaching over to grab [y]’s chair my hand did come into contact with [y]’s head. [y] did come off the chair and it was not because of my contact with [y] it was because she was off balance at the time.
the alleged incident on 3 february 2021
the mother’s living conditions
allegations of verbal abuse
risk of harm in the father’s household
relevant section 60cc (3) considerations
...children who are exposed to sustained parental conflict are at greater risk of developing adverse outcomes such as issues with their emotional wellbeing and general health, presentation and/or escalation of behavioural issues, issues in their relationship with one or both of their parents, with some children reaching a point of feeling like the have to choose one parent over the other.
...their verbalised concerns regarding their mother and previous experience of their mother could be exaggerated based on some influence by their father, them feeling unable to express things that go against their father, and them having lived with their father solely for some time now. it may also be the case that the children’s expressed views and experiences are also partly based on the children’s actual lived experiences of their mother.
...towards the goal of removing the children from my care and are trying to achieve this through swaying the children’s perception of me. the children have been told for years that their mother is no good and completely at fault and unfortunately they have developed the same view...
determination
associate: dated: 31 march 2023
dated: 31 march 2023