last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
balson & sandberg [2023] fedcfamc2f 390
orders
the court orders that:  ensure that all documents required to be exchanged between parties pursuant to chapter 6 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) have been exchanged, (b) ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court (by email to casemanager.jrdorian@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court (by email to casemanager.jrdorian@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   provide to the court (by email to casemanager.jrdorian@fcfcoa.gov.au and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution) (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) details of any previous or current family violence orders, (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted), (v) particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.   particulars of any financial resource, (vi) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ) a valuation or market appraisal of any real estate or other asset the value of which is in dispute, (vii) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  i) statements for, and where applicable, valuations of any superannuation interest, (viii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.  ii) written confirmation that the trustee of any fund that may be the subject of a splitting order has been afforded procedural fairness.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
material relied on
issues for determination
is the agreement an agreement according to the principles of contract?
is the agreement a financial agreement pursuant to the act?
the agreement is a part viiiab financial agreement. the parties to the de facto relationship may make the part viiiab financial agreement with one or more other people.
the matters referred to in paragraph (1)(a) are the following: how all or any of the: property, or financial resources, of either or both of the spouse parties at the time when the agreement is made, or at a later time and during the de facto relationship, is to be distributed, the maintenance of either of the spouse parties.
separation declaration
if the agreement is a financial agreement, is the agreement binding on the parties?
ca. a copy of the statement referred to in paragraph (c) that was provided to a spouse party is given to the other spouse party or to a legal practitioner for the other spouse party, and the agreement has not been terminated and has not been set aside by a court.
factual errors and inconsistencies in the agreement
requirements for the agreement to be signed by the parties
is the requirement that both parties sign the agreement satisfied?
there are two entirely different purposes which may be served by requiring that a will shall bear the testator’s signature. one refers to solemnity, the other to proof. one is to insure that a certain amount of attention and deliberation shall be given by the testator to the final adoption of the contents of the document. the other has regard to the authentication of the document by the position of the signature.
that principle is that, although the signature of a party which is required for the purpose of the statute of frauds 1677 need not be placed in any particular part of a written instrument, “it must be inserted in the writing in such a manner as to have the effect of ‘authenticating the instrument,’ or ‘so as to govern the whole agreement’ ... or ... ‘so as to govern what follows.”
was there a lack of independent legal advice?
if the agreement is binding, should the agreement be set aside?
section 90um(1)(e) - is the agreement void, voidable or unenforceable?
section 90um (1)(h) - can the agreement be set aside due to unconscionable conduct or duress?
there are other ways around this seeing as your so worried about losing your home. i personally can’t understand that entirely as a partner and a child is just as important however i know it’s important to you. you could rent your place out? and we could rent a house together and pay halves that way you wouldn’t need to worry about your house or me taking it. or you can get something written up by a lawyer that ensures the house goes to your mum and your child and if we don’t work out i don’t take $500,000. you pay child support to assist us and keep your house. i personally don’t care if u leave me nothing as long as i have a roof over my head. why would i consider this situation and choose you if all i want is to leave you and take your house i just don’t understand. my point being there are many options again though we need to discuss them and both be open to want too and to try. a lot of couples i know have had counselling it’s hard work at times being in long term relationships.
in the particular context of pre-nuptial and post-nuptial agreements, some of the factors which may have prominence include the following: (i) whether the agreement was offered on a basis that it was not subject to negotiation, (ii) the emotional circumstances in which the agreement was entered including any explicit or implicit threat to end a marriage or to end an engagement, (iii) whether there was any time for careful reflection, (iv) the nature of the parties' relationship, (v) the relative financial positions of the parties, and (vi) the independent advice that was received and whether there was time to reflect on that advice.
was the agreement offered on a basis that was subject to negotiation?
what were the emotional circumstances in which the agreement was entered into?
was there sufficient time to allow careful reflection of the agreement?
what was the nature of the parties’ relationship?
what were the parties’ relative financial positions?
did the parties receive independent legal advice?
conclusion with respect to duress
section 90um(1)(g): has there been a material change of circumstances?
since the making of the agreement, a material change in circumstances has occurred (being circumstances relating to the care, welfare and development of a child of the de facto relationship) and, as a result of the change, the child or, if the applicant has caring responsibility for the child (as defined in subsection (4)), a party to the agreement will suffer hardship if the court does not set the agreement aside.
establishing hardship
conclusion
associate: dated: 5 may 2023
dated: 5 may 2023
[1] see hoult & hoult [2013] famcafc 109; [2013] 50 fam lr 260 at [62].[2] see daily & daily [2020] famcafc 304.