last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
fuller & fuller [2023] fedcfamc2f 429
orders
the court orders that:
full fdr conference order on a date to be fixed  part 1 of the confidential court-based family dispute resolution (fdr) conference with a registrar (as family dispute resolution practitioner) on a date to be fixed, with each party to attend separately at times to be advised, and (b) part 2 of the confidential court-based fdr conference on a date and at a time to be fixed but not later than seven (7) days after the date referred to in order 1(a).   part 2 of the confidential court-based fdr conference on a date and at a time to be fixed but not later than seven (7) days after the date referred to in order 1(a).
part 1 of the fdr conference  ensure that all documents required to be exchanged between parties pursuant to chapter 6 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 have been exchanged, (b) ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   ensure that any private expert report that is relevant to the proceedings has been filed, (c) provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   provide to the court by email and to the other party a single collated bundle of documents comprising: (i) a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).   a confidential outline of case (dispute resolution), (ii) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  ) a detailed minute of orders sought, (iii) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  i) details of any previous or current family violence orders, and (iv) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).  ) a copy of any document exchanged between the parties which is directly relevant to an issue remaining in dispute (with relevant passages highlighted).
fdr conference  of non-attendance by either party at part 1 of the conference, or (b) that pursuant to regulation 29 of the family law (family dispute resolution practitioners) regulations 2008, the registrar is no longer satisfied that the conference is appropriate.   that pursuant to regulation 29 of the family law (family dispute resolution practitioners) regulations 2008, the registrar is no longer satisfied that the conference is appropriate.
trial directions
and the court notes that:  the party's actual costs, both paid and owing, up to and including the family dispute resolution conference, and (b) the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, including trial, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   the estimated future costs of the party up to and including each future court event, including trial, and (c) any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   any expenses paid or payable to an expert witness or, if those expenses are not known, an estimate of the expenses.   parties and their legal representatives in short (four hour) conferences are expected to be available until at least 1.00pm and at the specific times requested by the registrar, and (b) parties and their legal representatives in full day conferences are expected to be available for the entirety of the day and at the specific times requested by the registrar.   parties and their legal representatives in full day conferences are expected to be available for the entirety of the day and at the specific times requested by the registrar.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
parenting orders 1. that the husband have sole parental responsibility for the children: (a) [x] born [in] 2010, (b) [y] born [in] 2012, and (c) [z] born [in] 2015,   [x] born [in] 2010, (b) [y] born [in] 2012, and (c) [z] born [in] 2015,   [y] born [in] 2012, and (c) [z] born [in] 2015,   [z] born [in] 2015,  llectively, the children). that the husband be excused from his obligation to further particularise the final parenting orders sought by him pending the preparation of a family report.
property orders that pursuant to section 79 of the family law act 1975 there be such final orders as to settlement of property between the parties as this honourable court deems appropriate.   [x] born [in] 2010 (b) [y] born [in] 2012 (c) [z] born [in] 2015 (“hereafter called the children”).   [y] born [in] 2012 (c) [z] born [in] 2015 (“hereafter called the children”).   [z] born [in] 2015 (“hereafter called the children”).
property orders that pursuant to section 79 of the family law act 1975 there be such final orders as to settlement of property between the parties as this honourable court deems appropriate.  , [y] and [x] are not considered to be at significant risk of harm in [the father] or [the mother’s] care to warrant intervention by child protection.
... whilst the current 2:2:3:2:2:3 parenting plan is meeting the children’s needs, it involves frequent changes of address. as the children mature, they are likely to need stability and may find such frequent changes onerous. it is recommended that when developing future parenting plans, the parties build in flexibility to meet the children’s changing needs and consider how often the children have to move their belongings between households. agreements reached both parties indicated that the current parenting plan (2:2:3:2:2:3) is meeting the children’s needs and the children are much more settled since the plan was put into place. future directions in the absence of any information to the contrary, the following future directions are provided for consideration by the court. the children to continue to live in the current shared-care parenting arrangement as developed by the parties.
legal principles
section 60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). ... (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,
...
69zn principles for conducting child‑related proceedings application of the principles (1) the court must give effect to the principles in this section: (a) in performing duties and exercising powers (whether under this division or otherwise) in relation to child‑related proceedings, and (b) in making other decisions about the conduct of child‑related proceedings. failure to do so does not invalidate the proceedings or any order made in them. (2) regard is to be had to the principles in interpreting this division. principle 1 (3) the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. principle 2 (4) the second principle is that the court is to actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings. principle 3 (5) the third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will safeguard: (a) the child concerned from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence. principle 4 (6) the fourth principle is that the proceedings are, as far as possible, to be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child‑focused parenting by the parties. principle 5 (7) the fifth principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, and legal technicality and form, as possible.   in performing duties and exercising powers (whether under this division or otherwise) in relation to child‑related proceedings, and (b) in making other decisions about the conduct of child‑related proceedings.   in making other decisions about the conduct of child‑related proceedings.   the child concerned from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence.   the parties to the proceedings against family violence.
conclusion
associate: dated: 17 april 2023
dated: 17 april 2023