last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lei & nuan (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 628
orders
by way of final order, the court orders:  each alternate weekend on either saturday or sunday for a period of 2 hours at b family services, c family services or d contact centre or such other contact centre as may be agreed between the parties in writing. (b) the father be responsible for all costs associated with the supervised visits. (c) if the children are unwell and unable to attend to spend time with the father the mother produce a medical certificate to the contact centre and the father.   the father be responsible for all costs associated with the supervised visits. (c) if the children are unwell and unable to attend to spend time with the father the mother produce a medical certificate to the contact centre and the father.   if the children are unwell and unable to attend to spend time with the father the mother produce a medical certificate to the contact centre and the father.   respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak of and to the other parent respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, (d) not expose or subject the children to domestic and/or family violence, and (e) not discuss adult issues in the presence or hearing of the children or allow any other person to do so.   speak of and to the other parent respectfully, (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, (d) not expose or subject the children to domestic and/or family violence, and (e) not discuss adult issues in the presence or hearing of the children or allow any other person to do so.   not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the child and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child, (d) not expose or subject the children to domestic and/or family violence, and (e) not discuss adult issues in the presence or hearing of the children or allow any other person to do so.   not expose or subject the children to domestic and/or family violence, and (e) not discuss adult issues in the presence or hearing of the children or allow any other person to do so.   not discuss adult issues in the presence or hearing of the children or allow any other person to do so.
passports  where the father is the travelling parent, the mother is to release the children's passport to the travelling parent upon receipt of a copy of the children's itinerary and other information pursuant to clause 10(d) for any overseas trip, and (b) the father is to return the relevant children's passport to the mother within seven (7) days of the children's return from any overseas trip.   the father is to return the relevant children's passport to the mother within seven (7) days of the children's return from any overseas trip.
travel  the travelling parent shall give 6 weeks written notice to the other parent of their intention to travel with the children, (b) unless otherwise agreed, travel is to occur during the time the children are ordinarily spending with the travelling parent, (c) the travelling parent is not to take the children to a country listed as having an advice level 3 or higher or listed as "do not travel" on the australian smart traveller website www.smartraveller.gov.au, (d) the travelling parent shall provide to the other parent at least three (3) weeks prior to their departure the following:- (i) general itinerary setting out the travel arrangements for the parent and the children, which must include details of the intended destination, accommodation, departure and return dates, (ii) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.   unless otherwise agreed, travel is to occur during the time the children are ordinarily spending with the travelling parent, (c) the travelling parent is not to take the children to a country listed as having an advice level 3 or higher or listed as "do not travel" on the australian smart traveller website www.smartraveller.gov.au, (d) the travelling parent shall provide to the other parent at least three (3) weeks prior to their departure the following:- (i) general itinerary setting out the travel arrangements for the parent and the children, which must include details of the intended destination, accommodation, departure and return dates, (ii) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.   the travelling parent is not to take the children to a country listed as having an advice level 3 or higher or listed as "do not travel" on the australian smart traveller website www.smartraveller.gov.au, (d) the travelling parent shall provide to the other parent at least three (3) weeks prior to their departure the following:- (i) general itinerary setting out the travel arrangements for the parent and the children, which must include details of the intended destination, accommodation, departure and return dates, (ii) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.   the travelling parent shall provide to the other parent at least three (3) weeks prior to their departure the following:- (i) general itinerary setting out the travel arrangements for the parent and the children, which must include details of the intended destination, accommodation, departure and return dates, (ii) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.   general itinerary setting out the travel arrangements for the parent and the children, which must include details of the intended destination, accommodation, departure and return dates, (ii) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.  ) copies of the pre-paid return tickets for travel or other evidence of the pre-paid ticket, (iii) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.  i) copies of the children's travel insurance, and (iv) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.  ) telephone numbers on which the children may be contacted during the period the children will be overseas.
it is noted:
reasons for judgment(ex tempore)
judge vasta
the mother said: “[mr n] (that is, the brother of the father) and your mother want to see kids. they miss them. i showed them videos and photos. what’s wrong with it?? the father: “you said you were not seeing them. you lied.” mother: “is that a problem?” father: “yes, stay the fuck away. they are not your family, so fuck off.” mother: “they are kids’ family. you have no right to stop everyone seeing kids. kids are not your personal belongings.” father: “you have poisoned the kids against you with your craziness.” mother: “they are my kids as well.” father: “i just do not see what you hope to gain as you have hurt them so much. they will not be sad at your funeral, whereas mine, they will be devastated.” mother: “you are out of control.” father: “you have fucked up their lives.” mother: “good night.” father: “i have to say no to them as we have no money. no birthday parties, no gifts, no christmas. it’s a daily struggle to survive.” mother: “they can stay with me.” father: “no. fuck you. i do not have enough fuel or money to buy fuel. i am trying to shield the kids from our poverty, but you do not follow the fucking order and pay a share of anything, not even dicko $5 for disco. kids hate you and will always hate you. you are the reason they had to empty their bank accounts and have no birthdays or means to pay for school, and you’d still refuse to pay for shit. you are irresponsible. read your fucking orders.” mother: “i will just follow the parenting order and won’t say anything bad about you. thanks.” father: “[ms lei], we are in serious financial trouble here and i am begging for help. we are out of options and if things do not improve, we are likely to be homeless in the next few weeks. i will be unable to comply with any orders and will not be caring, as the kids and i are out of money.” mother: “can you ask your lawyer to talk to my lawyer regarding financial and kids’ safety issues? they can live with me. i am their mum. i won’t see them homeless. thanks.” father: “fuck the law. your appreciation is suing us, is so kind. you are just horrible. well, i will not show you any mercy when we go to trial.” mother: “i will see you on sunday. smiley face emoji.” father: “see you on sunday and we can scream about it in the park. you are fucked up. i had my interview with the court psychologist early and you are fucked. kids will tell all kinds of shit about you and it will go badly for you. you are going to lose over and over again. good luck proving shit. you had to lie. cannot substantiate anything in your statement. that is why your lawyer waved the white flag and gave up. let’s make every conversation just awful. heartless cunt. we are desperate and you lawyer up.” mother: “calm down and have a rest. don’t stress kids too much. see you on sunday.” father: “i just off. [ms lei] ready for a big fight. [ms lei], stay the fuck away from my mum, bad mouthing me and spreading lies. you will never be left with the kids. you are fucked too. your family will never see them.” mother: “you must had a bad day. hope you feel better soon. i love my kids. i won’t see them suffer.” father: “i am desperate, all because of you and the financial shit you did. i have no money to get to [town l], so fuck you. now, you enjoy the frustration of court.” mother: “i will still be there. if you won’t show up, please let your lawyer know the reason. thanks. have a good night.” father: “fired lawyer. we doing this street style. kids are crying for shit and i cannot give it to them. all your fucking fault. we are desperate. desperate is not what you want. we have nothing to lose now. courts will do fuck all. just watch. ha, ha, ha.” mother: “are you threatening me?” father: “you are not welcome.” mother: “all i care is kids’ safety.” father: “bullshit, coward.” mother: “i don’t want to fight with you.” father: “you started this fight. well, then why fucking sue?” mother: “i just want to see kids. you won’t let me.” father: “you have less than you started. bullshit. i begged your help and next thing is you sue me, refusing contact.” mother: “i only want to talk to kids, not you [mr nuan].” father: “breach of order. re‑read your order.” mother: “you are out of control.” father: “nonsense. you take no responsibility. you just take. be in for a rough ride now gloves are off. you only got the visits because of my sympathy for you.” mother: “can i have the custody?” father: “you would be back at visitation in centres. kids hate you.” mother: “that’s not up to you.” at 11.08, father wrote: “[...].” mother: “you really hate me that much? i said i don’t hate you at all, [mr nuan]. hope one day you will get better and stop the hate. i have no feelings towards you. the reason why i am still here talking to you with respect is because you are the father of my kids. good night.” father: “so much respect. you sue us and make us poor. you hate me. that is why you screw the kids over too.” mother: “you totally make it wrong, [mr nuan].” father: “they used all of their money to fight you in court.” mother: “if there are no kids between us, i will be long gone.” father: “they were adamant they reject you. and won’t talk to you at all.” father: “run and leave a mess like in [country e].” mother: “i don’t hate you, i just don’t love you.” father: “with all your business partners and employees you shafted and investors you lost their money.” mother: “that’s it. hope you understand.” father: “that is why you will never go back to [country e]. you are on the run. ha, ha, ha.” mother: “are you lost your mind? go to sleep.” father: “your family will grow old and, die. you will never see them again. this court thing is making things worse for you too.” mother: “don’t say anything about my family, [mr nuan], that’s too far.” father: “trial is going to rip your case to shreds. stop talking to my mother.” mother: “i won’t.” father: “you spread so many lies about money. you were there after your first visit, i heard, that same night.” mother: “and i won’t talk to you either, other than seeing the kids.” father: “liar. we need money now.” mother: “which part is our lie?” father: “you were with my mother.” mother: “did i say i was not?” father: “lies throughout your documents. nasty, nasty, the court process is going to be.”
phone call from client – (meaning the father) – stating that he was scared, worried, can’t sleep and angry, about to be homeless, feeling cornered. a number of themes around homicide/suicide were repeated throughout the call.
it was initially unclear as to the trigger for the call, but the client raised that he had contacted his wife tonight, desperate, asked her for help and she reportedly threatened to take the children (client has full custody, with wife having access visits). assessment indicates court for custody at the start of december. the father stated, “i’m not going to comply.” he reported that he had been caring for the children since they were born and hadn’t worked and now can’t work as there was no‑one to support him to look after the children. he reported that he has been there for the children their whole lives, whereas his wife has spent a significant portion of time in [country e] and didn’t want custody of them and is now threatening to take them with her to [country e] to be raised by her parents. the wife is currently paying $3 a day in child support and won’t give any money to him for the children. the client reported he is struggling to pay rent. the lease is up in december, but cannot move to a more affordable area due to court order/custody arrangements. the father expressed frustration with lawyers and legal costs, reporting that he has paid $5000 to lawyers and the next round will cost $15,000 and he doesn’t have this money. he reportedly had spent his children’s savings on legal costs, but they said it was okay because they could see how stressed he was. he also stated his children don’t understand why he can’t buy them things. the father was concerned about his ability to buy food and pay for school needs for his children. he reported that he had experienced dv from his wife and that he had cut her and that she also beat up her daughter. he feels these concerns were not taken seriously. he was expressing heightened stress around legal process, talking about “fucking lawyers”. talked about being served by his wife’s lawyers twice. “it’s like the hunger games. you’re always being hunted.” he reported it was intimidating getting served and reported he was frustrated with his own lawyers, “wish i could let loose and kill them all.” he said he was angry at the social injustice. he said that he had a plan to start working next year when the children would be at school and that he could live off his finances until then, but given the legal costs, he has run out of money. he talked about his situation being hopeless and that no‑one can help him, that when discussing his situation he was dismissive of options for support externally and made comments such as, “i’m intelligent so come up with these solutions quickly,” and, “i’m savvy about money.” he said that his wife had turned his own mother – that is, the paternal grandmother – against him. he said that his wife has told everyone that she has given him lots of money and that he has spent it all. he reported that his mother feels sorry for her because she can’t go back home to [country e].
“murder or murder‑suicide is the only option left.” when speaking about his wife he made a number of comments about her, “she is evil incarnate. the only source of the problem is her. she’s evil.” “he reported that, “i need to run away with the kids.” he spoke about going off the grid and he would hide and not use credit cards or access centrelink, and live off the land. he said that, “this is not a mental health issue and only got criminal options.” he was asked about the seriousness of his thoughts in an attempt to determine his immediate risk and the father reported, “very serious. i will kill myself now, but i would rather kill her.” he said that he was unaware where his wife was living and he was indicating that she had not told him or his legal team. he said that there was a planned contact on sunday with the children and he said he could kill her then and he didn’t care if it was in a public place. he reported that if he killed her, he will go to jail, giving him somewhere to live and that his children would at least be able to go into foster care and that he would spend less time for murder than dealing with her for the next 20 years. “she just needs to die horribly.” and he said, “no relief until she’s dead or out of the country” and that “murder would be the most morally vacuous option.” in relation to his own risk, he stated, “suicide looking pretty good at the moment.”
from the outset, he appeared angry and irritable, stating that he never wishes to engage with mental health services again and wants to disengage with their service immediately. he went into a statement about cancelling his planned appointment with the doctor and that the mh service had made things a whole lot worse for him.
the father was instantly heightened and was swearing at police and mental health, telling them to leave his property. he blamed [x] for letting them in the house and told her she should have listened to him and that they would not be there. the father was telling both children not to speak to police and the police were bad. as a result, both children, specifically [x] was refusing to speak to police and was yelling at police telling them to leave and telling them that they should not speak to her father like that.
tonight, when qps and mh clinician arrived, the father refused to answer the door. eventually, his seven year old daughter opened the door to police, with the daughter being distressed, asking police not to take her daddy to jail. the father immediately met police and the clinician in an angry and verbally aggressive state, telling police and the clinician to get out. the father then commenced verbally scolding his daughter for opening the door, and causing fear and anxiety in his two young children, telling his daughter the police have guns and they are here to hurt him and that she cannot trust the police or the clinician. the police and clinician made numerous attempts to de‑escalate the situation and explained to the father the reason for the police and mental health clinician attending, however, the father was highly agitated, pressured speech and yelling over the top of police and clinicians. he kept repeating that police and the clinician were violating his rights and had now made his situation worse. he refused to engage for mental health assistance, stating that he has no trust with mental health.
the father was consumed by his current stressors relating to his conflict with his ex‑wife over custody battle, that he was ruminating over the same issues that he has previously reported. he said that his ex‑wife is attempting to financially ruin him and destroy his life and he now believes that the police and mental health services have helped her do this. he denied that he had a mental illness. he said he had not been sleeping, only getting about two hours a night due to the stress his ex‑wife was causing him. he said that his situation is hopeless and he states he called mental health asking for help and asking what other options did he have. the father now believes that since the police have been involved, it will now affect him in his court case. he refused to speak with the clinician. it was offered for him to go to the emergency department voluntarily for a further assessment, and he refused.
the father had earlier said that he had a planned access handover visit with his ex‑wife on sunday and stated that he would carry out murder‑suicide and was not worried that it would be in a public place. he said that killing his ex‑wife would be better than facing lengthy legal battles and having to deal with his ex‑wife for the next 20 years with her involvement with the kids. he said that his ex‑wife does not want the kids and she is refusing to pay him any money for them. he states that he has called her, asked for money to help the kids, claiming that he asked for as little as $3 and she refused to help. he stated that when he called mental health, he was in a desperate state wanting help. he now feels that mental health have betrayed him by attending with police. the notes note his history of depression and the prescription by the gp. the father then went on a “rampage” about the class action that was taken against the pharmaceutical company and doctors who prescribe [a particular medication], which “caused suicidal ideations and people kill themselves”. he continued to agitate and ruminate over past wrongs by his ex‑wife.
he reportedly had a traumatic experience with police while he was transported to the hospital. he said that nine police turned up and put him in the back of a van and brought him here. he said that he felt very claustrophobic and he freaked out. he later found out that his children had been given into the custody of their mother, which was causing him significant distress. he said he is concerned about the children staying with her as they are scared of her. “she can be a bully and has been abusive towards them.” he mentioned that his wife had physically abused their daughter in the past. he said he called police a number of times in the past in regard to aggression from the wife, but they never entertained it. he said he does not trust anyone when it comes to the care of his children. he mentioned his law suit battle with his ex‑wife, resulting in a lot of psychosocial stressors and mental distress and that his ex‑wife had been living in [country e] mostly for the last seven years due to work commitments and that he had been mostly looking after the kids, but she decided to separate from him and stop paying him money to look after the kids and that resulted in a lot of financial stressors due to it as he did not have any work. he said that he had some savings, but he had spent most of it on this legal battle with the ex-wife. he said that recently he has been quite desperate, and was worried about losing his accommodation and not being able to pay his children. as a result, he contacted his ex-wife for financial support till early next year and has time to sort his things out, however, his ex-wife did not help him and told him to come through the lawyers.
there are concerns that without the mental health act, the father will not engage with treatment inclusive of mood-stabilising medication, and therapeutic and social supports aimed at decreasing stressors to decrease dynamic risk factors. there is a current inability to assess capacity due to significant evidence of confabulation, conflicting stories between [mr nuan] and collateral information. there is a general inconsistency in behaviour, personality and recall of events over time, which extends to an inconsistency in decision-making.
given that the symptoms of [this medical condition], to which i was treated in the hospital, could be mistaken for a mental health episode, i’m of the firm belief that i did not display symptoms of mental health deterioration. concurrently, it was established that, in fact, i was not suffering from mental illness, but in fact, [from a medical condition]. i was not diagnosed with any mental health issues, but in fact, the only diagnosis that the medical staff could report was the presence of [a medical condition]. as an individual with no history of mental illness or the diagnosis of any mental health conditions that need treatment or medication, i suggest that the police understandably made an inaccurate assessment at the time of their attendance upon my residence. i will endeavour to demonstrate this incorrect assessment through medical experts and reports. i urge the icl to perform her own research as to the similarity in symptoms.
i am of the opinion that the father would not meet the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (dsm-5) criteria for any serious mental illness, personality or substance use disorder.
the paulhus deception scales is a 40-item self-report instrument that identifies individuals who, when responding to assessments and rating scales, distort their responses. it is designed to be administered concurrently with other instruments to indicate the validity of the results of other instruments. the pds score is correlated against a measure of desirable responding and can be broken down into two specific scales: impression management (im), which represents a well-known category of social desirability aimed at the crude form of dissemination known as faking or lying, and self-deceptive enhancement (sde), which represents an unconscious favourability bias closely related to narcissism.
the father’s responses indicated a high im and a high sde score. such a profile can be conceptualised as a “repressor pattern”. individuals scoring high on both subscales tend to be restrained and generally well socialised, but when they do have problems, they lack the insight to deal with them and appear rigid. they may also appear sanctimonious about other problems. in sum, they have a trait-like style towards self-enhancement, as well as a tendency to be influenced by situational demands, leading them to respond in a socially acceptable manner. the father’s tendency to unconsciously impress needs to be taken into the context of the situation of the mental health assessment for family legal proceedings.
you keep making me waste hours on end, waiting around to drop them off and pick them up, and you make minimal effort in every regard.
and she said:
well, if i had a car, that would make things much easier.
the father said:
i cannot buy another one. we still have over $150,000 in net debts to repay. it will take me years to repay that, as i doubt you will pay anything.
the mother’s response was:
sell the property –  at being two properties that the father had as a trustee in city q.) the father said:
i do not own it.
the mother said:
so why should you pay for them?
the father then changed the topic, saying:
you know our movements. we’re going home. if you want to see them, i will offer you a lift to and from the train station, but you are a very nasty person. life is always going to be hard for you.
you don’t need to say those nasty words to me. i wish all the best to you and i mean it. you need to control your feelings, as you are an adult. we need to deal things like an adult.
i recognise that my behaviour in these text messages, in hindsight, were inappropriate and i am sorry for sending same.   the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, or from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm, or from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
my conclusion as to these primary considerations are, in summary, it is important to x and y that they have a meaningful relationship with both their mother and father, and (b) there is a very great need to protect them from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse.   i take into account the views that the children have made, that is, that they would like to see their father a lot more than they have been seeing him, that they love him, that they care for him, and they want him as part of their lives. the fact is, though, that they are still extremely young, being eight and six, and they do not have an appreciation of the danger that they have been in. it is very refreshing to see that the mother, having the opportunity to have manipulated the children in much the way that the father had, has not succumbed to any temptation, has not tried in any way to give the children a negative impression of their father, but continually talks of him in a respectful way and supports their decision or their need to speak to him and interact with him. she just insists that it be done in a safe way. the reaction that the children had, in march 2022, when they saw their father with ms s, shows the sincerity of what the mother has done and is a prime example of the proof of the pudding being in the eating. but i only give this consideration minimal weight. (b) i have spoken extensively of the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents. the mother is maintaining a relationship of the children with the paternal grandmother and the paternal uncle, much to the father’s chagrin. but i have taken into account all of those relationships. (c) i take into account the extent that they have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues and what will now happen in the future.   i have spoken extensively of the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents. the mother is maintaining a relationship of the children with the paternal grandmother and the paternal uncle, much to the father’s chagrin. but i have taken into account all of those relationships. (c) i take into account the extent that they have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues and what will now happen in the future.   i take into account the extent that they have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues and what will now happen in the future.
i have taken into account the extent to which each of the parents have fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, their obligation to maintain the child, which is circumstance (ca), and have spoken about this already.   i have looked at the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances. i am very cognisant of the fact that, having lived with the father as their primary caregiver for the majority of their lives, that, in the past nearly 18 months, they have had minimal contact with the father. i take into account the shock, in some ways, that this would have caused the children. but in the end, that has been done for their safety. but still, it is something that i have taken into account, and taken into account what will happen in the future and how it is that they will interact with their father in the future, and their separation from him. (e) there really is no practical difficulty in what has been proposed. (f) i have spoken extensively of the capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs. i do not need to speak of this any further. (g) i have already spoken about the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children. i have taken into account the developmental problems that y has faced as well. circumstance (h) is not relevant here. (i) i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   there really is no practical difficulty in what has been proposed. (f) i have spoken extensively of the capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs. i do not need to speak of this any further. (g) i have already spoken about the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children. i have taken into account the developmental problems that y has faced as well. circumstance (h) is not relevant here. (i) i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have spoken extensively of the capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual needs. i do not need to speak of this any further. (g) i have already spoken about the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children. i have taken into account the developmental problems that y has faced as well. circumstance (h) is not relevant here. (i) i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have already spoken about the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children. i have taken into account the developmental problems that y has faced as well. circumstance (h) is not relevant here. (i) i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.
circumstance (h) is not relevant here. (i) i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have spoken about the attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the parents. (j) i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have spoken already about the family violence that has been involved here, and (k) the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   the family violence order that was instigated by the police and made by the magistrate following the incident on 28 october 2021. i have taken all of those matters into account, and (l) i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have taken into account the sort of order that i should make, being least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children, and (m) i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.   i have looked at all facts and circumstance that i feel are relevant.
associate: dated: 20 april 2023
dated: 20 april 2023