last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
fancham & ayrus (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 461
orders
the court orders that:  the sum of $2,987 on account of the order of 31 august 2020, (b) the sum of $15,101.75 on account of costs from 1 september 2020.   the sum of $15,101.75 on account of costs from 1 september 2020.
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannesy
introduction
costs application
applicable law
117 costs (1) subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant. (notations omitted)   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.
husband’s case
... the wife found it difficult to make any concession that she perceived would favour the husband’s case. for example, about how the husband had expended monies or superannuation or income that he brought into the relationship on either the front or back of the [b street] property or of the other properties acquired. the husband said this expenditure was corroborated by an examination of banking records. the wife’s own examination of those banking records was some time before the trial, limited to a couple of hours, and i find not a detailed and careful examination necessary if a proper contradiction of the husband’s assertions was to be made. i find the wife failed to, or was slow to, concede the husband’s work and expenditure on the various properties. this was not because his assertions were contradicted by her examination or knowledge of contemporaneous banking and other records, but because it appeared to her not to suit her case to make such concessions. this goes to the reliability of the wife’s evidence. ... hence, in proportional terms the wife’s initial contributions are about 22.55% and the husband’s initial contributions about 77.45% of the parties’ initial and extraneous contributions. ... taking account of all of the parties contributions over the whole of the relationship and between separation and final hearing, i assess the wife has having contributed in the proportion of 21% and the husband is having contributed in the proportion 79%. ...
date
description
amount
september-october 2020
preparation for final hearing – 2 day matter
$6,277.00
17 may, 20 may, 11 august, 12 august
preparation for final hearing – each additional hearing day after 2nd hearing day – 4 days @ $1,334:
$5,336.00
27 october, 17 may, 20 may, 11 august, 12 august 2021
daily hearing fee – for a full day hearing @ $2,357 with advocacy loading 50% 5 days @$3,535.50 per day
$17,677.50
28 october 2020
daily hearing fee – short mention @ $321 with advocacy loading 50% ie $481.50
$481.50
26 march 2021
plus costs sought pursuant to hearing on 31 august 2020
$2,987.00
total
$33,190.50
the calculation of those costs on scale was sensibly not disputed.
wife’s case ] [i]t must not be overlooked that authority binding on me requires any cost order made in pursuance of s 117(2) upon demonstration of one of the matters in s 117(2a) to be just. and also pennisi & pennisi (1997) flc-92-774 (‘pennisi’) at 85,547:
and also pennisi & pennisi (1997) flc-92-774 (‘pennisi’) at 85,547:
... it is not the law that an offer of greater or equivalent value to that which results from the court will lead to an order for costs in favour of the offeror ... we would also add that just because an offer is marginally less than the amount ordered by a court does not mean that it is not a factor to be taken into account in determining whether costs should be awarded ... the plain words [of s 117(2a)(f)] do not limit a court’s attention to offers which are greater than the amount awarded. nor does the paragraph state what consequences flow from whether the offer is greater or lesser than the amount awarded, or how much that is the case. words of limitation should not be imported into the provision and nor should it be read as though offers in proceedings under the act carry the same consequences as payments into court in common law matters. we do however, consider that the closer the offer is to the award when the offer is under the amount awarded by the court, the more weight that should be given to this factor in considering the question of costs. the principle must not, however, be rigidly applied. offers must be seen in the context of the case and the extent of the offeree’s knowledge of the parties’ financial circumstances while the offer is live. in the family law jurisdiction, it is not uncommon to find relationships where one party, often the wife, has significantly less grasp of the parties’ financial arrangements, or the financial circumstances are so complex that it would be premature to accept an offer. there are also cases where the contents of the offer are in themselves the subject of disputed value and legitimate subject matter for determination. these and other features of the context of offers must be taken into account when considering whether it was reasonable or not to accept an offer, no matter how close to the ultimate result the offer may be.
pennisi was cited with approval by the full court in alston & alston [2021] fedcfamc1a 96 (‘alston’) at [101]. i adopt the observations of application of section 117 of the act in griffiths, pennisi and alston.
husband’s offer – wife to receive 50% of [the property] sale proceeds the husband’s offer was made on friday 28 august 2020 and was open until 9am on monday 31 august 2020. the husband clarified an error to a key term of the offer, namely the division of the [b] street property sale proceeds in the event of a sale, at 4:59pm on friday 28 august 2020. in other words, the husband’s offer as first put remained open for a period of less than one business day. the husband’s offer, as corrected, was not open to the wife during business hours at all. the full court in alston & alston [2021] fedcfamc1a 96 at paragraph 106 refers to a useful summary of the principles of calderbank offers. in that context, “[t]he factors relevant to the question whether a rejection of an offer is unreasonable include whether the offeree had an adequate opportunity to enable it to consider and deal with the offer”. in putting an offer that lapsed within less than one business day, the husband would have been well aware that he was not providing any adequate opportunity for the wife to consider or deal with his offer, nor could she receive any meaningful legal advice in relation to his offer. the wife submits that an offer put in those terms does not properly form the basis of an order for costs.
application of section 117
the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings
legal aid
the conduct of the parties to the proceedings
whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure to comply with an order of the court
whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings
whether any party has made an offer in writing to settle the proceedings
other matters relevant
husband’s interim application costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 april 2023
dated: 21 april 2023