last updated: 14 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
oglesby & oglesby (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 566
orders
the court orders that:  any document which has been called for in these proceedings, (b) any offer’s to be made by her and/or to be considered that have been made by the husband.   any offer’s to be made by her and/or to be considered that have been made by the husband.
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge turnbull
background
shortly thereafter, i attended a meeting with [mr oglesby] and other persons who were introduced to me as representatives of [t ltd]. i attended the meeting as [mr oglseby] had asked me to be present to support him. [t ltd] holds an australian financial services licence, and their licence underpinned the registration of [r company] as a managed investment scheme. during the meeting, a conversation to the following effect took place: [t ltd] rep: "we are concerned about the allegations [ms oglesby] made. even though they are false, they are clearly damaging. we are withdrawing the scheme, and consent to use our licence." "[ms oglesby] has contacted us directly on a number of occasions. she has demanded to know what funds had been generated by [r company], despite there not being any. she made several accusations about [mr oglesby]. she asserted that she and other investors had lost funds in [r company]. we have a professional reputation to preserve and we cannot be associated with any appearance of impropriety.   it is relevant,[2] and (b) the words attributed to the t ltd representative were first-hand hearsay and can be received pursuant to section 66a of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (‘the evidence act’), as an exception to the hearsay rule — that is, the representation evidences the state of mind of the t ltd representative and t ltd, and explains why t ltd withdrew from the managed investment scheme and no longer consented to the use of their license.   the words attributed to the t ltd representative were first-hand hearsay and can be received pursuant to section 66a of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (‘the evidence act’), as an exception to the hearsay rule — that is, the representation evidences the state of mind of the t ltd representative and t ltd, and explains why t ltd withdrew from the managed investment scheme and no longer consented to the use of their license.
alternatively, it was argued that the evidence should be received de bene esse and i should rule on the issue upon the completion of mr s’s evidence.
consideration  evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact that it can reasonably be supposed that the person intended to assert by the representation. (2) such a fact is in this part referred to as an asserted fact. (2a) for the purposes of determining under subsection (1) whether it can reasonably be supposed that the person intended to assert a particular fact by the representation, the court may have regard to the circumstances in which the representation was made.   a reference in this division (other than in subsection (2)) to a previous representation is a reference to a previous representation that was made by a person who had personal knowledge of an asserted fact. (2) a person has personal knowledge of an asserted fact if his or her knowledge of the fact was, or might reasonably be supposed to have been, based on something that the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived, other than a representation made by another person about the fact. (3) for the purposes of 66a a person has personal knowledge of the asserted fact if it is a fact about the person’s health, feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of mind at the time the representation referred to in that section was made.   this section applies in a civil proceeding if a person who made a previous representation is not available to give evidence about an asserted fact. (2) the hearsay rule does not apply to: (a) evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made, or (b) a document so far as it contains the representation, or another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation.   evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made, or (b) a document so far as it contains the representation, or another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation.   a document so far as it contains the representation, or another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation.   the hearsay rule does not apply to: (a) evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made.   evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made.
the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation made by a person if the representation was a contemporaneous representation about a person’s health, feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of mind. (emphasis added)
the union objects to the admissibility of evidence to be given on behalf of boral by neil phillips. mr phillips is a boral account manager with responsibility for customers in the ballarat region. he managed the account of town and country, a concrete placer, in relation to construction projects at werribee plaza and ballarat aquatic centre. the evidence concerns two groups of conversations between him and representatives of town and country. in the first group of conversations, mr phillips evidence would be that the part-owner of town and country, liam kinniburgh, and its estimator, tim knowles, told him that the concrete supply contract for the werribee plaza had all but been awarded to boral. after the quotation process was completed, mr kinniburgh said that boral had offered the best price and finalisation of the sale was underway. after the union bans were implemented, mr kinniburgh said that town and country could not use boral because of the bans. the contract was awarded to another supplier. mr phillips would also depose that mr kinniburgh told him that mr kinniburgh had been told by a shop steward of the site builder not to use boral and he told the shop steward that he would not do so. it can be seen that mr phillips’ evidence in this respect contains double-hearsay. the second group of conversations concern the ballarat aquatic centre. mr phillips’ evidence would be that mr kinniburgh told him that boral would be awarded the concrete supply contract. just prior to the commencement of the pour, mr kinniburgh told mr phillips that town and country would not be using boral because the union did not want it on site. this contract too was awarded to another supplier. boral witnesses have given, and will be giving, some evidence of this kind without objection in circumstances where it will be leading direct evidence from the customers about them not using boral because of the union bans. the union is not objecting to evidence of boral witnesses about what customers told boral in this respect where the customers themselves will be giving evidence. it is only objecting to evidence of this kind from boral witnesses where the customer will not be doing so. the ground of objection is hearsay and, in the one case, double-hearsay. boral relies upon the exception to the hearsay rule specified in s 66a of the evidence act 2008 (vic). section 66a provides
the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation made by a person if the representation was a contemporaneous representation about the person’s health, feelings, sensations, intention, knowledge or state of mind.
the exception in this provision applies in civil and criminal proceedings to first-hand hearsay evidence of contemporaneous representations by persons about their health etc. the operation of the exception is well illustrated by the classic case of evidence of fears expressed by a murdered wife about her husband’s violence and her intention to leave him. first-hand hearsay evidence of the words and actions of the deceased expressing these feelings and intentions are usually admissible in the trial of criminal charges against the husband. the fact that the evidence is hearsay evidence goes to weight, not admissibility. the evidence might be subject to discretionary exclusion, but that is not relevant here. boral submits that mr phillips’ evidence would be of the contemporaneous intention and state of mind of town and county with respect to the awarding of the concrete supply contracts to boral and then not doing so because of the union bans. it relies upon this evidence in relation to the issues of causation and quantum. it does not do so as evidence of the bans as these are taken to have been admitted by reason of the default judgment. the evidence of the conversations in the two groups would be of what town and country representatives told mr phillips about both its intention to award the contracts to boral and its intention not to do so by reason of the bans. in terms of s 66a, the evidence would be of town and country’s contemporaneous intention and state of mind in relation to awarding and not awarding the contracts to boral. despite being first-hand hearsay, that provision would apply to make the evidence admissible if it is relevant to issues in the trial. it would be so relevant because causation and quantum are issues in the trial. as i have said, that the evidence is hearsay goes to weight, not admissibility, and discretionary exclusion does not arise. on analysis, the conversation containing the double-hearsay stands in the same category but upon the basis that the evidence is admissible in relation to town and country’s intention and state of mind, not in relation to what the shop steward said. mr phillips’ evidence of what mr kinneburgh told him was said to mr kinniburgh by the shop steward is not covered by s 66a because it is double hearsay. but mr phillips’ evidence of what mr kinniburgh told him is further first-hand hearsay evidence of town and country’s intention and state of mind with respect to not awarding the contract to boral by reason of the union bans and, in that respect, is covered by s 66a. it too is relevant to causation and quantum.[4] (emphasis added) i therefore overrule the objections and admit the evidence.
the document could not be admitted under section 72, having failed to satisfy the relevance test under section 55. however, the document would not have become admissible under section 72 in any event. assuming the words “but must take mark with me to asc” could be treated as evidence of the appellant’s intention as to – as at the time he wrote in the pad, evidence of the appellant’s intention at the time of writing did not go to a fact in issue.[5] (emphasis added)
issues thus arise as to whether any or all of the contents of the letters may fall within the exception provided for in s 66a. they will only do so if they constitute first-hand hearsay and are contemporaneous in the necessary sense. insofar as the letters express opinions other issues arise under ss 76 and 79 of the evidence act. mr shtifelman does not assert that he has personal knowledge of the matters which are dealt with in the two letters. the representations in the letters are the representations of the authors who, at least to the extent that the representations relate to facts, such as where in the world programmes are distributed, may be assumed to be matters within the personal knowledge of the respective authors. mr shtifelman can thus be seen to be giving evidence that the authors, who had the relevant personal knowledge, had represented that certain facts existed. the contents of the letters, about which mr shtifelman gave evidence, thus constitute, at best for the applicants, second-hand hearsay. they are not rendered admissible by s 66a of the evidence act. section 66a provides that a representation may be admissible if it was a “contemporaneous representation” about the state of mind of the person making it. this begs the question: contemporaneous with what? the answer, in general terms, is: contemporaneous with the act to which the representation relates and which it is sought to establish.[6] (emphasis added)
subsequently, in the nsw court of appeal, two members of the court appeared to approve the notion that inability to cross-examine on material sought to be introduced is not of itself unfairly prejudicial, at least in civil proceedings where there is no jury, even though that inability may well be a very relevant consideration in the court's decision as to the weight it should ultimately afford to the evidence. certainly, if the impossibility of challenging the veracity of hearsay statements by non-witnesses were generally to justify, or were often to be a significant factor in justifying, a decision to exclude evidence in the court's discretion, the result would be to write the hearsay exceptions out of the act to a large extent. that outcome would be contrary to the legislative intention. on the other hand, the balancing exercise involved in the discretion gives courts considerable flexibility. the nsw court of appeal has reaffirmed the power of a court to exclude evidence where the opposing party is unable to cross-examine. similarly, the nsw court of criminal appeal has recognised that an inability to cross-examine can significantly reduce the probative value of the evidence and cause prejudice to the opponent. it would appear that the proper approach is to assess the significance of the inability to cross-examine in the particular circumstances of the case. in r v suteski (2002) 56 nswlr 182, 137 a crim r 371, [2002] nswcca 509 at [126]–[127] wood cj at cl observed:
i see no reason why the inability ... to cross-examine ... should not have been relevant for s 135 and s 137 of the evidence act. however, the bare fact that a defendant cannot cross-examine a witness is not necessarily decisive of the issue which arises in relation to these provisions. see ordukaya v hicks [2000] nswca 180, bakerland pty ltd v coleridge [2002] nswca 30, and in particular the decision of heydon ja in r v clark (2001) 123 a crim r 506, [2001] nswcca 494 at para 164. the decisions mentioned clearly depend upon their particular facts, that is, upon the character of the evidence involved and upon the nature or strength of the potential prejudice to the defendant. each case, in my view, needs to be examined individually by reference to the well understood balancing exercise.
these propositions were subsequently endorsed in galvin v the queen (2006) 161 a crim r 449, [2006] nswcca 66 at [40] per howie j (mcclellan cj at cl and latham j agreeing). in alrc 102, it was stated at para 16.45:
the commissions acknowledge that there has been uncertainty as to whether unfair prejudice can arise from procedural considerations. as noted above, one of the objects of these provisions is to prevent the tribunal of fact from being exposed to evidence that is likely to mislead it or play upon its emotions or prejudices. in the interim report for the previous evidence inquiry, the alrc referred not only to unfair prejudice arising from evidence which might inflame emotions, but also to unfair prejudice resulting from mis-estimation by the fact-finder of the weight to be given to particular evidence. an inability to test the reliability of evidence may carry with it the danger of such mis-estimation. it is therefore consistent with the policy basis for this discretion that the inability to test evidence may constitute a legitimate ground for its exclusion where this will affect the ability of the fact-finder to assess rationally the weight of the evidence.
of course, there is “no property in a witness” and an opposing party may be able to call the person who made the representation as a witness. in those circumstances, it would be appropriate to consider whether that person may be questioned by the opposing party prior to giving evidence and whether leading questions of the witness may be permissible in examination-in-chief. (citations omitted) (emphasis added)
associate: dated: 24 may 2023
dated: 24 may 2023
[1] evidence act 1995 (cth) s135 (‘evidence act’). [2] ibid s55. [3] s66a has statutory equivalents in state evidence acts throughout the commonwealth. [4] boral resources victoria proprietary limited v cfmeu (ruling no 2) [2015] vsc 459.[5] r v hannes [2000] nswcca 503 [480]. [6] connect tv pty ltd v all rounder pty ltd (no 5) [2016] fca 338 [60] – [62]. [7] stephen odgers, uniform evidence law (thomson reuters, 17th ed, 2022) 1297-1299.