last updated: 8 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
varela & baum [2023] fedcfamc2f 427
orders
pending further order the court orders that:
living arrangements
spend time with arrangements  each week on three (3) occasions on days and times as agreed but failing agreement each tuesday, thursday and saturday from 8 am until 12 pm. (b) on mother’s day from 8 am until 12 pm. (c) on christmas day from 8 am until 12 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm. (e) on the child’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm.   on mother’s day from 8 am until 12 pm. (c) on christmas day from 8 am until 12 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm. (e) on the child’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm.   on christmas day from 8 am until 12 pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm. (e) on the child’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm.   on the mother’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm. (e) on the child’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm.   on the child’s birthday from 8 am until 12 pm.
communication
restraints   physically disciplining the child or permitting any other person to do so. (b) questioning or interrogating the child about the time they have spent with the other parent and each parent shall do all reasonable things necessary to prevent any other person from doing so in the presence or hearing of the child. (c) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence. (d) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence. (e) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings. (f) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   questioning or interrogating the child about the time they have spent with the other parent and each parent shall do all reasonable things necessary to prevent any other person from doing so in the presence or hearing of the child. (c) denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence. (d) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence. (e) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings. (f) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended family, or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence. (d) discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence. (e) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings. (f) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence. (e) permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings. (f) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings. (f) communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child. (g) causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.   causing the child to be a medium in any way between the mother and the father or between the mother and the father and any other person.
bac testing  the father purchase a handheld breathalyser device with an australian standard as3547 certification forthwith and within five (5) days of the date of these orders. (b) the mother is to submit to a breathalyser test at the commencement and conclusion of her time with the child, with such test to be performed at changeover under supervision of the father or his nominee. (c) in the event that the breathalyser device purchased by the father is compatible with a phone application or subscription, the mother is to do all things necessary to ensure this is utilised when submitting to alcohol breath tests and the father receives notifications and/or reports to his mobile phone. (d) the father is to retain possession of the breathalyser device and ensure it is brought to changeover by himself or his nominee effecting changeover on his behalf. (e) at the request of the independent children’s lawyer and/or the mother or mother’s solicitor, the father is to provide data available from the breathalyser device. (f) in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.   the mother is to submit to a breathalyser test at the commencement and conclusion of her time with the child, with such test to be performed at changeover under supervision of the father or his nominee. (c) in the event that the breathalyser device purchased by the father is compatible with a phone application or subscription, the mother is to do all things necessary to ensure this is utilised when submitting to alcohol breath tests and the father receives notifications and/or reports to his mobile phone. (d) the father is to retain possession of the breathalyser device and ensure it is brought to changeover by himself or his nominee effecting changeover on his behalf. (e) at the request of the independent children’s lawyer and/or the mother or mother’s solicitor, the father is to provide data available from the breathalyser device. (f) in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.   in the event that the breathalyser device purchased by the father is compatible with a phone application or subscription, the mother is to do all things necessary to ensure this is utilised when submitting to alcohol breath tests and the father receives notifications and/or reports to his mobile phone. (d) the father is to retain possession of the breathalyser device and ensure it is brought to changeover by himself or his nominee effecting changeover on his behalf. (e) at the request of the independent children’s lawyer and/or the mother or mother’s solicitor, the father is to provide data available from the breathalyser device. (f) in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.   the father is to retain possession of the breathalyser device and ensure it is brought to changeover by himself or his nominee effecting changeover on his behalf. (e) at the request of the independent children’s lawyer and/or the mother or mother’s solicitor, the father is to provide data available from the breathalyser device. (f) in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.   at the request of the independent children’s lawyer and/or the mother or mother’s solicitor, the father is to provide data available from the breathalyser device. (f) in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.   in the event that the mother returns a bac reading higher than zero (0), or shows a faulty reading, or does not record a reading, the mother’s time with the child shall be suspended until further order of this court or agreement of the parties and the parties are at liberty to relist the matter upon seven (7) days’ notice.
cdt testing  the mother is required to submit to cdt testing within forty-eight (48) hours of notification of a request from the independent children’s lawyer to the mother and/or the mother’s solicitor, with a copy of the notification being sent to the father’s legal solicitor or the father directly if self-represented. (b) such requests for cdt testing occur on no more than two (2) occasions per month until the mother achieves a cdt return result of less than 2.1 per cent on three (3) consecutive occasions, and thereafter shall occur on not more than once per month. (c) the tests be conducted at a laboratory accredited by the national associate of testing authorities australia, in accordance with the current australian standard for the collection and detection of drugs of abuse. (d) the mother do all acts and things and sign all documents to authorise the testing laboratory to release the test results directly to the father, the father’s lawyers, the mother’s lawyers and the independent children’s lawyer. (e) the parties are at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the referrer of the cdt testing and/or the laboratory conducting the cdt testing. (f) the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.   such requests for cdt testing occur on no more than two (2) occasions per month until the mother achieves a cdt return result of less than 2.1 per cent on three (3) consecutive occasions, and thereafter shall occur on not more than once per month. (c) the tests be conducted at a laboratory accredited by the national associate of testing authorities australia, in accordance with the current australian standard for the collection and detection of drugs of abuse. (d) the mother do all acts and things and sign all documents to authorise the testing laboratory to release the test results directly to the father, the father’s lawyers, the mother’s lawyers and the independent children’s lawyer. (e) the parties are at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the referrer of the cdt testing and/or the laboratory conducting the cdt testing. (f) the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.   the tests be conducted at a laboratory accredited by the national associate of testing authorities australia, in accordance with the current australian standard for the collection and detection of drugs of abuse. (d) the mother do all acts and things and sign all documents to authorise the testing laboratory to release the test results directly to the father, the father’s lawyers, the mother’s lawyers and the independent children’s lawyer. (e) the parties are at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the referrer of the cdt testing and/or the laboratory conducting the cdt testing. (f) the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.   the mother do all acts and things and sign all documents to authorise the testing laboratory to release the test results directly to the father, the father’s lawyers, the mother’s lawyers and the independent children’s lawyer. (e) the parties are at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the referrer of the cdt testing and/or the laboratory conducting the cdt testing. (f) the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.   the parties are at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the referrer of the cdt testing and/or the laboratory conducting the cdt testing. (f) the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.   the cost of the tests be borne solely by the mother.
hair drug and alcohol testing   the mother is required to maintain her head hair at a length of not less than six (6) centimetres to test for a 6-month period from the date of the collection of hair. (b) the mother’s head hair is not to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair. (c) not later than 4 pm on 1 june 2023, the mother is required to make an appointment with u services by telephoning ... for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes. (d) each party (and, if legally represented, their legal representative) is at liberty to provide u services with a copy of these orders. (e) the mother is to attend at a u services clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother on 30 june 2023 or first available appointment closest to this date. (f) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   the mother’s head hair is not to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair. (c) not later than 4 pm on 1 june 2023, the mother is required to make an appointment with u services by telephoning ... for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes. (d) each party (and, if legally represented, their legal representative) is at liberty to provide u services with a copy of these orders. (e) the mother is to attend at a u services clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother on 30 june 2023 or first available appointment closest to this date. (f) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   not later than 4 pm on 1 june 2023, the mother is required to make an appointment with u services by telephoning ... for the purpose of providing a hair sample for hair drug and alcohol testing purposes. (d) each party (and, if legally represented, their legal representative) is at liberty to provide u services with a copy of these orders. (e) the mother is to attend at a u services clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother on 30 june 2023 or first available appointment closest to this date. (f) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   each party (and, if legally represented, their legal representative) is at liberty to provide u services with a copy of these orders. (e) the mother is to attend at a u services clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother on 30 june 2023 or first available appointment closest to this date. (f) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   the mother is to attend at a u services clinic or nominee and submit to the supervised collection of a hair sample from the mother on 30 june 2023 or first available appointment closest to this date. (f) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order also hereby authorising u services or nominee to provide the results of each test to all parties, including the independent children’s lawyer, and their legal representatives upon receipt of such test results. (g) the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   the hair drug and alcohol test may screen for alcohol etg and drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opioids and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required. (h) u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   u services is required to utilise the testing services of an appropriate laboratory accredited to conduct hair drug testing to the recognised international standard iso/iec 17025:2005 by the relevant national accreditation body. u services’ selection is to be based on the type of test required, the specific drug or drugs to be tested, the laboratory’s compliance level with the international society of hair testing (“soht”) guidelines, cost, and time required for results to be made available. (i) the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   the independent children’s lawyer is to submit an application for grant with legal aid nsw with respect to funding for the hair alcohol and drug test by no later than 4 pm on 24 april 2023. (j) in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.   in the event that the funding is refused then the independent children’s lawyer is to notify the parties as soon as practical, and the cost of the test is to be borne solely by the mother.
child care  the father shall provide the mother with the name and details of the child care centre, and (b) the child shall attend on the days enrolled unless he is unwell.   the child shall attend on the days enrolled unless he is unwell.
future listing
by consent and pending further order the court orders that:  bringing the maternal grandfather mr g to changeover or having him present at or facilitate changeover on her behalf, and (b) bringing the child into contact with the maternal grandmother’s partner mr h by any means whatsoever.   bringing the child into contact with the maternal grandmother’s partner mr h by any means whatsoever.
reasons for judgment
introduction
evidence   amended initiating application filed 27 january 2023, (b) affidavit of mr varela filed 16 february 2023, (c) affidavit of mr varela filed 11 april 2023 in respect of paragraphs one to and including seven only, (d) affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 27 february 2023, (f) affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of mr varela filed 16 february 2023, (c) affidavit of mr varela filed 11 april 2023 in respect of paragraphs one to and including seven only, (d) affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 27 february 2023, (f) affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of mr varela filed 11 april 2023 in respect of paragraphs one to and including seven only, (d) affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 27 february 2023, (f) affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023, (e) affidavit of ms f filed 27 february 2023, (f) affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of ms f filed 27 february 2023, (f) affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of mr k filed 28 february 2023, (g) affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of ms l filed 28 february 2023, (h) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11 november 2022, and (i) further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   further expert report of dr j dated 6 april 2023.   affidavit of ms baum filed 1 march 2023, (b) affidavit of mr g filed 28 february 2023, and (c) affidavit of ms m filed 28 february 2023.   affidavit of mr g filed 28 february 2023, and (c) affidavit of ms m filed 28 february 2023.   affidavit of ms m filed 28 february 2023.
background  the father lives in a four bedroom home with flatmates ms l and mr k and their two children. (b) the father works full time from 8 am until 5 pm on weekdays and is able to work from home and change his working hours as needed. (c) the mother and x live with the maternal grandfather father mr g (hereinafter “the maternal grandfather”) and the mother’s stepmother ms n (hereinafter “ms n”). (d) the mother is not in employment and cares for the child on a full time basis. the maternal grandfather and his partner are both retired and do not work. (e) neither parent has re-partnered.   the father works full time from 8 am until 5 pm on weekdays and is able to work from home and change his working hours as needed. (c) the mother and x live with the maternal grandfather father mr g (hereinafter “the maternal grandfather”) and the mother’s stepmother ms n (hereinafter “ms n”). (d) the mother is not in employment and cares for the child on a full time basis. the maternal grandfather and his partner are both retired and do not work. (e) neither parent has re-partnered.   the mother and x live with the maternal grandfather father mr g (hereinafter “the maternal grandfather”) and the mother’s stepmother ms n (hereinafter “ms n”). (d) the mother is not in employment and cares for the child on a full time basis. the maternal grandfather and his partner are both retired and do not work. (e) neither parent has re-partnered.   the mother is not in employment and cares for the child on a full time basis. the maternal grandfather and his partner are both retired and do not work. (e) neither parent has re-partnered.   neither parent has re-partnered.
proposals   x lives with the father. (b) x spends time with the mother as agreed between the parties or failing agreement, on three occasions each week from 8 am until 12 pm, with time to increase to 8 am until 5 pm on three occasions per week if the mother provides results from three consecutive carbohydrate deficient transferrin (hereinafter “cdt”) tests that show social and/or recreational levels of alcohol consumption. (c) at the mother’s instigation, she and x have a video call between 5.30 pm and 6 pm each monday, wednesday and friday. (d) the mother is restrained by injunction from bringing or permitting the maternal grandfather to be present at changeover. (e) the mother is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol and illicit substances within 24 hours prior to and during any time she spends with x. (f) the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   x spends time with the mother as agreed between the parties or failing agreement, on three occasions each week from 8 am until 12 pm, with time to increase to 8 am until 5 pm on three occasions per week if the mother provides results from three consecutive carbohydrate deficient transferrin (hereinafter “cdt”) tests that show social and/or recreational levels of alcohol consumption. (c) at the mother’s instigation, she and x have a video call between 5.30 pm and 6 pm each monday, wednesday and friday. (d) the mother is restrained by injunction from bringing or permitting the maternal grandfather to be present at changeover. (e) the mother is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol and illicit substances within 24 hours prior to and during any time she spends with x. (f) the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   at the mother’s instigation, she and x have a video call between 5.30 pm and 6 pm each monday, wednesday and friday. (d) the mother is restrained by injunction from bringing or permitting the maternal grandfather to be present at changeover. (e) the mother is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol and illicit substances within 24 hours prior to and during any time she spends with x. (f) the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the mother is restrained by injunction from bringing or permitting the maternal grandfather to be present at changeover. (e) the mother is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol and illicit substances within 24 hours prior to and during any time she spends with x. (f) the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the mother is restrained by injunction from consuming alcohol and illicit substances within 24 hours prior to and during any time she spends with x. (f) the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the mother shall submit to a breathalyser test, under supervision, at the commencement and conclusion of her time with x and in the event the mother returns a blood alcohol concentration reading higher than zero or does not record a reading, her time with x shall be suspended. (g) the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the mother shall submit to random cdt testing within 48 hours’ of notification of a request by the icl and/or her solicitor twice per month until the mother returns a cdt result of less than 2.1 per cent on three consecutive occasions, where the testing will reduce to once per month. (h) the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the mother shall submit to hair drug and alcohol testing involving chain-of-custody procedure, with the icl to submit an application for a grant of legal aid nsw with respect to funding. (i) the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the parents shall communicate via the our family wizard application.   the orders dated 21 december 2022 continue, with the exception of order 3, being an order for the child to have video calls with the father, which is to be discharged.
issues in dispute  does either parent pose an unacceptable risk of harm to x? (b) if so, how can the risk be ameliorated? (c) where should x live? (d) what time should x spend with each parent?   if so, how can the risk be ameliorated? (c) where should x live? (d) what time should x spend with each parent?   where should x live? (d) what time should x spend with each parent?   what time should x spend with each parent?
the law  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
...apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected. it is not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in issue.
primary consideration – risk of harm
alleged risks posed by the mother   that the mother has persistently and excessively consumed alcohol, and transferred alcohol to x through her breastfeeding, (b) that the mother has poorly managed mental health issues, and (c) that x is exposed to family violence and alcohol misuse by the mother and members of the mother’s extended family.   that the mother has poorly managed mental health issues, and (c) that x is exposed to family violence and alcohol misuse by the mother and members of the mother’s extended family.   that x is exposed to family violence and alcohol misuse by the mother and members of the mother’s extended family.
the mother’s alcohol usage
the father’s evidence
the mother’s evidence
independent evidence   for the sample length of 0-3.9cm, a result of 66.6 pg/mg, and (b) for the sample length of 3.9-7.8cm, a result of 68.3 pg/mg.   for the sample length of 3.9-7.8cm, a result of 68.3 pg/mg.   for the sample length of 0-3.9cm, a result of 21.7 pg/mg.
2.7 whilst only an approximation, it is estimated that the average ingestion of 60 grams, or six standard drinks, per day is required to exceed a etg concentration of 30 pg/mg i.e approximately 42 standard drinks per week. 2.8 it is estimated from the provided hair test results of [ms baum]’s that she consumed an average of 6 or more standard drinks daily throughout the time period represented by the two hair segments i.e mid-april 2022 to mid-december 2022. the results suggest that the pattern of consumption would be regarded as chronic excessive alcohol consumption. 2.9 it is possible that within the time period represented by the hair samples, there have been periods of little, if any, use of alcohol and conversely periods of greater use of alcohol. that is whilst an average, this does not infer that consumption was daily however it is likely to have been regular and if not daily, the volume consumed when drinking would have exceeded an average of 6 standard drinks.
3.2 an etg result of 21.7 pg/mg is consistent with the regular consumption of alcohol within the time period represented by the hair sample. 3.3 the amount consumed is not likely to have exceeded 6 standard drinks daily and may reasonably represent the social or recreational consumption of alcohol.
2. is it possible that despite a hair sample returning an etg concentration of approximately 66.6pg/mg 68.3pg/mg, [ms baum] did not consume 6 or more standard drinks on average per day and that her alcohol consumption was much lower? 2.1 an etg of approximately 66.6 pg/mg 68.3 pg/mg is most likely the result of consuming at least 6 standard drinks per day on average. 2.2 that said, as stated above, if shampoo or other hair product is used that contains etg, this may contribute to the etg concentration in hair. the amount of etg that may be contributed from hair products cannot be reliably determined. 3. is it possible that [ms baum] did not experience any of the impacts on her daily functioning as noted at paragraph 4 of your report, even assuming that her level of alcohol consumption was as suggested in your report? 3.1 the described impacts on [ms baum]’s daily functioning as noted at paragraph 4 of my report dated 15 february 2023, assumes a steady pattern of consumption that would result in an increasing blood alcohol consumption. 3.2 the impact on daily functioning as noted at paragraph 4 of my report dated 15 february 2023, assumes that the blood alcohol concentration of [ms baum] exceeds 0.03% during a drinking session. 3.3 it is possible that if [ms baum] consumed alcohol very slowly i.e one or less standard drink every hour, her blood alcohol would remain below 0.03% and she may not experience any of the impacts on her daily functioning as noted at paragraph 4 of my report dated 15 february 2023.
discussion  there is no acknowledgement by the mother that she has excessive alcohol consumption. (b) it was only during the interim hearing when questioned by me that the mother proffered that she would be undertaking alcohol treatment. this is at odds with her previous assertion that she does not have excessive alcohol consumption. i am not satisfied that the mother has any insight into the nature, extent and impact of her alcohol usage. (c) it was only during the interim hearing that the maternal grandfather agreed to provide an undertaking to the court that he would notify the father if the mother was alcohol affected and would remove x from her care. given the maternal grandfather’s evidence that he has never seen the mother affected by alcohol, the court remains concerned that either the maternal grandfather has been less than truthful to the court or the mother is able to disguise her excessive consumption of alcohol to the extent that her father is not aware of her drinking and has not been able to assess the mother’s presentation when she has been affected by alcohol. (d) while the mother agrees to undertake fortnightly cdt testing, there would potentially be periods where excessive consumption of alcohol by the mother would occur with x remaining in her care. i am not satisfied that this type, or indeed any type of testing regime, would sufficiently protect x.   it was only during the interim hearing when questioned by me that the mother proffered that she would be undertaking alcohol treatment. this is at odds with her previous assertion that she does not have excessive alcohol consumption. i am not satisfied that the mother has any insight into the nature, extent and impact of her alcohol usage. (c) it was only during the interim hearing that the maternal grandfather agreed to provide an undertaking to the court that he would notify the father if the mother was alcohol affected and would remove x from her care. given the maternal grandfather’s evidence that he has never seen the mother affected by alcohol, the court remains concerned that either the maternal grandfather has been less than truthful to the court or the mother is able to disguise her excessive consumption of alcohol to the extent that her father is not aware of her drinking and has not been able to assess the mother’s presentation when she has been affected by alcohol. (d) while the mother agrees to undertake fortnightly cdt testing, there would potentially be periods where excessive consumption of alcohol by the mother would occur with x remaining in her care. i am not satisfied that this type, or indeed any type of testing regime, would sufficiently protect x.   it was only during the interim hearing that the maternal grandfather agreed to provide an undertaking to the court that he would notify the father if the mother was alcohol affected and would remove x from her care. given the maternal grandfather’s evidence that he has never seen the mother affected by alcohol, the court remains concerned that either the maternal grandfather has been less than truthful to the court or the mother is able to disguise her excessive consumption of alcohol to the extent that her father is not aware of her drinking and has not been able to assess the mother’s presentation when she has been affected by alcohol. (d) while the mother agrees to undertake fortnightly cdt testing, there would potentially be periods where excessive consumption of alcohol by the mother would occur with x remaining in her care. i am not satisfied that this type, or indeed any type of testing regime, would sufficiently protect x.   while the mother agrees to undertake fortnightly cdt testing, there would potentially be periods where excessive consumption of alcohol by the mother would occur with x remaining in her care. i am not satisfied that this type, or indeed any type of testing regime, would sufficiently protect x.
the mother’s mental health
the father’s evidence
the mother’s evidence   in july 2019, the mother was referred to a dbt therapy group at s hospital, suburb t. the mother disclosed during that appointment that she had been “drinking etoh – not daily but using it to cope,” and that if she wasn’t drinking she would be self-harming. (b) in august 2019, the mother reported that she “self-harmed.” the record goes on to say that the mother was “aware of [mental health disorder] tendencies” and “brought dbt manuak [sic] to session.” the mother also acknowledged that she had “been drinking much less” and that she used also “[...]” (presumably an illicit substance) on a night out. (c) the notes recorded in october 2019 state that the mother’s “affect [was] much more regulated today” and that the mother “agrees to condsider [sic] admission to hospital.” the notes also record that the mother is “v[ery] worried about who can access her record, if [it] will limit possibilities later in life for her eg working with children etc.” the notes record “high anxiety” and that the mother “reports [she is] keen to use prescription medication, axcnkolwedges [sic] use of etoh when unabel to cope with anxiety” and has been recommended a medication review with a psychiatrist.   in august 2019, the mother reported that she “self-harmed.” the record goes on to say that the mother was “aware of [mental health disorder] tendencies” and “brought dbt manuak [sic] to session.” the mother also acknowledged that she had “been drinking much less” and that she used also “[...]” (presumably an illicit substance) on a night out. (c) the notes recorded in october 2019 state that the mother’s “affect [was] much more regulated today” and that the mother “agrees to condsider [sic] admission to hospital.” the notes also record that the mother is “v[ery] worried about who can access her record, if [it] will limit possibilities later in life for her eg working with children etc.” the notes record “high anxiety” and that the mother “reports [she is] keen to use prescription medication, axcnkolwedges [sic] use of etoh when unabel to cope with anxiety” and has been recommended a medication review with a psychiatrist.   the notes recorded in october 2019 state that the mother’s “affect [was] much more regulated today” and that the mother “agrees to condsider [sic] admission to hospital.” the notes also record that the mother is “v[ery] worried about who can access her record, if [it] will limit possibilities later in life for her eg working with children etc.” the notes record “high anxiety” and that the mother “reports [she is] keen to use prescription medication, axcnkolwedges [sic] use of etoh when unabel to cope with anxiety” and has been recommended a medication review with a psychiatrist.   baum] is engaging well in a cbt / dbt approach to address [mental health symptoms] including self harm ([...]), emotional dysregulation, relationship difficulties, impulsive and self destructive behaviours (etoh use) and a lack of self identity. her partner [mr varela] has been a supportive and positive presence.[17]
essentially [the] father is not clear about a lot of things, says “not sure” if [ms baum] is using drugs, “not sure” if [ms baum] has a formal diagnosis, but said had no money to continue private psychiatric   an apparent overdose in early 2009, (b) in early 2009, the mother overdosed on prescription medication, was found to have a history of self-harming and issues with her mother and friends, and was diagnosed with “adjustment disorder with depressive mood accompanied by alcohol and other substance abuse”, (c) in early 2009, “depression with suicidal ideation” was noted and the mother was scheduled under the mental health act 2007 (nsw). the mother was released to the care of the community mental health team. (d) in early 2009, it is noted that the mother had alcohol two days prior. (e) in early 2009, the mother stated that she had been using illicit drugs and that she has been taking drugs intermittently and irregularly. the mother stated that she had increased the number of tablets taken over the last 2 years, though she has only taken illicit drugs once. (f) in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in early 2009, the mother overdosed on prescription medication, was found to have a history of self-harming and issues with her mother and friends, and was diagnosed with “adjustment disorder with depressive mood accompanied by alcohol and other substance abuse”, (c) in early 2009, “depression with suicidal ideation” was noted and the mother was scheduled under the mental health act 2007 (nsw). the mother was released to the care of the community mental health team. (d) in early 2009, it is noted that the mother had alcohol two days prior. (e) in early 2009, the mother stated that she had been using illicit drugs and that she has been taking drugs intermittently and irregularly. the mother stated that she had increased the number of tablets taken over the last 2 years, though she has only taken illicit drugs once. (f) in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in early 2009, “depression with suicidal ideation” was noted and the mother was scheduled under the mental health act 2007 (nsw). the mother was released to the care of the community mental health team. (d) in early 2009, it is noted that the mother had alcohol two days prior. (e) in early 2009, the mother stated that she had been using illicit drugs and that she has been taking drugs intermittently and irregularly. the mother stated that she had increased the number of tablets taken over the last 2 years, though she has only taken illicit drugs once. (f) in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in early 2009, it is noted that the mother had alcohol two days prior. (e) in early 2009, the mother stated that she had been using illicit drugs and that she has been taking drugs intermittently and irregularly. the mother stated that she had increased the number of tablets taken over the last 2 years, though she has only taken illicit drugs once. (f) in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in early 2009, the mother stated that she had been using illicit drugs and that she has been taking drugs intermittently and irregularly. the mother stated that she had increased the number of tablets taken over the last 2 years, though she has only taken illicit drugs once. (f) in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in early 2009, the mother presented to hospital with aggressive behaviour and possible drug use. (g) in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]   in late 2017, q hospital mental health acute assessment team reviewed the mother and received the impression that there was a “situational crisis.” subsequent to that assessment, there appears to have been no contact between the mother and the mental health service until early 2021, and their records indicate that despite attempts made to contact the mother, no contact had been successful.[24]
discussion
the child’s exposure to family violence and alcohol misuse by the maternal family
‘i’m scared of [ms n] being drunk and violent again’ ‘i just want to go home and be in peace’ ‘not feeling like i have to be in survival mode constantly’ ‘constantly wondering if something will make them blow up’   on 24 february 2021, the mother reported that she is “now living upstairs in father’s house” and that there were “issues with his wife [ms n] – has etoh of an evening and becomes emotionally abusive and wakes [ms baum].” the notes also state that “[ms baum] calls her father who takes care of [ms n]” and that the mother had called mental health services for ms n and “an avo has been suggested.” (b) on 24 march 2021, the mother reported that there were “issues at home” as her stepmother had become intrusive and was yelling when drinking. the notes state ms n has a long standing 10 year history of drinking and that the mother was waiting to hear back from a social worker at q hospital in relation to housing options. (c) on 28 april 2021, the mother reported that her stepmother ms n had been less aggressive and had been away every second week.   on 24 march 2021, the mother reported that there were “issues at home” as her stepmother had become intrusive and was yelling when drinking. the notes state ms n has a long standing 10 year history of drinking and that the mother was waiting to hear back from a social worker at q hospital in relation to housing options. (c) on 28 april 2021, the mother reported that her stepmother ms n had been less aggressive and had been away every second week.   on 28 april 2021, the mother reported that her stepmother ms n had been less aggressive and had been away every second week.
dad has a drunk, alcoholic wife – dad’s wife started to yell and abuse her so she left the house. had a further argument with her dad, stated ‘i was acting erratically’, ambulance was called and she ended up in hospital.[28]
drug use
alleged risks posed by the father
family violence
conclusion of primary considerations
additional considerations
relationship of child with significant others
practical difficulties
impact of change
capacity to provide for the child
conclusion
associate: dated: 28 april 2023
dated: 28 april 2023
[1] affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023, page 50 [2.8].[2] exhibit icl1, pages 5-8.[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 60cc(2a) (“the act”). [4] deiter & deiter [2011] famcafc 82 [61].[5] m & m (1988) flc 91-979.[6] bant & clayton [2015] famcafc 222 at [99].[7] marvel & marvel (no.2) [2010] famcafc 101 [120].[8] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97; (2022) flc 94-092 [86].[9] s 69zl of the act. [10] exhibit m4; exhibit m5.[11] exhibit icl4, pages 4-5.[12] exhibit f2.[13] exhibit icl2.[14] exhibit m3.[15] exhibit f2.[16] exhibit icl2.[17] exhibit f3.[18] exhibit icl3.[19] exhibit f11.[20] exhibit f13.[21] exhibit icl2.[22] exhibit f4.[23] exhibit icl2; exhibit f14.[24] exhibit f4.[25] exhibit f2.[26] exhibit f13.[27] exhibit icl2.[28] exhibit f4.[29] ibid. [30] exhibit f5; exhibit f6; exhibit f7; exhibit f8; exhibit f9.[31] ibid. [32] affidavit of mr varela filed 16 february 2023 [110]; affidavit of dr j filed 16 february 2023 page 22.