last updated: 5 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
walls & keeble (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 477
orders
definitions:
the court orders that:
real property   the p street, suburb q property, (b) the ms walls family trust, (c) the o street property as trustee for the ms walls family trust,   the ms walls family trust, (c) the o street property as trustee for the ms walls family trust,   the o street property as trustee for the ms walls family trust,
and the respondent is hereby declared to have no interest therein.   the c trust, (b) the town b company pty ltd,   the town b company pty ltd,
to the applicant and the respondent thereafter is declared to have no further interest therein.   the respondent do all acts and things and sign all documents as may be required to: (i) resign as a director and secretary of the town b company, (ii) transfer his shareholding in the town b company to the applicant, at the expense of the applicant, (iii) resign as a beneficiary of the c trust and assign or transfer to the applicant absolutely all other rights, entitlements, claims, actions or demands which he may have against the c trust whether by way of shareholder loan accounts, directors loan accounts, beneficiary accounts or otherwise however arising and the respondent will forgo any right or entitlement to which he may be entitled as an employee or shareholder of the town b company as from the date of these orders, or as beneficiary of the c trust, and (iv) resign as appointer of the c trust.   resign as a director and secretary of the town b company, (ii) transfer his shareholding in the town b company to the applicant, at the expense of the applicant, (iii) resign as a beneficiary of the c trust and assign or transfer to the applicant absolutely all other rights, entitlements, claims, actions or demands which he may have against the c trust whether by way of shareholder loan accounts, directors loan accounts, beneficiary accounts or otherwise however arising and the respondent will forgo any right or entitlement to which he may be entitled as an employee or shareholder of the town b company as from the date of these orders, or as beneficiary of the c trust, and (iv) resign as appointer of the c trust.  ) transfer his shareholding in the town b company to the applicant, at the expense of the applicant, (iii) resign as a beneficiary of the c trust and assign or transfer to the applicant absolutely all other rights, entitlements, claims, actions or demands which he may have against the c trust whether by way of shareholder loan accounts, directors loan accounts, beneficiary accounts or otherwise however arising and the respondent will forgo any right or entitlement to which he may be entitled as an employee or shareholder of the town b company as from the date of these orders, or as beneficiary of the c trust, and (iv) resign as appointer of the c trust.  i) resign as a beneficiary of the c trust and assign or transfer to the applicant absolutely all other rights, entitlements, claims, actions or demands which he may have against the c trust whether by way of shareholder loan accounts, directors loan accounts, beneficiary accounts or otherwise however arising and the respondent will forgo any right or entitlement to which he may be entitled as an employee or shareholder of the town b company as from the date of these orders, or as beneficiary of the c trust, and (iv) resign as appointer of the c trust.  ) resign as appointer of the c trust.   cause to refinance and payout the company’s liability to company v in respect of that vehicle, and (b) the respondent being responsible for any and all tax liability arising as a result of the transfer of that vehicle from the town b company to the respondent.   the respondent being responsible for any and all tax liability arising as a result of the transfer of that vehicle from the town b company to the respondent.   all or any liability he may have arising from the past and future operation of the town b company including but not limited to any taxation liability except for any liability that arises from the transfer pursuant to order 6 hereof, (b) all or any liability he may have arising from any loan he owes or owed to the town b company, including any past or future liability arising from the assignment of the loans pursuant to these orders and including but not limited to any taxation liability.   all or any liability he may have arising from any loan he owes or owed to the town b company, including any past or future liability arising from the assignment of the loans pursuant to these orders and including but not limited to any taxation liability.   any and all further liability he may have arising from the operation of the c trust and the town b company including but not limited to any future taxation liability, and (b) any and all future liability he may have arising from any loan he owes or owed to the c trust and the town b company.   any and all future liability he may have arising from any loan he owes or owed to the c trust and the town b company.
company t and company u
reasons for judgment
judge bettsintroduction:  an april 2022 offer from a third party to buy the town b property for $5.15m which the wife refused to respond to. the husband submits that the wife’s rejection of that offer is akin to “waste”, and (b) the husband points to the particular characteristics of the town b property, namely its location and future development potential, and says that it has further value which is not reflected in the balance sheet.   the husband points to the particular characteristics of the town b property, namely its location and future development potential, and says that it has further value which is not reflected in the balance sheet.
the hearing:
the law:  firstly, identify and value the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties (the “balance sheet”), (b) secondly, consider whether it would be “just and equitable” to make a property settlement order, (c) if it is, then thirdly i will identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets pursuant to s 90sm(4)(a), s 90sm(4)(b) and s 90sm(4)(c) of the act, (d) fourthly, i will identify and assess any relevant “future factors” being those matters referred to in s 90sf(3) of the act. i will also identify and assess any relevant matters arising in s 90sm(4)(d), s 90sm(4)(f) and s 90sm(4)(g) of the act.   secondly, consider whether it would be “just and equitable” to make a property settlement order, (c) if it is, then thirdly i will identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets pursuant to s 90sm(4)(a), s 90sm(4)(b) and s 90sm(4)(c) of the act, (d) fourthly, i will identify and assess any relevant “future factors” being those matters referred to in s 90sf(3) of the act. i will also identify and assess any relevant matters arising in s 90sm(4)(d), s 90sm(4)(f) and s 90sm(4)(g) of the act.   if it is, then thirdly i will identify and assess the respective contributions made by each of the parties towards the net assets pursuant to s 90sm(4)(a), s 90sm(4)(b) and s 90sm(4)(c) of the act, (d) fourthly, i will identify and assess any relevant “future factors” being those matters referred to in s 90sf(3) of the act. i will also identify and assess any relevant matters arising in s 90sm(4)(d), s 90sm(4)(f) and s 90sm(4)(g) of the act.   fourthly, i will identify and assess any relevant “future factors” being those matters referred to in s 90sf(3) of the act. i will also identify and assess any relevant matters arising in s 90sm(4)(d), s 90sm(4)(f) and s 90sm(4)(g) of the act.
having done so, i will then determine what (if any) adjustment ought to be made to each party’s respective contributions-based entitlement on account of such matters. in carrying out this step i will be mindful not only of percentages (which are often convenient to the court) but also the underlying dollar figures that are involved (which are the practical consequence to the parties), (e) finally, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that my proposed property settlement order is “just and equitable”.   finally, i will consider the effect of my findings and proposed orders so as to satisfy myself that my proposed property settlement order is “just and equitable”.
step 1: the balance sheet
owner
description
wife value
husband value
value
value adopted
1
w
p street, suburb q vic
$2,650,000
2
h
r street, suburb s, wa
$630,000
$ 630,000
3
joint
c trust and the town b company, trading as town b property (including motor vehicle 1)
$2,525,000
4
ms walls family trust (incl. 1 o street town b at $430,000), share portfolio and debt owed by the c trust.
$2,680,000
5
company t pty ltd
$ nil
6
company u business
$ 7,000
7
cba savings account (suburb x)
$ 1,460
$ 6,962
8
bank y saver account
$ 1,822
9
bank z savings account
$ 1,216
10
cba netsaver
$ 26
11
bank ab savings
$ 1,210
12
cba account ...79
13
various bank accounts
$ 77,602
$ 32,894
14
motor vehicle 2
$ 14,500
15
motor vehicle 3
$ 40,000
16
motorcycle 1
$ 3,000
17
motor vehicle 4
$ 14,000
18
motorcycle 2
19
household contents
$ 4,000
20
boat, outboard motor and trailer
$ 13,500
21
inflatable boat, outboard motor and trailer
22
personal tools and equipment
$ 750
23
motor vehicle 5
$ 4,300
24
motorcycle 3
$ 8,000
25
motorcycle 4
26
motorcycle 5
$ 2,500
27
ride-on mower
28
tools and equipment
29
security system
$ 1,500
30
kayaks
31
surfboards
items 30-34 total $ 2,000
items 30-34 total $2,000
$ 2,000
32
2 x pushbikes
33
camping gear
34
2 x mainsails
35
excavator
$ 18,000
total assets
$8,729,386
$8,663,906
$8,664,356
addbacks
36
funds drawn down from the wa mortgage post separation
$ 95,000
$ 50,000
total
total assets including addback
$ 8,824,386
$ 8,663,906
$ 8,714,356
liabilities
37
commonwealth bank loan over wa property
$ 480,236
total liabilities
total net assets (excluding superannuation)
$ 8,344,150
$ 8,183,670
$ 8,234,120
superannuation
38
super fund 1
$ 691,750
39
super fund 2
$ 468,583
total super
$1,160,333
$ 1,160,333
total net assets (including superannuation)
$9,504,483
$9,344,003
$ 9,394,453
items 7 – 11: various bank accounts of the wife
item 27: ride-on mower ($4,000)
item 35: excavator said to be owned by the husband ($18,000) item 36: add-back - post-separation funds drawn down by husband from wa mortgage ($95,000)
good morning, [mr ag] we’re interested to talk about a build in [town ae] qld. we’re looking at our dream block. but, it appears to be bedrock close to the surface. kind regards, [mr keeble]
step 2: is it “just & equitable” to make a property settlement order?
step 3: assessment of contributions
i’m very aware that you’re not a normal 9 – 5 guy and that scenario is just fine with me. whether that means i fly up 2 weeks on, 2 weeks off or travel for a couple of months, it’s all do-able. if we want to be together, it will just work and where you’re based is only logistics xxx
initial contributions:
contributions during the relationship:
p street, suburb q:
ar street, town as property:
suburb s property (also described as the city aj property):
the town b property:
motor vehicle 1:
company u business:
contributions post-separation:
overall assessment of contributions:
step 4: adjustments for future factors:
the $5.15m offer:
as a statement of general principle, i am firmly of the view that financial losses incurred by the parties or either of them in the course of the marriage...should be shared by them (although not necessarily equally) except in the following circumstances: (a) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value. [13]   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value. [13]   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value. [13]
the court does not consider that the offer makes any difference to the outcome of the husband’s application to re-open the evidence.
particular characteristics of the town b property
in summary, the property can only be assessed in its current state as a large rural-zoned reserve lot with future potential for rezoning subject to extensive studies and council approval. [mr k]’s report being the only admissible valuation evidence at trial, the wife, for reasons that are not entirely clear to me (although hindsight is always 20/20) decided to file an affidavit by [mr m]. [mr m] is a solicitor with a masters degree in environmental law, a graduate diploma in legal practice, a bachelor of legal studies, a bachelor of science and who also holds an electrical engineering certificate. he is an expert in planning, administration and environmental law advice and litigation, property law, environmental and planning law, compliance, compulsory acquisition and due diligence and planning agreements. [mr m] had been commissioned by the wife to provide her with written report on 16 february 2022, long before this matter was to proceed to trial, and a copy of that report is annexed to his affidavit. he was specifically asked to advise as to the prospects of a change in zoning for the property in the near to medium term future. his report very thoroughly canvasses all of the relevant regulatory requirements, including consultation requirements in respect of environmental issues and the like. he makes the observation that it will take quite some time for the local environmental plan to come to fruition and for any potential rezoning to occur. he said that this involves pre-lodgement of the plan, which is stage 1, a planning proposal, which is stage 2, a gateway determination, which is stage 3, a post-gateway determination, which is stage 4, and a public exhibition and assessment at stage 5 before a finalisation at stage 6. he says that the realistic timeframe for this process would likely exceed fourteen (14) months. he observes that the “rural strategy” had just come off public exhibition as at the time of that report but that various other reports still needed to be undertaken as well, including environmental reports. [mr m] concluded that the [region o] housing strategy did foreshadow that the zoning of [j street, town b] would change from primary production to part “environmental protection” and part “medium density residential”. he says that about 54 % of the total land could benefit from the medium density residential zoning but that about 46 % would be likely to be included within the environmental protection zone as abutting sand dunes and the like, such that it couldn’t be developed as medium density residential. [mr m] also said that until the new local environmental plan was exhibited and finalised, the actual zoning outcome remained tentative. [mr m]’s report was updated and, in particular, he prepared a report of 1 november 2022 addressed to the wife which is also annexed to his affidavit. this report was a specific response to the report of the husband obtained from [planning report] ([mr n]) of 14 april 2021 – being the report mentioned in the husband’s case outline as referred to earlier. in his updated report, [mr m] effectively agreed with many of the things that [mr n] had said, while at the same time putting in issue various other aspects of what [mr n] said. that is to say, he endorses some but not all of [mr n]’s observations in the report.
32 i will turn briefly then to the [planning] report prepared by [mr n]. [mr n]’s report had been commissioned by the husband on 14 april 2021. self-evidently, the husband had been in possession of this report for 19 months or thereabouts before the final hearing. [mr n] was never put on affidavit. [mr n] was not available for cross-examination at the trial. it appears to me that [mr n] is an expert town planner, rather than an expert valuer. [mr n]’s report speaks glowingly about the rezoning potential of the [town b] property, referring to the potential for the existing tourist facility to increase in size and that if it was redeveloped as medium density residential then the value of the property might increase significantly. he referred to the three local council environmental plans that existed across the [region g] region. he referred to their impending consolidation into a single local environmental plan. he referred to the draft housing strategy adopted by the [region g] council in december 2020 to which i have referred. he estimated that the new lep would come into effect some time in 2023. his opinion was that upon it coming into force, the proprietor of the [town b] property would be able to build residential accommodation up to a height of 12 metres provided it was medium density housing only. he said:
the site has been identified and accepted by council as a future medium density zone. this new zoning will come into effect in the new lep which at this stage may occur in 2023. the new zoning provides significant development opportunity for the provision of medium density housing in a unique location. such medium density development could occur by conversion of the existing tourist units to a residential use, or complete redevelopment of the site to provide a new medium density development. such locations available for development of the [sic] nature are becoming very rare in location [sic] in new south wales. in our opinion the future development potential significantly increases the value of the land. given the current zoning of the land is rural, it would not be unexpected that the site could realise a land value increase of between 250 - 400 % when the new medium density zoning comes into effect. annexed to the planning report is an analysis of zoning issues and relevant responses in support of a rezoning of the [town b] property to medium property residential. again, i reiterate, [mr n] was never put on affidavit. no expert evidence was called from him in admissible form by the husband at trial. an important point to note here is that the only reason the planning report is even before me is because the wife chose to file an affidavit by [mr m] which specifically responded to it. in that sense, she put that report before me. in his report of 1 november 2022 responding to the planning report, [mr m] agreed with the current zoning of the property, as set out by [mr n]. he agreed that there was a single consolidated local environmental plan being progressed and he agreed that the draft housing strategy adopted by [region g] council in december 2020 identified the [town b] property as medium density residential. [mr m]’s report stated that he is far from convinced that a rezoning to medium residential would permit a maximum height of 12 metres in respect of any dwellings built on the property. he observed that this was speculative. he also observed that the timing of the lep was speculative, particularly, that there were other constraints not referred to by [mr n] in his report. this included that the change of zoning was not a certainty, that even if the change of zoning occurred there would be constraints, such as wetland/vegetation, coastal erosion issues and no certainty about permitted height controls. he also questioned the [mr n]’s expertise to value the property. i agree. there is no way, in my view, that the evidence of [mr n] as to a 250-400 % increase would be admissible evidence of that fact because he is clearly not a valuer. i do not say that disrespectfully. it is a simple matter of law that he does not, on the face of that report, have the requisite expertise for that evidence to be admissible expert evidence. returning then to [mr m]’s response to the planning report, [mr m] observes that there are many steps that are involved before council could finalise the local environmental plan. he refers to the various layers of mapping which take quite a significant amount of time to complete. they include land application, land zoning, consideration of lot sizes, building heights, heritage issues, land reservation acquisitions, acid sulphate soils, flood planning, wetlands, urban release area, drinking water catchment, etcetera. he reiterates the various stages that have to be followed before the council can adopt a consolidated local environmental plan. he observes that any development control plan is not the same pathway as the lep. he observes that until the public exhibition of the draft lep it will remain unknown if the change of zoning tentatively proposed will actually reflect the land use zoning depicted in the housing strategy. his report says that in any event there will be two (2) site constraints - namely a vegetation and hazard zone that would arguably impact on any redevelopment potential. he also observes that there may well be amendments to the coastal hazard zone given the impact of global warming and the fact that climate change seems to be proceeding more quickly than perhaps the science had earlier anticipated. in short, it would be fair to say that [mr m] gives a significantly more subdued outlook for the rezoning potential than does [mr n]. he also observes that there can be no assumption as to increased valuations of the property merely based on the change in the zoning because it is necessary to consider the actual development potential of the land itself. he does not himself suggest that he would be in a position to place a value on the property. he does, however, say that a proper valuation must reference and consider the environmental, economic and broad planning constraints as part of the valuation algorithm and that these would include a consideration of the potential developable area of the property. he says that just because there may be some change to the underlying zoning in the future does not automatically mean that the new zoning becomes the default best value use or highest use of the property. he says the ongoing viability of the [property], whether under a continuing existing use right, must also be considered. in short, [mr m] disagrees with the advice from planning and his report concludes as follows: we disagree with the advice, in our opinion, we are unlikely to see a new lep and dcp coming into effect until at least 2024. there remains a degree of uncertainty as to whether the property will be rezoned medium density. the draft lep when it is finally exhibited can increase that certainty, but even at that point adjustments in zoning can still be made. based on the current site constraints, in our opinion, under a best-case scenario only about 54 % of the property would potential have for any zone permissible development [sic] there is no certainty that a height of building control at 12 metres will be imposed. the increase in value of an ru1 to rezoning, expressed under the advice of “250 – 400%” is entirely speculative. it is not apparent whether the author of the advice has any formal qualifications as a valuation expert. applying that range of an increase to the current market value of the property, without qualifications as to timing and constraints is an exercise fraught with risk and error. a business case would also need to be developed to understand the most economical use of the property post any zoning change. the continued use and expansion of the tourist [property] may make greater commercial sense.
... ...[mr k] was kind enough to make himself available again that afternoon and, in the course of some further cross-examination, it was obvious to me that he was prevaricating somewhat about whether they may or may not be a change in value from what he had estimated in his report. he said that he was “thinking out loud” and obviously he was caught somewhat off-guard by the fact of not having ever seen the report of [mr n] before. he said that that the value of the property may go up or it may go down over time. if he were to undertake a fresh valuation at a future time its value may have changed. he said that it may be necessary to demolish existing structures if the property was revalued so that the ultimate value of the land may not, in fact, increase even if the rezoning took place. he said that the market may possibly be softened by the interest rate rises that have occurred in the meantime. in short, [mr k] clearly seemed to be grappling and, to some extent, prevaricating about what the value of the [town b] land might be but, ultimately, it was apparent that he had based his decision on the most recent information given to him by [mr l] at council as recorded in his report. in the end, [mr k] said that he could not say that there would be an increase in value based on the planning report which had now been brought to his attention and that probably there would not be any increase in value unless there was more certainty about the rezoning of the land. with respect, [mr k]’s oral evidence did not fill me with confidence. he did appear to be struggling somewhat. but fundamentally, and with some reservations, he stood by his original valuation figure of $4.1m which is incorporated in the balance sheet. ... ... i have before me evidence from an expert valuer ([mr k]) which values this property and the structures thereon at $4.1 million. the report contains an acknowledgment that an allowance has been made for future development potential. in that sense, although [mr k] did not have the report of planning, it is clear enough that [mr k] was aware of the possibility, or even probability, of the land being rezoned. indeed, as i have observed earlier, a possible rezoning for this property has been on the cards since at least 2019 although as i observed at trial, it has not happened yet. the matter has taken some two (2) years and nine (9) months to reach a trial. it could well be months or years before the council local environmental plan is finalised. these things are uncertain. ... in my view, the husband and the wife are both well aware of the possibility and, perhaps probability, of the [town b] property being rezoned, it has been on the cards for years. it has not yet happened. there are many uncertainties. there are many planning considerations. even if the rezoning occurs there will be many other considerations relevant to a valuation, such as whether the existing use is not, in fact, a better use for the property. or whether the costs of “improving” the property to take advantage of that change in zoning will, in fact, outweigh the benefits and, if so, would they outweigh them in such a fashion as to make a significant difference to the value of the land. 79 in short, there are a lot of unknowns in this case. if i adjourn these proceedings over, it seems to me that the court will be waiting, potentially, for an interminably long time, with respect, for the [region g] council to arrive at a decision as to zoning. and, even then, that will not be the end of the matter. i do not know when the zoning change will happen. if it does, then it could be sometime late in 2023, it could be in 2024, it could be later or, perhaps, it will not happen at all.
146 this would, however, usually be relevant only in the following circumstances: to highlight a significant discrepancy between the value of assets to be retained by each of the parties which calls for some further adjustment..., or to show that the extent of assets to be retained by each party following assessment of contributions is such that there is no warrant for further adjustment...or that a further adjustment is required..., or where the nature of the property to be retained by one of the parties has a quality about it which is not accurately reflected in the value ascribed...[14]   emphasis)
step 5: ensuring a “just & equitable” outcome
conclusion & orders:
associate: dated: 28 april 2023
dated: 28 april 2023
[1] on 9/12/22, i delivered reasons and orders dismissing the husband’s application to re-open the evidence. in those reasons i incorrectly stated that separation occurred in early 2020.[2] see paragraph [117] of these reasons[3] exhibit tba-17; p 88 of the tender bundle[4] exhibit tba-18; p 89 of the tender bundle[5] i say at least because he did not claim all of his expenses in his financial statement. in particular, he omitted to complete item 32 and part n, which provide for “usual” day-to-day living expenses such as food and fuel etc [6] see the full court’s decision in weir & weir [1992] famca 69; (1993) flc 92-338 and the line of authority which follows it[7] the husband made this concession in the course of cross-examination[8] exhibit tba-1a; p3 of the tender bundle[9] the wife’s affidavit annexed various negative reviews from guests. a common theme of the reviews was that the husband had behaved aggressively or rudely to them but although the reviews make for entertaining reading, they cannot be given any weight in the absence of evidence that the husband’s actions diminished the value of the business in any real way[10] order 1.1.1[11] order 2.3[12] the wife’s responsibility falls within s 90sf(3)(e) or s 90sf(3)(r)[13] at p 76,644[14] see also preston & preston [2022] fedcfamc 1a 157 where the full court (alstergren cj, mcclelland dcj & austin j) applied semperton - again in the context of non-commutable superannuation interests