last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kadis & elmore [2023] fedcfamc2f 479
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessyintroduction
background
the proceedings
... that a penalty be payable to the commonwealth by the respondent, as this honourable court deems appropriate (as per csrca, ss 67 & 67a).
27 september 2021 hearing
...
documents relied upon
how the debt occurred
exhibit h2
b. that i had no means of paying anything myself, and given that any payment to [the mother] would have to come from a third party then such amount was, in all likelihood, more than she would obtain by pursuing me personally. i otherwise dispute the claim at paragraph 9 of [the mother]'s affidavit of 19/03/2021. at the present time, i am the primary care-giver for my 2 children, ... aged 7 and 5 respectively. my wife ... is the 'bread-winner' in our home. the offer elucidated in the letter from my solicitors was made in a genuine attempt to give [the mother] something and to resolve the matter. ... in relation to paragraph 11 of [the mother]'s affidavit of 19/03/2021, i confirm that the facts set out in the letter from my solicitor were correct then and are correct now. i have no assets and i have no income other than my superannuation. ...
... the issue to be determined is whether [the father]’s estimate of nil income on 22 july 2016 should be accepted. ... pursuant to subsection 60(3) of the [csaa], it is open to [the father] to estimate his adjusted taxable income for the remaining part of a year of income, in this case until 30 june 2017. pursuant to subsection 63aa(2) of the act, that election may not be accepted if it is less than the amount considered likely to be [the father]’s actual income for that period. it was [the father]’s evidence that i could not accept that his income was nil on 22 july 2016. he was, at that time, working and receiving income. on 20 and 21 july 2016, he received income totalling $3,000. he gave evidence that he had lied to the department when he claimed to have nil income at that time. i am satisfied that the amount of [the father]’s estimate of income is less than is likely to be his actual adjusted taxable income for the remainder of the financial year ending 30 june 2017. the direction to refuse to accept his income is enlivened. [the father] sought that i exercise that direction in his favour because he has multiple child support cases with two ex-wives, both of whom he claims to continue to harass him. he gave evidence of not being able to deal with child support issues. he gave evidence of being depressed and behaving erratically, although conceded he was working from july 2015. he gave evidence of gambling which put his third marriage at significant risk. the principle object of the act is to ensure that [the children of these proceedings] receive a proper level of financial support from their parents. to exercise the direction in the favour of [the father] would not promote that object. i refuse to accept [the father]’s estimate of nil income on 22 july 2016. ...
exhibit m1
a decision was made by that tribunal on 15 february 2017 based on the above findings, the coa decision was set aside and the following changes were made: - for the period between 1 april 2016 and 30 june 2016 the adjusted taxable income of [the father] was varied to $243,257.00, - for the period between i july 2016 and 30 june 2017 the adjusted taxable income of [the father] was varied to $162,086.00, and - for the period between 1 january 2017 and 31 december 2017 the annual rate of child support was increased by $2,500.00. ... in order to establish reason 8a i must be satisfied that the child support assessment is unfair because of [the father]’s income, property or financial resources. [the father] has not provided a satisfactory response to the application or any evidence as to his finances and the finances of his business. ... ... the evidence in this matter is unsatisfactory but the law is that i must do the best that i can with the evidence that i have. the unsatisfactory nature of the evidence is largely due to the failure by [the father] to provide a response and full disclosure as to his finances. ... the income currently used in the assessment is $15,239.00. based on the evidence set out above and [the father]'s failure to respond to the application or provide evidence as to his income, i find [the father]'s current income is significantly higher than he has been assessed upon. i am satisfied that this makes the child support assessment unfair and so special circumstances exist. reason 8a is established. [the mother] also asked dhs to consider the earning capacity of [the father]. if i am to determine that a parent's earning capacity is greater than is reflected in his or her income used in the child support formula i have to be satisfied on the balance of probability (what is more likely than not to be the case) about all of the following three matters: the parent is: - not working despite ample opportunity to do so, or - has reduced his or her weekly hours of work to below full time work, or - has changed his or her occupation, industry or working pattern. and the parent's decision about his or her work arrangements is not justified by either: - his or her caring responsibilities, or - his or her state of health and the parent has failed to show that the decision about his or her work arrangements was not substantially motivated by the effect this would have on the child support assessment. ... the third test is framed as a 'rebuttable presumption' and this means that the starting point is that affecting the child support assessment is presumed to be a major purpose of the parent's decision about his or her working arrangements. the parent can rebut this presumption by demonstrating, to a decision maker's satisfaction, that affecting the child support assessment was not a major purpose of his or her decision. this is a subjective test and i must consider what the parent's purposes were in making the decision about his or her working arrangements and whether a major purpose was to affect the child support assessment. the uncontested is [the father] was working for [employer b] on a very good level of income but left that position. in the aat it was shown that he has failed to disclose relevant information about his employment and earnings. he has also not provided dhs any evidence in regard to his circumstances or as to why he chose to leave a well-paid job. in the circumstances i am satisfied that [the father]: - has changed his occupation, industry or working pattern. and his decision about his work arrangements is not justified by either: - his caring responsibilities, or - his state of health and that he has failed to show that the decision about his work arrangements was not substantially motivated by the effect this would have on the child support assessment. that being the case i am satisfied that [the father] has a higher earning capacity in line with his previous earnings from [employer b]. special circumstances are therefore established and i find that reason 8b is established. ... [the mother] is employed and only earns a very modest level of income. she resides in a rented home and her main assets consist only of her car, household contents and superannuation. her evidence is, and i accept, that she is struggling financially and had to enter into a debt agreement proposal under the bankruptcy act 1966 on 6 september 2017. [the mother] did not claim that there are currently any necessary costs that can be said to be special or out of the ordinary for her support or the support of the children. i have already discussed [the father]'s income and earning capacity. unfortunately i have no other current financial information in regard to him due to his failure to take part in this process. nevertheless, in the absence of evidence to the contrary i will take it that there is nothing about his commitments necessary for his support that can be said to be special or out of the ordinary. ... having regard to the matters set out above i am satisfied that it would be just and equitable to change the administrative assessment of child support. ... in deciding whether or not to change the assessment i must also consider whether a change to the assessment would be fair to the community (otherwise proper). this means that where the receiving parent receives an income tested pension or benefit, i have to consider the effect a change to the assessment would have on the pension or benefit. ... i note that any increase in the level of child support to be provided by [the father] would be likely to, if anything, decrease the burden on the community through the provision of income tested payments to [the mother] and would ensure that the primary duty to maintain the children is borne by the parents. i am therefore satisfied that it would be otherwise proper to change the administrative assessment of child support. ... having carefully considered the evidence i am satisfied that as from 1 january 2018 the adjusted taxable income of [the father] should be set at $147,500.00 which will give an annual rate of child support around $12,000.00 as requested by [the mother]. i have decided that the change to the annual rate of child support should commence on 1 january 2018 as that is the date from which the changes made by the aat ended. this will create a substantial level of arrears of child support and i am satisfied that this is fair in the circumstances. the change that i am making will last until a terminating event occurs with regard to the child support liability for the younger child. this would normally occur when the child attains the age of 18 years. however, if he is still at school at that time [the mother] can apply to this department for the child support liability to be extended until the child's last day of school. this will require a letter being obtained from the school specifying that date and an application being made to this department prior to the child's 18th birthday. it is open to either parent to make a further application in the future if he or she believes it is warranted due to circumstances that have arisen. (emphasis added)
father’s case
3. the respondent's costs in connection with this application be reserved.
mother’s case
16. ... [the father] has failed to provide evidence of financial hardship. ...
application for leave to apply for a departure application  a liable parent, or a carer entitled to child support, (the applicant) may apply to a court having jurisdiction under this act for leave for:
... (b) the court to make an order under section 118, in respect of a day in a child support period, being a day that is more than 18 months, and less than 7 years, earlier than the day on which the application under this section is made.
... court may grant leave to amend administrative assessment that is more than 18 months old (1) if an application is made to a court under section 111, the court may grant leave for:
... (b) the court to make an order under section 118.   the court may grant leave for an order to be made under section 118 if the court is satisfied that it would be in the interest of the parties to the proceeding for the court to consider, at the same time as it hears the application under section 111, whether an order should be made under section 118. if the court does so, the applicant is taken to have made an application to the court under section 116 for such an order.   in considering whether to grant leave under subsection (1), the court must have regard to:   any responsibility, and reason, for the delay in:  making an application under section 98b or 116, or (ii) making a determination under section 98s, as the case requires, and (b) the hardship to the applicant (other than the registrar) if leave is not granted, and (c) the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the hardship to the applicant (other than the registrar) if leave is not granted, and (c) the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the hardship to the other party or parties (other than the registrar) if leave is granted.   the court may have regard to any other relevant matter. orders granting leave to specify period (6) an order granting leave under this section must specify the period in respect of which the registrar may make a determination or the court may make an order. (7) the period specified under subsection (6): (a) must not include a day in a child support period if the day is more than 7 years earlier than the day on which the application under section 111 was made, and (b) is not limited by the terms of that application. no requirement to make determination or order (8) the granting of leave under subsection (1) does not imply that:   must not include a day in a child support period if the day is more than 7 years earlier than the day on which the application under section 111 was made, and (b) is not limited by the terms of that application.   is not limited by the terms of that application.
... (b) the court is required to make an order under section 118.   the court is required to make an order under section 118.
... 116 application for order under division (1) application may be made to a court having jurisdiction under this act for an order under this division in relation to a child in the special circumstances of the case. (2) an application: (a) may only be made if an administrative assessment is in force in relation to the child, the custodian entitled to child support and the liable parent concerned, and (b) may be made by the custodian entitled to child support or the liable parent. (3) subject to section 145 (registrar may intervene in proceedings), the parties to the application are the liable parent and the custodian entitled to child support. ... 118 orders that may be made under division (1) the orders that a court may make under this division are as follows:   may only be made if an administrative assessment is in force in relation to the child, the custodian entitled to child support and the liable parent concerned, and (b) may be made by the custodian entitled to child support or the liable parent.   may be made by the custodian entitled to child support or the liable parent.   an order varying the annual rate of child support payable by a parent, (b) an order varying a parent's or non-parent carer's cost percentage for a child, (c) an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply, (f) an order varying a parent's child support percentage, (g) an order varying a parent's adjusted taxable income, (h) an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance, (i) an order varying a parent's self-support amount, (j) an order varying the costs of the children.   an order varying a parent's or non-parent carer's cost percentage for a child, (c) an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,   an order varying a parent's child support income, (d) an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,   an order varying the parents' combined child support income, (e) an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,   an order that: (i) the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,   the column in the costs of the children table that covers a parent's child support income or combined child support income that is, or is ordered to be, greater than 2.5 times the annualised mtawe figure for the relevant june quarter, is the column headed "2 to 2.5", and (ii) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,  ) the column is to apply as if the second dollar amount in the heading to that column did not apply,   an order varying a parent's relevant dependent child amount or multi-case allowance,   an order under this section may make different provision in relation to different child support periods and in relation to different parts of a child support period. (2b) a court may only make an order under this division in respect of a day in a child support period, being a day that is more than 18 months earlier than the day on which the application for the order is made under section 116, if the court has granted leave under section 112 for the order to be made. (2c) if the court has granted leave under section 112, the court may only make an order under this division in respect of a day in a child support period if the day is within the period specified by the court, under subsection 112(6), in the order granting the leave. (3) if the court makes an order under this section, the court must: (a) give reasons for making the order (including reasons for its satisfaction as required by paragraph 117(1)(b)), and (b) cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court. (4) subsection (3) does not apply in relation to an order if:   give reasons for making the order (including reasons for its satisfaction as required by paragraph 117(1)(b)), and (b) cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court.   cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the court.   it is an order made by consent, and (b) the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   the carer entitled to child support concerned is not in receipt of an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   a contravention of subsection (3) in relation to an order does not affect the validity of the order. (emphasis added)
section 111 & 112(1)(b)
matters to be considered: section 112(4)
... ... i had been attempting to communicate with [the mother] in an attempt to resolve the question of the outstanding child support arrears. this was another reason i had not filed a departure application though primarily, i simply did not have the financial resources to do so ... ... i had never thought i would need to bring a departure application as i hoped that [the mother] would realise that as i did not have capacity to pay, there was very little point in pursuing me and i had offered to settle with her on the basis that my current wife would help me pay the modest settlement sum primarily so as to avoid incurring legal costs to protect her property. however, since [the mother] instigated this litigation i have been forced into reconsidering my position and given that the child support liability is being pursued, i believe i have little alternative other than to seek to correct the amount that is being pursued. i first raised my intention to seek leave to issue a child support departure in my response ... i did so as i genuinely believe the amounts i have been assessed to pay were incorrect and unfair as i had been assessed on income i did not earn. whilst i had always believed these amounts were incorrect, it was not until it was clear to me that [the mother] sought to enforce the debt against me that i realised i needed to have the arrears re-assessed. ...  ] in respect of the respondent, the primary judge found she had received “little or no child support” and so, although she had been primarily responsible for the financial support of the children, her obligation to also supervise and care for them confined her employment opportunities to only part-time work and thereby limited her earning capacity, causing her hardship. but that was hardship she endured because of the paucity of child support she received from the appellant over numerous preceding years. it was not hardship she would suffer if the appellant was granted leave to pursue his review application which, if granted, might either succeed or fail. section 112(4)(c) of the assessment act required the primary judge to consider the hardship she would suffer if the appellant was granted leave to pursue his application, not the hardship she had already endured due to impecuniosity. while s 112(5) of the assessment act might well have permitted the latter consideration to be taken into account, the exercise of discretion miscarried because the primary judge failed to correctly take into account the material factor prescribed by s 112(4)(c) of the assessment act. as it was not even taken into account, it could not be balanced against the countervailing consideration of the hardship the appellant would suffer if leave was denied (s 112(4)(b)).  phasis added)
conclusion
associate: dated: 28 april 2023
dated: 28 april 2023