last updated: 5 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
raisner & kells [2023] fedcfamc2f 265
orders
the court orders that:  the parties’ matrimonial assets, liabilities and financial resources are as set out in “annexure a” hereto, (b) the assets, liabilities and financial resources are valued as stated in the balance sheet/asset distribution schedule, other than if the property situate at c street, suburb d is sold then the value shall be the net sale price, being the sale price less costs of sale.   the assets, liabilities and financial resources are valued as stated in the balance sheet/asset distribution schedule, other than if the property situate at c street, suburb d is sold then the value shall be the net sale price, being the sale price less costs of sale.
transfer of real property  the respondent will be solely liable for all mortgage payments, insurances and outgoings associated with the c street, suburb d property, (b) the respondent will maintain the c street, suburb d property in good condition and be solely responsible for the cost of any maintenance or repairs, and (c) the respondent be restrained and an injunction issue restraining the respondent from further encumbering the c street, suburb d property.   the respondent will maintain the c street, suburb d property in good condition and be solely responsible for the cost of any maintenance or repairs, and (c) the respondent be restrained and an injunction issue restraining the respondent from further encumbering the c street, suburb d property.   the respondent be restrained and an injunction issue restraining the respondent from further encumbering the c street, suburb d property.
transfer of real property - default provisions  the c street, suburb d property will be listed for sale with a registered real estate agent as agreed to by the parties and failing agreement as nominated by the chief executive officer of the real estate institute of queensland. (b) the listing price for the c street, suburb d property will be as agreed between the parties and failing agreement as nominated by a valuer appointed by the real estate agent.   the listing price for the c street, suburb d property will be as agreed between the parties and failing agreement as nominated by a valuer appointed by the real estate agent.   the auctioneer will be as agreed between the parties and failing agreement as nominated by the registered real estate agents nominated by the chief executive officer of the real estate institute of queensland. (b) the respondent will pay to the auctioneer any sums requested for advertising expenses in relation to the auction. (c) the parties will execute all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the c street, suburb d property by auction. (d) the parties will request the auctioneer to recommend a reserve price to be placed on the c street, suburb d property for the purpose of the auction sale and the applicant and the respondent will accept such recommended reserve price. (e) the parties will give such instructions as are necessary to a solicitor for the preparation of a contract for sale and for the contract of sale to be made available to the auctioneer prior to the auction. (f) the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the respondent will pay to the auctioneer any sums requested for advertising expenses in relation to the auction. (c) the parties will execute all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the c street, suburb d property by auction. (d) the parties will request the auctioneer to recommend a reserve price to be placed on the c street, suburb d property for the purpose of the auction sale and the applicant and the respondent will accept such recommended reserve price. (e) the parties will give such instructions as are necessary to a solicitor for the preparation of a contract for sale and for the contract of sale to be made available to the auctioneer prior to the auction. (f) the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will execute all documents requested by the auctioneer for the sale of the c street, suburb d property by auction. (d) the parties will request the auctioneer to recommend a reserve price to be placed on the c street, suburb d property for the purpose of the auction sale and the applicant and the respondent will accept such recommended reserve price. (e) the parties will give such instructions as are necessary to a solicitor for the preparation of a contract for sale and for the contract of sale to be made available to the auctioneer prior to the auction. (f) the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will request the auctioneer to recommend a reserve price to be placed on the c street, suburb d property for the purpose of the auction sale and the applicant and the respondent will accept such recommended reserve price. (e) the parties will give such instructions as are necessary to a solicitor for the preparation of a contract for sale and for the contract of sale to be made available to the auctioneer prior to the auction. (f) the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will give such instructions as are necessary to a solicitor for the preparation of a contract for sale and for the contract of sale to be made available to the auctioneer prior to the auction. (f) the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will attend at the auction sale of the c street, suburb d property and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event that the reserve price is not reached. the parties agree to accept the advice of the auctioneer as to the acceptance of a price less than the reserved price. (g) the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will execute the contract of sale. (h) the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the respondent will co-operate in any way with the auctioneer in relation to the auction of the c street, suburb d property including making a key available, allowing inspection of the c street, suburb d property at all times requested by the auctioneer and ensuring that the c street, suburb d property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of inspection by prospective purchasers. (i) the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the parties will execute all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale. (b) to discharge the current mortgage affecting the c street, suburb d property. (c) to reimburse the parties for any expense agreed in writing and incurred by them to affect the sale of the c street, suburb d property. (d) the balance shall be divided to achieve an overall 70:30 division of the asset pool in favour of the wife and annexure a to these orders is the relevant asset pool, save that the value of the c street, suburb d property shall be the net sale price.   to discharge the current mortgage affecting the c street, suburb d property. (c) to reimburse the parties for any expense agreed in writing and incurred by them to affect the sale of the c street, suburb d property. (d) the balance shall be divided to achieve an overall 70:30 division of the asset pool in favour of the wife and annexure a to these orders is the relevant asset pool, save that the value of the c street, suburb d property shall be the net sale price.   to reimburse the parties for any expense agreed in writing and incurred by them to affect the sale of the c street, suburb d property. (d) the balance shall be divided to achieve an overall 70:30 division of the asset pool in favour of the wife and annexure a to these orders is the relevant asset pool, save that the value of the c street, suburb d property shall be the net sale price.   the balance shall be divided to achieve an overall 70:30 division of the asset pool in favour of the wife and annexure a to these orders is the relevant asset pool, save that the value of the c street, suburb d property shall be the net sale price.
the westpac loan
other asset retention and responsibility for liabilities  the applicant’s car, (b) the applicant’s bank accounts, (c) the applicant’s superannuation with super fund e (now known as super fund e), and (d) the applicant’s household items.   the applicant’s bank accounts, (c) the applicant’s superannuation with super fund e (now known as super fund e), and (d) the applicant’s household items.   the applicant’s superannuation with super fund e (now known as super fund e), and (d) the applicant’s household items.   the applicant’s household items.   the respondent’s legal and/or equitable business interests in company f, company g, company h, company j and company m, (b) the respondent’s car, (c) the respondent’s bank accounts, (d) the respondent’s household items, (e) the respondent’s motorcycle, (f) the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the respondent’s car, (c) the respondent’s bank accounts, (d) the respondent’s household items, (e) the respondent’s motorcycle, (f) the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the respondent’s bank accounts, (d) the respondent’s household items, (e) the respondent’s motorcycle, (f) the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the respondent’s household items, (e) the respondent’s motorcycle, (f) the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the respondent’s motorcycle, (f) the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the respondent’s superannuation interest with super fund e (now known as super fund e).   the shortfall on the k street mortgage to bank l (loan account ...20) with a current payout figure in or about the sum of $16,126.07, (b) the respondent’s credit card debts, and (c) the respondent’s tax liabilities and the tax liabilities of any entities in which he has a legal or equitable interest.   the respondent’s credit card debts, and (c) the respondent’s tax liabilities and the tax liabilities of any entities in which he has a legal or equitable interest.   the respondent’s tax liabilities and the tax liabilities of any entities in which he has a legal or equitable interest.
miscellaneous orders
the court notes that:
annexure a
reasons for judgmentjudge cope  x born in 2010 who is 12 years of age, and (b) y born in 2013 who is 9 years of age.   y born in 2013 who is 9 years of age.
background  company h, (b) company f, (c) company j, and (d) company g.   company f, (c) company j, and (d) company g.   company j, and (d) company g.   company g.
issues  the asset pool – what assets and liabilities are in the pool and the values to be attributed to many of those assets and liabilities, (b) the value of the de facto husband’s initial contributions, (c) what adjustment, if any, is to be made for contributions, (d) what adjustment, if any, is to be made for future needs, and (e) what, if any, property and/or cash and/or super should change hands in order to give meaning and effect to the court’s determination.   the value of the de facto husband’s initial contributions, (c) what adjustment, if any, is to be made for contributions, (d) what adjustment, if any, is to be made for future needs, and (e) what, if any, property and/or cash and/or super should change hands in order to give meaning and effect to the court’s determination.   what adjustment, if any, is to be made for contributions, (d) what adjustment, if any, is to be made for future needs, and (e) what, if any, property and/or cash and/or super should change hands in order to give meaning and effect to the court’s determination.   what adjustment, if any, is to be made for future needs, and (e) what, if any, property and/or cash and/or super should change hands in order to give meaning and effect to the court’s determination.   what, if any, property and/or cash and/or super should change hands in order to give meaning and effect to the court’s determination.
orders sought
the evidence
witnesses
the applicant de facto wife
the respondent de facto husband  when his company o pty ltd went into liquidation post separation, he retained only the trading name, company g, (b) the business operated by company g today is completely different from the business operations during the course of the relationship. he now only has “mum and dad” clients whereas previously he had commercial clients and worked in transport, (c) he no longer does service, he just contracts his services to company f (“company f”) for $1,400 per week, (d) company f now belongs to his current wife “100%”. he is not company f anymore, (e) his current wife does not choose how much he gets paid. that is between him and the “management” of company f, (f) he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   the business operated by company g today is completely different from the business operations during the course of the relationship. he now only has “mum and dad” clients whereas previously he had commercial clients and worked in transport, (c) he no longer does service, he just contracts his services to company f (“company f”) for $1,400 per week, (d) company f now belongs to his current wife “100%”. he is not company f anymore, (e) his current wife does not choose how much he gets paid. that is between him and the “management” of company f, (f) he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   he no longer does service, he just contracts his services to company f (“company f”) for $1,400 per week, (d) company f now belongs to his current wife “100%”. he is not company f anymore, (e) his current wife does not choose how much he gets paid. that is between him and the “management” of company f, (f) he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   company f now belongs to his current wife “100%”. he is not company f anymore, (e) his current wife does not choose how much he gets paid. that is between him and the “management” of company f, (f) he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   his current wife does not choose how much he gets paid. that is between him and the “management” of company f, (f) he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   he does not choose how much he is paid, (g) he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   he registered the three business names, company j, company f and company g, all under the same abn, (h) looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   looking at the documents, he acknowledged that on the same day that he registered his businesses, the company j pty ltd was created by his current wife, (i) his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   his evidence was that he could see from the document, and implied that he did not know from any other source, that company j pty ltd was created by an accountant, and said that it was “nothing to do with me, not my company” that it was “just her, creating her own company”, (j) he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   he confirmed that by saying “her”, he meant his current wife, (k) that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   that he had nothing to do with his current wife registering that company using the same name that he had previously registered a business name, (l) that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   that he and his current wife did not discuss her registering that company, that the barrister asking the questions had “as much information as i have”, (m) that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   that it was just a coincidence that he registered a business name and his current wife created a company using the same name on the same day, (n) that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   that he does not answer to his current wife when working for company f, that he answers to “management”, and (o) that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   that he and his current wife do not discuss business matters.   his current wife’s background is in administration, not the service industry or business management. (b) it is ludicrous to suggest that someone would receive an invoice for $130,000, and simply pay it without question when it leaves their own taxable income at $14,164. it is so disproportionate as to be simply unbelievable. (c) his financial statement reflects that his current wife’s income is $800 per week, which is $41,600 per year. to bill her husband such a significant amount is out of all proportion to his evidence about her usual income, and disproportionate to what either of their expectations would reasonably have been for some management assistance. (d) it is pretty poor business management advice that leaves him with such a low income. i cannot see it as anything other than a blatant step to reduce his own income. and this all in a year where his business turnover was over $1 million.   it is ludicrous to suggest that someone would receive an invoice for $130,000, and simply pay it without question when it leaves their own taxable income at $14,164. it is so disproportionate as to be simply unbelievable. (c) his financial statement reflects that his current wife’s income is $800 per week, which is $41,600 per year. to bill her husband such a significant amount is out of all proportion to his evidence about her usual income, and disproportionate to what either of their expectations would reasonably have been for some management assistance. (d) it is pretty poor business management advice that leaves him with such a low income. i cannot see it as anything other than a blatant step to reduce his own income. and this all in a year where his business turnover was over $1 million.   his financial statement reflects that his current wife’s income is $800 per week, which is $41,600 per year. to bill her husband such a significant amount is out of all proportion to his evidence about her usual income, and disproportionate to what either of their expectations would reasonably have been for some management assistance. (d) it is pretty poor business management advice that leaves him with such a low income. i cannot see it as anything other than a blatant step to reduce his own income. and this all in a year where his business turnover was over $1 million.   it is pretty poor business management advice that leaves him with such a low income. i cannot see it as anything other than a blatant step to reduce his own income. and this all in a year where his business turnover was over $1 million.
mr q - the de facto wife’s father
findings
the law
... the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applied, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79.
this is the position, the defendant having called no evidence it is a matter of common sense that you should accept the plaintiff's evidence with respect to the facts as being accurate. the fact that the defendant hegedus has not gone into the box and offered any explanation leaves you in this position, that you can accept the facts given by the plaintiff as proved, but the question then is whether you should find negligence against him as a matter of inference to be drawn from those facts, and that is the question for you, whether you think from the proved facts an inference of negligence ought to be drawn. if you think so, the plaintiff is entitled to your verdict. if, on the other hand, you think no such inference can be drawn then the verdict must go against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendant.[3]
the usual way in which defective disclosure is taken into account is either by adding a sum to the pool, reflective of an estimate of the value of undisclosed property ..., or under s 75(2)(o) of the act. ...
finally, and of great significance, is the husband’s non-disclosure of his financial position. it is substantial. it would appear that the husband’s business dealings in china involve sums of money greatly in excess of the assets presently in australia. he appears to have under his control significantly large (in terms of the assets in australia) sums of cash which he lends out for profit. at least until late 2012 he carried on a substantial and significant business in australia under the name bao qing ding with a gross income of hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. where there has been deliberate non-disclosure the court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent party. it may well be appropriate to err on the side of generosity. black & kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) flc 92-287, weir and weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338 and kannis & kannis [2002] famca 1150, (2002) 172 flr 464. the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and extensive. the evidence suggests that he has earned a substantial income and holds assets that exceed the assets the subject of these proceedings. the appropriate adjustment, therefore, is one that would see the wife receive all, or nearly all, of the available assets in australia.
consideration and determination
determining the assets and liabilities
the c street, suburb d property
company f city b – business  a mere façade, behind which activities may be carried on which were not to be really directed to the stated purposes but to other ends (scott v commissioner of taxation (no 2) (1966) 40 aljr 265, 279 per windeyer j) , (b) is something that intended to be mistaken for something else or that is not really what it purports to be (hadjiloucas v crean [1988] 1 wlr 1006, 1019) (c) steps which take the form of a legally effective transaction but which the parties intend should not have the apparent, or any, legal consequences (sharment pty ltd v official trustee in bankruptcy [1988] fca 179, (1998) 18 fcr 449, per shephard), (d) an agreement or series of agreements which are deliberately framed with the object of deceiving third parties as to the true nature and effect of the legal relations between the parties (equuscorp pty ltd v glengallan investments pty ltd [2004] hca 55, (2004) 218 clr 471, 486).   is something that intended to be mistaken for something else or that is not really what it purports to be (hadjiloucas v crean [1988] 1 wlr 1006, 1019) (c) steps which take the form of a legally effective transaction but which the parties intend should not have the apparent, or any, legal consequences (sharment pty ltd v official trustee in bankruptcy [1988] fca 179, (1998) 18 fcr 449, per shephard), (d) an agreement or series of agreements which are deliberately framed with the object of deceiving third parties as to the true nature and effect of the legal relations between the parties (equuscorp pty ltd v glengallan investments pty ltd [2004] hca 55, (2004) 218 clr 471, 486).   steps which take the form of a legally effective transaction but which the parties intend should not have the apparent, or any, legal consequences (sharment pty ltd v official trustee in bankruptcy [1988] fca 179, (1998) 18 fcr 449, per shephard), (d) an agreement or series of agreements which are deliberately framed with the object of deceiving third parties as to the true nature and effect of the legal relations between the parties (equuscorp pty ltd v glengallan investments pty ltd [2004] hca 55, (2004) 218 clr 471, 486).   an agreement or series of agreements which are deliberately framed with the object of deceiving third parties as to the true nature and effect of the legal relations between the parties (equuscorp pty ltd v glengallan investments pty ltd [2004] hca 55, (2004) 218 clr 471, 486).
company g - the de facto husband’s acknowledged business
company h, company j & company m
motorcycle
nab funds
addbacks  where the parties have expended money on legal fees, (b) where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and (c) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets or has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where there has been a premature distribution of matrimonial assets, and (c) where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets or has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets or has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.
de facto husband’s loan from his grandparents
asset pool for the purposes of the property division
determining the approach
determining whether it is just and equitable to make orders
evaluation of section 90sm(4) - contribution issues
findings as to contributions
evaluation of section 90sf(3) factors - future needs
findings as to future needs
just and equitable
conclusion
associate: dated: 4 may 2023
dated: 4 may 2023
[1] exhibit w6
[2] exhibit icl 2 – sentencing remarks dated 30 september 2019[3] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; [1959] 101 clr 298 at [12][4] jones v dunkel [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 especially at 308, 312 and 320-21[5] m & m [1998] famca 42[6] c & c [1998] famca 143 at [46][7] trevi & trevi [2018] famcafc 173; (2018) flc 93-858 at [28]- [30][8] argyle & argyle [2021] fcca 505, dellas & halton [2022] fedcfamc1f 368, zeidman & godar [2021] fcca 510