last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
penn & laird [2023] fedcfamc2f 571
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
living arrangements
restraints and injunctions
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge young:   views expressed by the children –
i have referred to those views which are essentially that they continue in their present arrangement living with ms lawson. (b) the nature of the relationship of the children with each of the child’s parents and other persons – the children are strongly attached to each of their parents and wish to continue with a relationship with their parents. that, of course, is qualified by the matters that i have referred to. the children have a close relationship with ms lawson. (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in decision making about major long-term issues in relation to the children spending time with and communicating with the children – for the reasons that i have given, i am not persuaded that the mother has constructively participated in making those decisions in recent years. i have dealt with the issue of spending time and communicating with each of the parents. there was no evidence about the issue of maintenance of the children. (d) there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   the nature of the relationship of the children with each of the child’s parents and other persons – the children are strongly attached to each of their parents and wish to continue with a relationship with their parents. that, of course, is qualified by the matters that i have referred to. the children have a close relationship with ms lawson. (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in decision making about major long-term issues in relation to the children spending time with and communicating with the children – for the reasons that i have given, i am not persuaded that the mother has constructively participated in making those decisions in recent years. i have dealt with the issue of spending time and communicating with each of the parents. there was no evidence about the issue of maintenance of the children. (d) there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,
the children are strongly attached to each of their parents and wish to continue with a relationship with their parents. that, of course, is qualified by the matters that i have referred to. the children have a close relationship with ms lawson. (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in decision making about major long-term issues in relation to the children spending time with and communicating with the children – for the reasons that i have given, i am not persuaded that the mother has constructively participated in making those decisions in recent years. i have dealt with the issue of spending time and communicating with each of the parents. there was no evidence about the issue of maintenance of the children. (d) there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   the extent to which each of the child’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in decision making about major long-term issues in relation to the children spending time with and communicating with the children – for the reasons that i have given, i am not persuaded that the mother has constructively participated in making those decisions in recent years. i have dealt with the issue of spending time and communicating with each of the parents. there was no evidence about the issue of maintenance of the children. (d) there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,
for the reasons that i have given, i am not persuaded that the mother has constructively participated in making those decisions in recent years. i have dealt with the issue of spending time and communicating with each of the parents. there was no evidence about the issue of maintenance of the children. (d) there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   there will be no change in the children’s circumstances, (e) was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   was not the subject of any significant evidence, (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   the capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs – i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,
i am satisfied that the mother’s capacity to provide for the needs of the children is severely curtailed by her mental health problems and use of illicit drugs. in the case of the father, as i say, he did not seek that the children live with him and i think the reasons for that are probably that he is uncertain what his prospects in the immediate future hold, and indeed, whether he continues living in region e – (g) i do not propose to say anything about that,   i do not propose to say anything about that,   i do not propose to say anything more about that.
there has been evidence of historic family violence, certainly between the mother and the father, according to the mother and there is other evidence of family violence, though that appears to be largely historic notwithstanding the concerns expressed by the children about the mother’s relationship with mr c. i note that there is no current family violence order.
associate: dated: 5 may 2023
dated: 5 may 2023