last updated: 25 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
deering & jennett [2023] fedcfamc2f 647
orders
the court orders that:
for the remainder of 2023:  each third weekend from 9am until 3pm saturday, and from 9am until 3pm sunday, commencing on a weekend to be nominated by the father to the mother in writing. to avoid doubt, this order is intended to operate during school terms and during school holiday periods and is never to include the mother’s day weekend,
from 1 january 2024 until 31 december 2024:  each alternate weekend from 9am until 6pm saturday, and from 9am until 6pm sunday, provided that the father is able to facilitate this time, failing which the time will occur each third weekend. to avoid doubt, this order is intended to operate during school terms and during school holiday periods and is never to include the mother’s day weekend,
in 2025:  each alternate weekend from 9am saturday until 3pm sunday provided the father is able to facilitate this time, failing which the time will occur each third weekend. to avoid doubt, this order is intended to operate during school terms and during school holiday periods and is never to include the mother’s day weekend,
in 2026:  each alternate weekend from after school friday until 4pm sunday. to avoid doubt, this order is intended to operate during school terms and during school holiday periods and is never to include the mother’s day weekend,
from 1 january 2027 onwards:  each alternate weekend from after school friday until commencement of school monday. to avoid doubt, this order is intended to operate during school terms and during school holiday periods and is never to include the mother’s day weekend,
holidays & special days:  the mother may suspend two (2) of the father’s weekends with x during school holiday periods each year. the mother must give the father at least three (3) months written notice of the suspension(s) and the father is to have make-up time with x as soon as possible thereafter, (b) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on x’s birthday, that parent is to spend time with x that day from after school to 6pm if a school day, or from 12 noon to 5pm if a non-school day, (c) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on that parent’s birthday, that parent is to spend time with x that day from after school to 6pm if a school day, or from 12 noon to 5pm if a non-school day, (d) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on christmas day, that parent is to spend time with x on boxing day from 9am to 5pm.   if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on x’s birthday, that parent is to spend time with x that day from after school to 6pm if a school day, or from 12 noon to 5pm if a non-school day, (c) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on that parent’s birthday, that parent is to spend time with x that day from after school to 6pm if a school day, or from 12 noon to 5pm if a non-school day, (d) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on christmas day, that parent is to spend time with x on boxing day from 9am to 5pm.   if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on that parent’s birthday, that parent is to spend time with x that day from after school to 6pm if a school day, or from 12 noon to 5pm if a non-school day, (d) if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on christmas day, that parent is to spend time with x on boxing day from 9am to 5pm.   if as a result of these orders, a parent does not have x in their care on christmas day, that parent is to spend time with x on boxing day from 9am to 5pm.   2023 - from 9am to 3pm, (b) 2024, 2025 & 2026 – from 9am to 6pm, (c) 2027 onwards – from 9am to commencement of school monday.   2024, 2025 & 2026 – from 9am to 6pm, (c) 2027 onwards – from 9am to commencement of school monday.   2027 onwards – from 9am to commencement of school monday.
changeovers
communication
restraints  denigrating the mother, any member of the mother’s family or any member of the mother’s household in the hearing or presence of x, or enabling x to remain in the hearing or presence of any other person engaging in such denigration, (b) perpetrating “family violence” in the presence or hearing of x or knowingly exposing x to any acts of “family violence” as defined in s4ab of the family law act (copy of which will be attached), (c) consuming alcohol or illicit drugs, or being in any way affected by alcohol or illicit drugs, while x is in the father’s care, (d) attending x’s school except for the purposes of father’s day events or other events which the father has been specifically invited by the school to attend, for instance parent/teacher interviews. the father is to notify the mother in writing at least 48 hours in advance of any proposed attendance by him at the school and if the mother is present, the father is not to approach the mother, (e) removing x from school, or any other person or organisation with whom the mother has placed her, except in accordance with these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother. the mother is at liberty to give a copy of these orders to any school, person or organisation with whom she may place x.   perpetrating “family violence” in the presence or hearing of x or knowingly exposing x to any acts of “family violence” as defined in s4ab of the family law act (copy of which will be attached), (c) consuming alcohol or illicit drugs, or being in any way affected by alcohol or illicit drugs, while x is in the father’s care, (d) attending x’s school except for the purposes of father’s day events or other events which the father has been specifically invited by the school to attend, for instance parent/teacher interviews. the father is to notify the mother in writing at least 48 hours in advance of any proposed attendance by him at the school and if the mother is present, the father is not to approach the mother, (e) removing x from school, or any other person or organisation with whom the mother has placed her, except in accordance with these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother. the mother is at liberty to give a copy of these orders to any school, person or organisation with whom she may place x.   consuming alcohol or illicit drugs, or being in any way affected by alcohol or illicit drugs, while x is in the father’s care, (d) attending x’s school except for the purposes of father’s day events or other events which the father has been specifically invited by the school to attend, for instance parent/teacher interviews. the father is to notify the mother in writing at least 48 hours in advance of any proposed attendance by him at the school and if the mother is present, the father is not to approach the mother, (e) removing x from school, or any other person or organisation with whom the mother has placed her, except in accordance with these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother. the mother is at liberty to give a copy of these orders to any school, person or organisation with whom she may place x.   attending x’s school except for the purposes of father’s day events or other events which the father has been specifically invited by the school to attend, for instance parent/teacher interviews. the father is to notify the mother in writing at least 48 hours in advance of any proposed attendance by him at the school and if the mother is present, the father is not to approach the mother, (e) removing x from school, or any other person or organisation with whom the mother has placed her, except in accordance with these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother. the mother is at liberty to give a copy of these orders to any school, person or organisation with whom she may place x.   removing x from school, or any other person or organisation with whom the mother has placed her, except in accordance with these orders or as agreed in writing with the mother. the mother is at liberty to give a copy of these orders to any school, person or organisation with whom she may place x.   for a period of three (3) years following the making of this order, provide correspondence to the mother every three (3) months from his treating psychologist confirming the status of his mental health treatment (noting that the father consents to this order), (b) comply with any mental health treatment plans as provided to him by his gp from time to time (noting that the father effectively consents to this order), (c) notify the mother within 24 hours in the event that: (i) the father is charged with any criminal offence including providing details of all charges and any upcoming court dates, (ii) the father is the applicant or respondent to any application for an advo (except where the other party to the proceedings is the mother or a police officer representing the mother), (iii) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.   comply with any mental health treatment plans as provided to him by his gp from time to time (noting that the father effectively consents to this order), (c) notify the mother within 24 hours in the event that: (i) the father is charged with any criminal offence including providing details of all charges and any upcoming court dates, (ii) the father is the applicant or respondent to any application for an advo (except where the other party to the proceedings is the mother or a police officer representing the mother), (iii) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.   notify the mother within 24 hours in the event that: (i) the father is charged with any criminal offence including providing details of all charges and any upcoming court dates, (ii) the father is the applicant or respondent to any application for an advo (except where the other party to the proceedings is the mother or a police officer representing the mother), (iii) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.   the father is charged with any criminal offence including providing details of all charges and any upcoming court dates, (ii) the father is the applicant or respondent to any application for an advo (except where the other party to the proceedings is the mother or a police officer representing the mother), (iii) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.  ) the father is the applicant or respondent to any application for an advo (except where the other party to the proceedings is the mother or a police officer representing the mother), (iii) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.  i) the father is admitted to any mental health facility for treatment.
authority
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction:
final hearing & material relied upon:
chronology of events:
various incidents of family violence / coercive behaviour:
...so i contacted a friend, and had them pick up [x] and i and take us home.   jennett], please not in front of [x] –
and:   jennett], please, you’re scaring [x], and you’re scaring me.
try and get her and i will fucking smash you.
the mother says she phoned the police, but they were unable to attend upon the father until several days later, and she quotes a specific police event number ... in relation to this event.
makes no sense to me.
weighing all of this evidence together, i do not accept that the father threatened to “fucking smash” the mother, but he nonetheless acted in a way that was coercive and controlling.
father expresses suicidality and is hospitalised:
mother continues to facilitate a relationship between the father and x:
further coercive behaviour:
...such a miserable fuck. i have done everything i possibly can to make things right. i had broken you and now you have broken me. [x] needs her mum. and dad together maybe you can explain to her one day that her dad did everything he could ti make it right because he trully loves his wife. you new it was going to come to this and so did i hence my constant grief. kiss my girl tell her het daddy loves her i love you [ms deering]. do not call anyone to help me its to late. you where right. [typographical errors reflect the original text.]
you’re just stringing me along [ms deering]. if you’re too gutless to end this relationship now, then i will.
a birthday present after all.
an ambiguous relationship?
final breakdown of the parents’ relationship:
...your mum’s idea. i didn’t want this. i love you both. i am sorry i couldn’t be the man your mum wanted me to be.
the mother told him that that was enough and that they would have to follow through with mediation.
father’s mental health declines again & he is hospitalised:
father’s coercive behaviour continues:
apprehended violence order is made to protect the mother:
father is still acting coercively:
seen her and mummy walking on sunday. i have spies.
father breaches the avo & engages in other coercive behaviour:
can you please confirm in writing before 5 pm this afternoon that you will meet us at [town n] police station this coming friday at 6 pm.
going on your inability to communicate, or compromise or guarantee my daughter adequate time with her father, i think it is only practical if [x] stays with me. i would like to see some evidence that you are getting suitable care for your mental health and addressing your alcohol and [illicit drug] use.
baby, baby, i love you.
when it suits you, [ms deering], go on, call the cops it’s easier than facing the truth. bring the cops on. at least you can tell [x] i died because i love you.
not the court’s, because i have done nothing wrong but love.
this was clearly a reference to the avo and to the father’s inability or unwillingness to abide by its conditions, notwithstanding that he had only recently been before a local court magistrate and admitted to a conditional release order.
i am sorry for harassing you last week. i found it very hard after spending that time with you and had missed a few days of the new medication i have been prescribed. this, i believe, led me into a very sad, emotional state over a period of days.
dear [ms deering], i'm sure you've had a busy day. was thinking i might have heard from [x] by now. maybe later. regards [mr jennett].
supervised time is trialled:
final avo breach:
father takes active steps to address his issues and improve his functioning:
supervised time ends:
father’s outstanding avo breaches are dealt with as a mental health issue:
interim hearing & orders:
the law:
section 60cc primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the capacity of: (i) each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right,   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  i) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter,   any other relevant matter,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
best interests findings in this case:
the question for [mr jennett] is whether a life-long history of emotional dysregulation and fractious relationships can be turned around.
it has always been my professional opinion that the father did not, in fact, require psychiatric intervention but that process was followed because of certain requirements laid down by either the legal profession or the family/circuit court. the treatment plan has been, for some time, a general counselling program to assist the father to deal with the ongoing family law issues that he was embroiled in.
has had relatively minor issues in the past with alcohol and [illicit substances].
since 2020, [mr jennett]’s symptoms have significantly improved, and, on assessment on 6 december [2022] [mr jennett] did not appear depressed, and he reported to have a much reduced alcohol intake with no periods of intoxication. he is in stable employment and has not been in any trouble with the police since mid-2021. [mr jennett]’s improvement is likely the result of having attended drug and alcohol counselling, engaging in dv psychoeducation, regular psychotherapy, compliance with his prescribed medication and a significant reduction in his alcohol intake. with ongoing regular therapy and mental health review and continued minimal use of alcohol (if abstinence is not possible), it is likely that [mr jennett]’s prognosis is good. [mr jennett]’s commitment to being a father to his daughter is a protective factor.
while [mr jennett] demonstrates certain personality vulnerabilities (fear of abandonment, impulsive destructive behaviours when upset, emotional dysregulation, suicidal behaviour), most likely due to the trauma experienced during his childhood, he does not meet criteria for the diagnosis of a personality disorder or a trauma-related disorder such as post-traumatic stress disorder. moreover, with psychotherapy and psychoeducation, he seems to have developed skills to recognise and modify and/or manage these vulnerabilities.
in [mr jennett]’s case, his parenting capacity is most likely to be affected if he has a relapse of his alcohol use disorder. as such, he needs to continue to limit his alcohol use as he is doing currently, and should attend alcoholics anonymous or some similar support group on a regular basis.
conclusion & orders:
associate: dated: 5 may 2023
dated: 5 may 2023