last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cadman & cadman [2023] fedcfamc2f 630
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction:
short litigation history:  i specifically ordered that the enforcement hearing be adjourned to 10 am on 9 february 2023 and that by 25 january 2023 each of the parties file and serve one consolidated affidavit of that party and of any other witnesses they relied upon, (b) although it is more of an aside than anything else, i should also add that i appointed ms b as the wife’s litigation guardian, it being apparent from the material that the wife has suffered from significant depression and mental illness and has been unable to conduct the litigation herself. indeed, the wife had a litigation guardian at the time of the making of the consent orders of 29 august 2022, namely one mr c, a professional, (c) as part of the suite of orders made that day, i also ordered that if the husband intended to bring a section 79a application to set aside the orders then he was to file and serve any such application by close of registry filing on 25 january 2023.   although it is more of an aside than anything else, i should also add that i appointed ms b as the wife’s litigation guardian, it being apparent from the material that the wife has suffered from significant depression and mental illness and has been unable to conduct the litigation herself. indeed, the wife had a litigation guardian at the time of the making of the consent orders of 29 august 2022, namely one mr c, a professional, (c) as part of the suite of orders made that day, i also ordered that if the husband intended to bring a section 79a application to set aside the orders then he was to file and serve any such application by close of registry filing on 25 january 2023.   as part of the suite of orders made that day, i also ordered that if the husband intended to bring a section 79a application to set aside the orders then he was to file and serve any such application by close of registry filing on 25 january 2023.
i. the husband’s section 79a application, ii. the wife’s enforcement application (in that order).” at this point in time, the court does not consider that it would be appropriate in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction to restrain the wife’s legal representatives from continuing to act. that position may change upon delivery of the points of claim referred to in these orders. the court reserves any judgment about that issue to 1 may 2023.
c. the court recommends that the parties retain counsel at the next court event. in the event that the wife pursues a personal costs order from the husband’s lawyers the wife’s solicitor to notify the husband’s lawyers, at least, 14 days prior to 1 may 2023.
to resolve these matters the wife has today filed a further amended enforcement application seeking declaratory relief concerning the interpretation of order 3 and 5 of the consent orders. we attach an unsealed copy of this application for your reference. the parties kindly ask that his honour determine the issues in chambers based on the court documents and the submissions made by the parties’ lawyers on 9 february 2023. this would remove the need for an appearance by the parties’ lawyers. it is anticipated that the parties will be able to provide orders to his honour detailing with costs and other issues shortly after his honour’s judgment is received.
the consent order of 29 august 2022:
by consent it is ordered joining the second respondent 1. that the second respondent be added as a party to these proceedings. the joint trust account within 28 days of these orders, the applicant and first respondent are to do all things necessary to distribute the balance of the joint trust account – held by the applicant’s lawyers and containing the net sale proceeds of the former matrimonial home – as follows: 2.1. $525,000 to the second respondent, and 2.2. the balance to the first respondent by way of payment to her lawyer’s trust account, the details of which are as follows: ... the first payment simultaneously with order 2, the applicant is to pay the first respondent $358,125. the injunction the applicant is restrained from withdrawing or transferring moneys from his cba account [...61] except in accordance with order 3. the town e property simultaneously with orders 2 and 3, the applicant and second respondent are to transfer their interest in the [town e] property to the first respondent and discharge the cba mortgage secured over it. ...
how the order was interpreted:
the husband’s argument:
5.1. the brothers are to appoint the [h real estate] to conduct the sale. 5.2. the brothers are to sell the property in accordance with the methodology proposed by the [h real estate]. [a limitation as to the period the property is to be listed, or a mechanism for the sale price to be reduced to be agreed]. 5.3. upon the sale the brothers are to distribute 50 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the wife, excluding cgt for which the husband will remain liable.
wife proposes a different basis for settlement:
putting aside, for a moment, the issue of the sale, there would appear to be distinct advantages to your client and [mr d] in transferring the [town e] property to our client pursuant to consent orders - i.e. the avoidance of sale costs, cgt and capitalising on what your client appears to regard as an inflated valuation. as such, we would propose a settlement whereby: your client transfer to our client the balance of the net sale proceeds of [suburb j] held in trust, together with the balance of the cba account [...]61 (already agreed). your client and [mr d] cause the transfer of property and in so doing: 2.1 your client attend to discharging his half share of the joint cba mortgage, 2.2 our client pay [mr d] $325,000, from which he would effect the discharge of his half-share of the joint cba mortgage, 2.3 your client pay [mr d] $200,000 on whatever terms the brothers believe are suitable in the circumstances. ...
we are instructed our client remains willing for your client to acquire the [town l] property for $1.05 million and we understand his brother is agreeable to this also but the $200,000 payment to your client remains our client’s obligation...
we are instructed to give your client until 4.00pm friday 1 july 2022 to decide whether she wishes to purchase the property at the price of $1,050,000. if not the property will then be placed on the market for sale at a price of $1,099,000. should this occur our client will instruct the agent to excluded [sic] the wife for the purposes of the agent’s commission such that there will be no commission payable in the event the property is sold to the wife.
our client is content to accept your client’s proposal subject to: the transfer occurring pursuant to orders as follows: 1.1 the husband and [mr d] transfer their interest in the property to our client and discharge the mortgage secured over it, and  ich is again effectively a repetition of the wife’s earlier proposal in the letter of 27 june)
1.2 our client pay [mr d] $525,000.
my interpretation of the consent order:
the husband submits his only obligation with respect to the mortgage pursuant to order 5 was to remove the encumbrance. in other words, he is not obligated to meet the $140,885.88 share of loans which it secured. this is more than mere semantics because a “mortgage” is defined in section 3 of the real property act as “any charge on land (other than a covenant charge) created merely for securing the payment of a debt”. the husband does not dispute a registered mortgagee will insist on the settlement of a debt secured by a mortgage before releasing the security and the husband does not submit that the security could have been released without the loans having been settled. but in the context of the factual matrix in this case the husband submits that consistent with the heads of agreement and the exchange of correspondence that the obligation for the settlement of the husband’s share of the loans fell to the wife. the husband and his brother were the only persons with legal authority to do what was required to legally discharge the mortgage, i.e. the charge on the land. the orders are silent as to who is responsible for the settlement of the loans to cba, but in light of the heads of agreement and consistent with section 3 of the real property act 1900 (nsw) the only reasonable conclusion to be drawn is that the wife was to meet the husband’s share of that, namely $140,885.88.  d in that regard he refers to a specific “vendor destination line” in the conveyancing transaction relating to the town e property.)
a party who has entered into a written contract under a serious mistake about its contents in relation to a fundamental term will be entitled in equity to an order rescinding the contract if the other party is aware that circumstances exist which indicate that the first party is entering the contract under some serious mistake or misapprehension about either the content or subject matter of that term and deliberately sets out to ensure that the first party does not become aware of the existence of his mistake or misapprehension.
conclusion & orders:
associate: dated: 10 may 2023
dated: 10 may 2023